wm^^m^mmm. 


.CD 


'CT> 
?CM 

00 


I 


FROM   LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK 


MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  Limited 

LONDON  .  BOMBAY  •  CALCUTTA  •  MADRAS 
MELBOURNE 

THE  MACMILLAN  COMPANY 

NEW   YORK  •  BOSTON  •  CHICAGO 
DALLAS  •  SAN    FRANCISCO 

THE  MACMILLAN  CO.  OF  CANADA.  Ltd. 

TORONTO 


FROM   LIBERTY 
TO   BREST-LITOVSK 

THE   FIRST   YEAR 
OF   THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 


BY 

ARIADNA  TYRKOV A- WILLIAMS 
(Mrs.  Harold  Williams) 


MACMILLAN   AND    CO.,   LIMITED 

ST.   MARTIN'S  STREET,   LONDON 

1919 


PK 

1V^7 


COPYRIGHT 


J'eutrepreuds  de  conter  Tann^e  ^pouvautable 
Et  voilk  que  j'h^site,  accoud^  aur  ma  table.  .  .  . 
N'importe.     Poursuivons.     L'histoire  en  a  besoin. 
Ce  si^cle  est  k  la  barre  et  je  suis  sou  temoin. 

L'AnrUe  Terrible,  Victor  Uuqo. 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2008  with  funding  from 

IVIicrosoft  Corporation 


http://www.archive.org/details/fromlibertytobreOOwilluoft 


"  The  word  '  Brotherhood '  you  have  inscribed  upon 
your  banners,  but  you  have  not  written  it  in  your 
hearts  and  minds." — Froni  a  speech  of  tJie  Commander-inr 
Chief  of  the  Bussian  Army^  General  M.  V.  Alezeieff^ 
delivered  on  May  20,  191 7,  at  an  Officers'  Congress  at 
General  Headquarters. 


PREFACE 

I  HAVE  tried  in  this  book  to  elucidate,  as  far  as  was  in 
my  power,  the  development  of  the  fundamental  ideas  of 
the  Socialist  parties  in  the  Russian  Revolution  and  their 
reflection  in  the  life  of  the  masses.  A  revolution  is  a 
very  complex  thing,  especially  in  such  an  immense 
country  as  Russia,  with  its  large  and  varied  population, 
and  it  goes  without  saying  that,  far  from  claiming  to 
have  described  it  exhaustively,  I  realise  only  too  clearly 
that  there  are  numbers  of  questions  on  which  I  have 
barely  touched. 

National  complications  and  contradictions,  the  finan- 
cial crash,  the  disorganisation  of  transport,  production 
and  exchange,  the  agrarian  disorders,  the  food  cata- 
strophe that  has  overwhelmed  the  North,  particularly 
the  towns — at  all  these  things  I  have  merely  been  able 
to  hint.  I  have  refrained,  too,  from  the  temptation  to 
dwell  on  the  external,  dramatic  side  of  the  Revolution 
of  which  I  was  a  witness  from  day  to  day.  My  aim 
has  been  to  avoid  being  carried  away  by  my  personal 
impressions,  and  to  be  as  objective  as  one  may  be  when 
writing  of  the  sufferings,  the  convulsions,  and,  too  often, 
of  the  humiliations  of  one's  own  people. 

These  humiliations  have  been  so  great,  in  so  fearful, 
in  so  criminal  a  form  did  the  brutality  latent  in  every 
man  display  itself  at  times  in  the  Russian  masses,  that 

vii 


viii      FEOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK 

more   than   once   in   the   midst   of  my   work   I   have 
stopped,  doubting  whether  I  ought  to  continue. 

And  again  I  have  picked  up  my  pen,  for  it  seemed 
to  me  that  this  terrible  lesson  had  its  significance  for 
others  besides  ourselves.  The  Socialists  have  made  of 
my  country  a  tremendous  experimental  station  for  their 
dogmas  and  theories.  I  know  that  the  best  of  them 
sincerely  desired  to  bring  happiness  to  the  labouring 
masses.  They  were  entranced  by  the  dogmatic  illusions 
of  the  Internationale,  and  forgot  that  man  is  the  least 
known,  the  least  studied  of  all  beings  upon  the  earth, 
and  that  the  psychology  of  the  individual,  still  more  of 
the  mass,  moves  by  ways  as  yet  uncharted,  and  is 
guided  by  forces  that  elude  clear  apprehension. 

And  for  this  reason,  bitter  though  the  truth  about 
the  Russian  Revolution  may  be,  I  have  felt  that  we 
must  have  the  courage  to  tell  it. 

I  trust  that  the  tragical  lessons  of  a  strange  far-away 
land  and  the  insane  and  criminal  Socialistic  experiments 
of  the  Maximalists  may  serve  as  a  stern  warning  for 
other  peoples.  It  is  worth  while  for  those  who  are 
struggling  to  secure  for  mankind  happier  and  more 
worthy  conditions  of  life  to  read  attentively  the  blood- 
stained pages  of  the  Russian  Revolution.  If  they 
realise  what  our  mistakes  were,  what  were  our  delusions 
and  our  crimes,  and  if,  avoiding  these,  they  find  other 
ways  surer  and  less  cruel,  then  we  Russians  will  have  at 
least  this  consolation  that  the  immeasurable  sufferings 
of  Russia  are  an  historical  sacrifice  ofi'ered  for  the  sake 
of  a  brighter  future  for  mankind. 

Who  knows  ?  Perhaps  the  path  to  truth  leads  only 
through  a  suffering  that  cleanses  and  ennobles. 

London,  April  1919. 


CONTENTS 

CHAPTER    I 

PAGE 

The  Downfall  op  the  Old  Regime    ....         1 

A  patriotic  Opposition — The  storm  brewing — Nicholas  II.  and 
the  Duma — Monday  March  12 — The  joy  of  liberty — Two  centres — 
Rodzianko  and  Chheidze — A  Government  in  formation — Abdication 
of  the  Tsar — Ministers  of  Prince  G.  LvoflTs  Cabinet. 

CHAPTER   II 
Patriotism  or  Internationalism?       .  .  .  .36 

Whom  to  obey  ? — Parties  before  the  Revolution — Liberalism  and 
Cadets — Populist  Socialists  and  Marxists — Order  No.  1,  and  per- 
secution of  officers — Democratic  peace — Soviet  and  Provisional 
Government — Bolshevist  influence — Dual  power. 

CHAPTER   III 
Lenin  and  his  Watchword     .  .  .  .62 

Triumphal  entry  of  Lenin — Propaganda  of  Bolshevism — The 
dancer's  house — German  support  of  Lenin's  doctrines — Lenin's 
estimate  of  other  Socialists. 

CHAPTER  IV 
The  First  Government  Crisis  .  .  .  .83 

Shulgin  and  Tse retell — Whence  is  the  danger  ?— Crisis  because  of 
the  word  "victory" — Resignation  of  Milyukofi'and  Guchkoff'— The 
Coalition  Ministry — The  Declaration  of  the  new  Government  and  the 
Zimmerwald  formulae — The  Socialist  Ministers — AlexeieflTs  speech 
— His  retirement  from  the  post  of  GeneralissimOk 


FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK 


CHAPTER  V 

PAGE 

The  International  Policy  of  the  Soviet      .  .  .100 

Attitude  towards  President  Wilson— Cool  reception  of  Allied 
Socialists— Friendly  relations  with  Zimmerwaldista— The  Robert 
Grimm  Scandal — The  Stockholm  Conference. 


CHAPTER  VI 
The  First  Congress  of  Soviets  and  Kerensky's  Advance    .     116 

DiflSculties  of  the  Socialist  Centre — Theory  and  practice — The 
allurements  of  Bolshevism — The  Congress  of  Soviets  as  a  review  of 
the  forces  of  Revolutionary  Democracy. 

CHAPTER  VII 

Rear  and  Front  broken  through      .  .  .  .135 

Independent  Ukraine  and  the  Ministerial  crisis — The  July  Bol- 
shevist insurrection — German  advance — Front  broken  through — 
Disputes  about  Capital  Punishment — State  of  the  army — The  ' '  Save 
the  Revolution  !  " — The  Committees  or  a  powerful  Government  ? 


CHAPTER   VIII 

The  Moscow  State  Conference  .  .  .  .164 

Attempts  of  the  Government  to  find  supporters  outside  the  Soviets 
— The  Generals  and  the  Committees  at  the  front — Rodzianko's 
declaration  and  Chheidze's  declaration — Two  Russias — Kerensky's 
ambiguous  position— Difficulty  of  amalgamation— The  Bolsheviks 
and  the  Moscow  workmen. 


CHAPTER  IX 

The  Psychology  op  the  Masses  .  .  .  .185 

Industrial  anarchy — A.  Konovaloffs  resignation — An  appeal  to 
the  people's  sense  of  duty — Ddsirs  and  demands — Intelligentsia  and 
workmen — Class- war  propaganda — Municipal  elections  and  the  new 
rulers — The  leaders  and  the  crowd. 


CONTENTS  xi 


CHAPTER   X 

PAGE 

Kerensky's  Swan  Song  .....     207 

Soviets  trend  towards  Bolshevism  —  The  fall  of  Riga  — Lavr 
Korniloff  and  the  Korniloflf  affair— Arrest  of  Generals  and  chaos  in 
the  army — Trotsky's  appearance — The  Democratic  Conference — The 
Soviets  opposed  to  the  Coalition  Government — The  Council  of  the 
Republic— The  Bolsheviks  organise  an  insurrection. 


CHAPTER   XI 
The  November  Revolution     .....     248 

The  General  Staff  and  the  Winter  Palace — Arrest  of  members  of 
the  Provisional  Government  —  Adventure  or  coup  d'J^tat  ?  —  No 
defenders — Kerensky  disappears — The  Petrograd  Municipal  Council 
as  the  centre  of  opposition — The  Military  Cadets — The  Moscow 
fighting — Strike  of  officials — Seizure  of  the  State  Bank — Union  of 
Unions — Impotence  of  the  intelligentsia. 


CHAPTER   XII 

The  Consolidation  of  the  Bolshevist  Power  .  .     287 

Bolsheviks  and  Germans — Whence  came  the  money  ? — A  morality 
of  Lenin — Trotsky  and  other  heroes — Decrees  about  land  and  peace 
— Ensign  Krylenko — The  separate  armistice — The  march  against 
the  Stavka  —  Brutal  murder  of  Dukhonin  —  The  Brest -Litovsk 
Negotiations — Soviet  rule — Decrees  about  the  Press — Raiding  of 
newspaper  offices. 

CHAPTER   XIII 

The  Constituent  Assembly     .....     326 

The  part  played  by  the  old  zemstvo — Universal  suffrage— The 
dispersion  of  the  Petrograd  Municipal  Council  —  Parliamentary 
cre<int5m— Elections  to  the  Constituent  Assembly  and  their  results 
—The  first  broil  in  the  Taurida  Palace— Arrest  of  the  members  of 
the  Constituent  Assembly — The  Cadets  as  enemies  of  the  people — 
Discrediting  the  Constituent  Assembly — The  first  and  last  sitting — 
Dispersion— Murder  of  A.  I.  Shingareff  and  F.  F.  Kokoshkin. 


xii       FEOM  LIBEKTY  TO  BEEST-LITOVSK 


CHAPTEE  XIV 


PAGE 


Bolshevist  Government  .  .  ,  .  .370 

Economic  phantasies — Expropriate  the  expropriators — A  blow  at 
the  world  bourgeoisie — The  Budget  of  the  Bolsheviks— The  work- 
men's control — Contribution — Lenin's  speech — The  abolition  of 
justice  —  Revolutionary  tribunals  —  Judgement  pronounced  on 
Countess  Panin  and  General  Boldyreff — Indulgence  shown  to  a 
secret  agent — Hostages  and  executions  without  trial — Struggle 
with  the  Press — The  Press  and  elections — Campaign  against  the 
Church — The  clergy  and  the  intelligentsia — Holy  processions. 


CHAPTER  XV 
Everyday  Life  .  .  .  .  .  .421 

Chaos — Legends — House  -  Committees — Intellectuals  begging — 
Soldiers  from  Rumania — Russians  fighting  Russians— Streets — 
Drunken  Pogroms — Robbers  and  Hunger — Murder  of  the  brothers 
Guenglezi — Sadism. 

CHAPTER   XVI 

War  with  the  Russians — Peace  with  the  Germans  .     455 

The  self-determination  of  nations — The  home  Front — Stories  of 
a  World  Revolution — Brest-Litovsk  Diplomacy — The  break  with 
the  Germans — Lenin  and  Trotsky — Panic — The  Socialistic  Father- 
land and  the  Red  Army — The  approach  of  the  Germans — Peace 
signed  on  March  3. 

APPENDIX      .  .  .  .  .  .  .     503 

INDEX  .  .  .  .  .  .  .507 


CHAPTEE  I 

THE  DOWNFALL  OF  THE  OLD  REGIME 

A  patriotic  opposition — ^The  storm  brewing — Nicholas  II.  and  the  Duma 
— Monday  March  12 — ^The  joy  of  liberty — Two  centres — Rodzianko 
and  Chheidze — A  Government  in  formation — Abdication  of  the  Tsar 
— ^Ministers  of  Prince  G.  LvofE's  Cabinet. 

During  the  morning  of  the  12th  of  March  I  was  rung 
up  by  a  telephone  message,  "  It  has  begun." 

At  once  I  realised  what  had  happened.  No,  that  is 
incorrect.  At  the  time  none  of  us  realised  what  was 
taking  place,  none  realised  what  a  revolution  really 
meant.  But  we  all,  the  whole  city,  realised  at  once  that 
it  was  the  Revolution. 

The  winter  of  1916-17  had  passed  in  a  state  of 
nervous  and  oppressed  expectancy.  The  front  was 
war-weary,  and  the  homeland  still  more  so.  Neither 
the  political  nor  the  economic  structure  of  Russia  was 
prepared  for  such  a  prolonged  and  strenuous  military 
tension.  The  country  having  given  its  best  to  the  army, 
the  front  held  out  better  than  the  rear.  Difficulties  in 
the  food -supply  were  beginning  to  make  themselves 
felt.  Compared  with  what  the  Russian  towns  were 
destined  to  undergo  owing  to  the  Revolution,  these 
restrictions  were,  as  yet,  insignificant.  Yet  at  the  time 
all  food  embarrassments  were  still  a  novelty  and 
provoked  general  discontent.  This  enhanced  the  ever- 
growing distrust  and  antagonism  towards  the  Govern- 


2        FEOM  LIBERTY  TO  BEEST-LITOVSK       ch. 

ment.  The  Duma  gradually  became  the  authoritative 
centre  of  patriotic  and  therefore  opposition  elements. 
It  was  an  opposition  rallied  around  the  motto, 
"  Defence  of  the  Fatherland."  The  mere  shadow  of  an 
agreement  with  Germany  provoked  the  sharp  protest  of 
these  circles.  For  the  purpose  of  a  more  energetic 
carrying-on  of  the  war  the  people's  representatives 
persistently  demanded  "  a  Ministry  of  confidence,"  i.e. 
that  the  blind,  unpopular,  incapable,  and  unintelligent 
Ministers  should  be  replaced  by  universally  respected, 
honourable  public  men.  Nicholas  II.  remained  deaf  to 
these  demands,  treating  them  as  an  insolent  infringe- 
ment of  his  prerogative  as  an  autocrat.  His  tenacity 
augmented  the  opposition.  Throughout  Russia,  both 
at  the  front  and  at  home,  rumour  grew  ever  louder 
concerning  the  pernicious  influence  exercised  by  the 
Empress  Alexandra  Feodorovna,  at  whose  side  rose  the 
sinister  figure  of  Gregory  Rasputin.  This  charlatan  and 
hypnotist  had  wormed  himseK  into  the  Tsar's  palace 
and  gradually  acquired  a  limitless  power  over  the 
hysterical  Empress,  and  through  her  over  the  Sovereign. 
Rasputin's  proximity  to  the  Tsar's  family  proved  fatal 
to  the  d}Tiasty,  for  no  political  criticism  can  harm  the 
prestige  of  Tsars  so  effectually  as  the  personal  weakness, 
vice,  or  debasement  of  the  members  of  a  royal  house. 

Rumours  were  current,  up  to  now  unrepudiated, 
but  likewise  unconfirmed,  that  the  Germans  were 
influencing  Alexandra  Feodorovna  through  the  medium 
of  Rasputin  and  Stiirmer.  Haughty  and  unapproach- 
able, she  lacked  popularity,  and  was  all  the  more  readily 
suspected  of  almost  anything,  even  of  pro-Germanism, 
since  the  crowd  is  always  ready  to  believe  anything 
that  tends  to  augment  their  suspicions.  In  November 
the  Duma  made  an  emphatic  demand  for  a  change  in 
the  Government's  policy.     On  the  14th  of  November 


I      THE  DOWNFALL  OF  THE  OLD  REGIME      3 

the  leader  of  the  opposition,  P.  N.  Milyukoff,  made  a 
historical  speech,  which  is  considered  by  many  as 
marking  the  first  day  of  the  revolution.  Characterising 
the  policy  of  the  Prime  Minister,  Stiirmer,  P.  N.  MilyukofE 
pointed  out  that  in  dwelling  upon  the  conduct  of  the 
head  of  the  Government  one  could  not  refrain  from 
putting  the  question,  "  What  is  it,  folly  or  treason  ?  " 

In  those  days  these  words  were  upon  everybody's 
lips.  The  incapacity  of  the  authorities  became  ever 
more  apparent.  Government  circles  were  incapable  of 
realising  the  necessity  of  granting  concessions.  Mean- 
while only  in  imison  with  trusted  statesmen  could  the 
Government  bring  the  war  with  Germany  to  a  victorious 
end. 

The  assassination  of  Rasputin  came  as  a  first  conse- 
quence of  the  speeches  uttered  in  the  Duma.  This  was 
a  society  revolt,  a  protest  of  aristocrats  and  monarchists 
against  the  degradation  of  the  Tsar's  dignity.  The 
circles  which  planned  this  assassination  had  not  the 
habit  of  political  reflexion.  They  did  not  realise  that 
Rasputin  was  not  a  casual  phenomenon,  but  the  sign 
of  the  profound  dissolution  of  the  autocratic  principle, 
which  the  monarchists  aspired  to  save.  The  leading 
part  in  Rasputin's  murder  was  played  by  the  young 
Count  Yusupoff-Sumarokoff-Elston,  one  of  the  wealthiest 
of  Russian  aristocrats,  a  relative  of  the  Tsar  by  his 
marriage  with  the  daughter  of  Nicholas  II. 's  sister. 

His  chief  assistant  and  accomplice  was  one  of  the 
most  gifted  and  energetic  defenders  of  the  autocracy,  a 
member  of  the  Duma,  VI.  Purishkevich.  By  exter- 
minating the  evil  genius  of  the  Tsar's  family  these  men 
hoped  to  purify  the  principle  of  autocracy  itself  and 
save  the  old  regime.  But  nothing  was  changed  with 
Rasputin's  removal,  nothing  improved  either  in  affairs 
of  the  State  or  in  the  Tsar's  situation.    Formerly  thQ 


4        FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

Tsar's  various  mistakes  and  weaknesses  were  attributed 
to  Rasputin's  evil  influence — ^now  the  last  veil  had  been 
withdrawn  and  the  insignificant  little  officer,  slightly 
educated,  unintelligent,  incapable  of  following  and 
grasping  all  the  complexity  of  contemporary  social  and 
political  life — stood  out,  a  lonely  figure  attracting  the 
ever  more  malevolent  attention  of  public  opinion. 
Rasputin  was  no  more,  but  the  Ministers  appointed  by 
this  half -illiterate  rascal  remained  at  their  posts  and 
conducted  the  affairs  of  the  State  as  if  still  guided  by 
his  shadow. 

Discontent  grew  apace,  merging  into  exasperation. 
As  in  physical  nature,  there  are  moments  in  political 
life  when  it  becomes  difficult  to  breathe.  Clouds  gather 
ever  lower  and  lower.  Gusts  of  wind  are  succeeded  by  a 
deadly  calm.  The  sultry  heat  awes  and  oppresses,  and 
one  longs  for  the  flash  of  lightning,  for  the  crash  of 
thunder. 

Such  was  our  life  from  November  to  the  beginning 
of  March.  The  political  disorganisation  became  most 
marked  in  measures  relating  to  the  food-supply.  On 
the  8th  of  March  the  Minister  of  Agriculture,  Rittikh, 
in  a  speech  at  the  Duma  candidly  avowed  the  Govern- 
ment's incapacity  to  deal  unaided  with  the  food-supply. 
And  while  the  Duma  listened  to  his  speech  in  morose 
and  surly  silence,  the  mob  in  the  labour  district  of  the 
Vyborgsky  was  already  looting  the  markets  and  parading 
the  streets  with  shouts  of  "  Bread !  "  This  happened 
on  Thursday  the  8th  of  March.  On  Friday,  towards 
evening,  trams  stopped  running.  The  numbers  of 
demonstrators  increased.  Cossack  scouts  patrolled  the 
city.  But  the  crowd,  the  vast  heterogeneous  crowd, 
which  flooded  the  streets  not  only  did  not  fear  them, 
but  seemed  to  absorb  the  Cossacks  amicably  into  its 
own  surging  ranks. 


I      THE  DOWNFALL  OF  THE  OLD  REGIME      5 

On  Saturday  machine-guns  were  brought  into  action. 
The  Minister  of  the  Interior,  Protopopoff,  determined  to 
suppress  the  ferment  by  force  of  arms.  Machine-guns 
distributed  long  beforehand  among  the  police  stations 
were  posted  throughout  the  city.  Policemen  were 
ordered  to  fire  at  the  crowd.  Whether  many  people  did 
not  realise  the  danger,  or  whether  the  popular  feeling 
had  swelled  into  an  as  yet  unexpressed  but  universal 
determination  to  end  with  the  old  police  regime  once 
for  all — at  all  events  the  machine-guns  excited  no 
panic.  The  crowds  dispersed,  flocked  into  a  neighbour- 
ing street,  but  would  not  go  home.  They  waited. 
Nevertheless  some  were  killed  and  wounded  both  on 
Saturday  and  Sunday.  The  police  were  the  only  ones 
to  fire  in  those  two  days.  The  crowds  did  not  retaliate, 
nor  was  there  any  show  of  fighting-spirit  on  their  part. 
It  was  difficult  to  understand  whether  this  was  merely 
a  popular  agitation  or  a  revolution  ?  What  would  be 
the  outcome  of  it  all  ? 

On  Monday  the  12th  of  March  all  doubts  were 
dispelled.  The  revolution  had  begun.  The  Volynsky, 
Litovsky,  and  Kexholm  regiments  revolted.  Several 
officers  were  Idlled  for  ordering  the  soldiers  to  come  out 
and  help  the  police.  The  soldiers  poured  out  of  their 
barracks  into  the  street,  but  did  not  know  what  to  do 
next.  They  had  no  one  to  guide  them.  Tumultuous, 
absolutely  unorganised  crowds  of  soldiers  rushed  hither 
and  thither  for  some  unknown  reason,  gradually  rallying 
towards  the  Liteiny  Prospect. 

When  at  about  eleven  in  the  morning  we  walked 
towards  the  Taurida  Palace  where  the  Duma  was 
sitting,  shots  were  heard  from  all  sides  singly  or  in 
volleys.  It  was  only  later  we  learned  that  this  was  a 
harmless  firing  into  the  air. 

All  was  quiet  at  the  Taurida  Palace.    Deputies  were 


6        FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       oh. 

wandering   in    the   lobbies    nervously    discussing   the 
situation. 

On  the  10th  of  March  the  Tsar  had  decreed  the 
dissolution  of  the  Duma,  but  the  President  of  the  Duma, 
Michael  Rodzianko,  before  he  knew  of  this  decree,  had 
sent  the  following  telegram  to  the  Tsar  at  the  Stavka  : 

The  situation  is  serious.  There  is  anarchy  in  the  capital. 
The  Government  is  paralysed.  Transport,  food,  and  fuel  supply 
are  completely  disorganised.  Universal  discontent  is  increasing. 
Disorderly  firing  is  going  on  in  the  streets.  Some  troops  are 
firing  at  each  other.  It  is  urgently  necessary  to  entrust  a  man 
enjoying  the  confidence  of  the  country  with  the  formation  of  a 
new  Government.  Delay  is  impossible.  Any  tardiness  is  fatal. 
I  pray  God  that  at  this  hour  the  responsibihty  may  not  fall  upon 
the  Sovereign. 

Copies  of  the  above  telegram  were  also  sent  by 
Rodzianko  to  all  the  army  commanders  with  the  request 
that  they  should  endeavour  to  persuade  the  Tsar  of  the 
urgency  of  granting  concessions. 

The  decree  of  dissolution  was  the  reply.  Rodzianko 
then  sent  his  second  and  last  telegram  to  the  Tsar. 

The  situation  is  growing  worse.  Measures  should  be  taken 
immediately,  as  to-morrow  it  will  be  too  late.  The  final  decisive 
hour  for  Motherland  and  dynasty  has  struck. 

This  telegram  also  remained  unanswered.  It  was 
said  later  that  the  Tsar's  courtiers,  with  the  cynical 
rapacious  Court  adventurer.  General  Voeikoff,  at  their 
head,  purposely  withheld  Rodzianko 's  telegrams, 
because  being  opposed  to  concessions  they  deemed 
themselves  sufficiently  strong  to  suppress  the  mal- 
contents with  machine-guns.  The  same  General 
Voeikoff,  when  it  became  known  that  the  Revolution 
had  broken  out  at  Petrograd,  proposed  to  Nicholas  II. 
to  open  the  front  to  the  Germans  and  place  himself 
under  the  Kaiser's  protection. 


I   THE  DOWNFALL  OF  THE  OLD  REGIME   7 

But  the  last  of  the  Romanoffs  did  not  consent 
to  this  dishonourable  proposal.  Nicholas  IL  refused. 
Before  the  soldiers  had  had  time  to  approach  the  Taurida 
Palace,  the  Executive  Committee  of  the  Duma  had 
decided  to  disobey  the  order  of  dissolution.  But  what 
was  to  be  done  next  no  one  knew,  and  the  same  kind 
of  confusion  reigned  amid  the  people's  representatives  as 
was  evident  in  the  midst  of  the  revolted  regiments,  who 
did  not  at  once  manage  to  find  their  way  to  the  Duma. 

Only  towards  one  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  led  by 
intellectuals  fired  with  revolutionary  enthusiasm,  did 
the  first  detachments  of  soldiers  reach  the  Palace. 
Members  of  the  Duma  greeted  them  with  speeches  of 
welcome.  All  around  in  the  adjacent  streets  one  could 
hear  the  heavy  tramp  of  soldiers'  feet.  Crowds  of 
people  from  all  the  barracks,  from  every  part  of  the 
city,  flowed  to  the  Taurida  Palace. 

At  once  the  Duma  became  the  centre.  In  the 
afternoon  of  the  12th  of  March  the  Provisional 
Committee  of  the  Duma  was  formed  by  the  unanimous 
decision  of  the  deputies.  M.  Rodzianko,  a  confirmed 
Monarchist,  hesitated  at  first,  but  patriotism  gaining 
the  better  of  Court  traditions,  he  consented  to  become 
the  President  of  the  Committee.  In  the  evening  the 
Duma  issued  the  following  proclamation  : 

The  Provisional  Committee  of  the  State  Duma  has  found 
itself  compelled,  under  the  distressing  conditions  of  internal 
disintegration  provoked  by  the  pohcy  of  the  Government,  to 
take  into  its  hands  the  re-estabUshment  of  poUtical  and  pubUc 
order.  Fully  conscious  of  the  responsibiUty  attached  to  this 
decision,  the  Committee  expresses  the  certitude  that  both  the 
community  and  the  army  will  come  to  their  aid  at  the  difficult 
moment  of  creating  a  new  Government  corresponding  to  the 
desire,  and  capable  of  enjoying  the  confidence,  of  the  people. 

This  message  was  signed  by  M.   Rodzianko,  but 


8         FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

members  of  all  parties  were  represented  in  the  Committee, 
including  two  Socialists,  A.  Kerensky  and  N.  Chheidze. 
It  seemed  as  though  a  real  national  centre  had  been 
created  here,  which  by  absorbing  various  currents  of 
political  opinion  would  become  capable  of  organising 
a  Government  and  carrying  on  the  war  to  the  end. 
Events,  however,  took  a  different  course.  From  the 
very  first  day  two  distinct  political  tendencies  were 
manifested. 

In  the  afternoon  of  March  12  tidings  reached  the 
Taurida  Palace  that  a  revolutionary  mob  was  besieg- 
ing the  so-called  Kresty  prison  on  the  Vyborg  side, 
where  the  Labour  group  of  the  War  Industries  Com- 
mittee was  imprisoned.  Running  past  me  into  the 
street,  where  he  had  to  address  the  soldiers,  Kerensky 
exclaimed  joyously : 

''  Now,  then,  the  real  masters  will  come  with  the 
Labour  group  !  " 

I  remember  in  spite  of  the  tumult  of  impressions 
crowding  upon  me  from  all  sides  how  strangely  I  was 
struck  by  these  words.  To  me  it  seemed  as  though  the 
master,  the  Duma,  were  already  here,  and  that  there 
was  no  need  to  seek  for  another.  We  were,  however, 
mistaken,  both  Kerensky  and  myself.  Neither  the 
Labour  group  nor  the  State  Duma  succeeded  in  retaining 
their  influence  or  mastering  the  situation.^ 

All  day  long  thousands  of  soldiers  poured  towards 
the  Taurida  Palace,  around  which  the  human  ocean 
ebbed  and  flowed.  Yet  upon  that  first  day  of  the 
Russian  Revolution  the  soldiers  who  overthrew  the  old 
regime  showed  no  sign  of  triumph.    I  gazed  into  their 

^  The  Labour  group  had  been  attached  to  the  War  Industries  Committees, 
formed  after  the  summer  retreat  of  1915,  which  had  revealed  the  fact  that  the 
Russian  Army  was  fighting  almost  without  arms  and  munitions.  The  aim  of 
these  Committees  was  the  organisation  of  munition  factories.  The  members  of 
the  Labour  group  were  moderate  Social-Democrats. 


I      THE  DOWNFALL  OF  THE  OLD  REGIME      9 

faces,  as  standing  by  force  of  habit  in  perfectly  ordered 
rows  before  the  entrance  they  hstened  with  fixed 
attention  to  the  deputies'  speeches.  The  orators  exalted 
the  deeds  of  the  revolutionary  troops,  but  the  soldiers' 
countenances  seemed  excited  and  uncertain.  They  did 
not  realise  what  had  happened,  did  not  know  whether 
they  had  behaved  well  or  ill !  Perhaps  some  of  them 
considered  themselves  in  the  light  not  so  much  of  heroes 
as  of  rebels. 

By  the  middle  of  the  day  the  Taurida  Palace  was 
transformed  into  a  military  camp.  The  halls  and 
endless  corridors  filled  with  soldiers.  Rifle  cartridges 
and  machine-gun  belts  were  piled  up  in  the  circular 
hall  hung  with  large  framed  war  maps  marking  the 
movements  of  Russian  and  Allied  troops.  Machine- 
guns  were  scattered  about.  But  even  these  military 
preparations  did  not  reassure  the  soldiers.  I  asked  the 
stalwart,  gallant  Volynsky  men  whether  they  would 
return  to  their  barracks  for  supper.  The  soldiers  only 
clustered  closer  around  me  and  protested  excitedly  : 

"  To  the  barracks  ?  Oh,  no  !  What  for  ?  The 
whole  lot  of  us  would  be  shot.  We  shan't  move  from 
the  Duma.  Here  we'll  all  remain,  let  them  defend  us 
here." 

As  yet  there  was  not  much  self-confidence  in  these 
troops,  who  from  being  Tsarist  had  in  a  few  hours  become 
revolutionary.  Whence,  indeed,  could  self-confidence 
arise  when  no  one  knew  exactly  anything  of  the  general 
situation  ?  Rumours  were  current  that  somewhere 
there  were  troops  which  had  remained  loyal  to  Nicholas 
II.,  that  they  might  appear  at  any  moment.  Shots  were 
being  fired  from  everywhere.  Police  fired  and  were 
fired  at,  some  one  else  was  firing  too,  no  one  knew  why 
or  at  whom.  Revolution  swept  like  a  whirlwind,  and 
it  was  difi&cult  to  hearken  to  all  its  voices. 


10       FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

Strange  to  say,  the  civilian  population  of  Petrograd 
exhibited  far  greater  assurance  and  less  fear  than  the 
soldiers  of  the  Petrograd  garrison. 

In  joyous  exaltation,  with  fiery  enthusiasm  and 
faith  in  free  Russia,  Petrograd  lived  through  the  honey- 
moon of  liberty.  All  were  filled  with  the  proud  con- 
sciousness that  at  last  the  Russian  people  was  liberated 
from  the  oppressive  autocracy,  and  would  itself  create 
and  build  up  its  new  Ufe.  The  morose,  unsociable 
Petrograd  citizens  were  unrecognisable.  Day  and  night 
the  streets  were  thronged  with  people,  notwithstanding 
that  firing  was  still  going  on  in  the  city,  that  motor-cars 
bristling  on  all  sides  with  rifles  went  tearing  along  the 
streets.  Their  occupants — soldiers  and  civilians,  mostly 
young  men — rushed  they  knew  themselves  not  whither 
on  the  look-out  for  a  non-existent  enemy.  These  over- 
zealous  warriors  only  provoked  good-humoured  smiles. 
In  those  days  good-nature  and  goodwill  were  general, 
and  created  a  strong,  common  feeling,  breathing  energy 
and  force.  People  looked  joyiully  and  trustfully  into 
each  other's  eyes  and  smiled  with  that  irrepressible 
happy  smile  which  beams  upon  lovers'  faces. 

We  believed  that  Russia  stood  upon  the  threshold  of 
a  new,  longed-for  life,  when  every  one  would  feel  himself 
equally  free,  when  rights  and  duties  would  be  assigned, 
not  as  a  series  of  privileges  and  compulsions,  but  as 
something  inherent  in  every  individual. 

It  was  a  joy  to  behold  how  the  pathos  of  liberty 
was  kindled  in  the  hearts  of  drab,  insignificant  men  and 
women,  who  but  yesterday  had  felt  themselves  to  be 
pariahs.  On  the  second  or  third  day  of  the  Revolution 
a  telegraph  messenger  brought  me  a  telegram,  and, 
handing  it  to  me,  said  : 

"  Thank  you  so  much." 

I  looked  at  him  in  surprise.     A  pale,  tired-out, 


I      THE  DOWNFALL  OF  THE  OLD  REGIME     11 

sickly,  hollow-cheeked  man  stood  before  me.  But  the 
light  in  his  eyes  relieved  the  drab  insignificance  of  his 
countenance. 

"  What  for  ?  "  I  asked  him. 

"  Why,  to  be  sure,  we  know  about  it,"  he  said 
warmly,  *'  although  we  are  small  people,  and  have  kept 
to  our  slums  afraid  to  move,  still  we  knew  of  what 
others  did.  I  have  read  your  articles  in  the  papers 
and  heard  your  speeches  at  meetings.  We  also  under- 
stand what  difierent  people  stand  for.  Well,  thank  God, 
we've  gained  our  liberty,  you  and  I.  It  seems  to  me  as 
if  I  were  born  again.  What  were  we  before  now  ? 
Nothing.  Worse  ofi  than  dogs.  Harassed  by  every  one, 
not  looked  upon  as  human  beings.  And  now  my  back 
is  straightened.  I  seem  to  tread  on  air,  my  very  soul 
seems  to  sing — I  am  a  man,  I  am  no  longer  a  slave  but 
a  free  man.'' 

His  words  gushed  out  in  torrents.  The  joy  of 
liberty  was  bubbling  in  him  like  wine.  I  could  not  take 
my  gaze  off  the  eyes  that  sparkled  with  pride  and  joy. 
We  both  laughed  with  that  glad  laugh  which  means  so 
much  more  than  words.  And  the  telegraph  messenger 
hastened  to  tell  his  story  in  order  to  make  me  realise 
more  vividly  the  importance  of  all  that  was  filling  his 
soul  to  overflowing : 

"  Here  I  have  a  wife  and  five  children.  As  to 
myself,  I  am  an  invalid.  I  have  consumption.  You 
yourself  know  how  hard  my  work  is.  Out  in  the  street 
in  all  weathers.  Our  wages  are  beggarly — forty  roubles  a 
month.  But  I  claim  nothing,  I  want  nothing,  no  increase, 
nothing.  We'll  bear  it,  we'll  weather  it  somehow.  If 
only  we  can  hold  firmly  together,  only  not  return  to 
what  was  before.    But  we'll  hold  together,  won't  we  ?  " 

The  small  grey  eyes  shone  with  hope  and  faith.  We 
parted  like  old  friends  with  a  hearty  hand-shake.     And 


12       FEOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

often  in  the  gloomy  days  of  disillusion  and  defeat  I 
thought  of  this  consumptive  postman,  of  his  enthusiasm, 
his  touching  intimacy  with  all  whom  he  looked  upon  as 
friends  of  liberty,  his  heroic  readiness  to  bear  any  further 
material  misfortunes  if  only  to  safeguard  his  rights  as  a 
man  and  citizen. 

His  was  by  no  means  an  exceptional  case.  Liberty 
had  straightened  out  many  people,  had  made  them 
kinder  and  more  sociable.  All  around  there  rose  the 
overwhelming  consciousness  of  proximity  to  and  of 
fusion  with  millions  of  other  people.  Probably  some- 
thing of  the  kind  is  felt  in  moments  of  mass  religious 
movements.  There,  too,  inspired  by  mystic  transport, 
the  spiritual  force  of  one  suddenly  becomes  absorbed  by 
the  kindred  forces  of  other  individuals  who  were  but 
recently  strangers,  and  seemed  hopelessly  isolated  each 
in  his  own  individuality.  And  man  is  no  longer  alone. 
He  becomes  part  of  a  whole.  His  soul  expands  and 
becomes  enriched  because  it  has  come  into  touch  with 
the  emotions  of  its  fellows,  because  it  has  absorbed  their 
rapture  and  given  them  its  own  enthusiasm.  In  those 
days  all  the  partitions  raised  by  contemporary  life 
between  fellow-men  disappeared.  People  ceased  to  look 
askance  at  each  other  with  that  feeling  of  distrustful 
half-enmity  which  the  citizen  of  a  contemporary  state 
entertains  towards  his  unknown  neighbour.  As  if  a  veil 
had  been  drawn  for  a  moment  and  we  were  allowed  a 
vision  of  that  kingdom,  where  man  unto  man  is  not 
wolf,  but  a  friend,  where  each  is  certain  that  his  neigh- 
bour wishes  him  good,  not  evil,  and  is  therefore  ready 
to  display  the  best,  the  most  magnanimous  part  of  his 
own  self. 

This  did  not  last  long.  Once  more  the  veil  was 
drawn,  leaden  and  impenetrable,  and  the  brief  dazzling 
glimpse  of  a  blue  fairy-tale  was  over.     But  those  who 


I      THE  DOWNFALL  OF  THE  OLD  REGIME     13 

have  actually  lived  it  know  that  in  spite  of  all  human 
failings  and  vices,  the  crowd,  even  a  contemporary 
crowd,  is  capable  of  rising  to  a  sense  of  consummate, 
all-purifying  brotherhood.  Such  days  cannot  be  for- 
gotten. Such  days  should  not  be  forgotten,  for  such 
collective  emotions  are  a  kind  of  historic  revelation 
reminding  men  of  what  mankind  may  become  if  purified 
from  all  low  and  selfish  instincts. 

Not  in  vain  in  those  days  was  one  word  upon  all 
lips — Christ's  Glorious  Resurrection.  Easter  in  Russia 
is  always  kept  with  a  special  bright  solemnity,  and  these 
words  not  only  marked  the  gladness  of  common  emotions, 
but  held  the  unexpressed  avowal  that  we  were  all  living 
participators  in  a  collective  miracle,  a  miracle  of  the 
resurrection  of  bright,  lofty  emotions  among  the  people. 

A  heavy  and  bloody  price  did  the  Russian  people 
pay  for  the  depths  of  that  joy.  Some  one  deceived  it, 
some  one  troubled  its  soul,  thrust  it  along  the  path  of 
crime  and  degradation,  and  watered  the  Russian  land 
with  blood  and  tears.  .  .  .  But  in  the  days  of  early 
rapture  we  all  believed  that  this  early,  inspiriting  sense 
of  community  could  be  retained  and  deepened,  that 
national  unity  would  help  us  to  defend  Russia  from  the 
Germans  and  work  out  a  new  statehood,  strong  and 
free. 

It  seemed  as  though  all  Russia  in  a  common  impulse 
had  accepted  the  long-awaited  liberty  as  a  gift  for  the 
bloody  sacrifices  offered  upon  the  battlefields,  as  a 
result  of  the  century-old  struggle  for  the  rights  of  the 
people. 

But  this  unity  was  fictitious.  The  Tsarist  authority 
had  so  far  outlived  itself  that  it  offered  almost  no 
resistance  to  the  Revolution,  if  we  do  not  take  into 
account  the  few  thousand  policemen  who  endeavoured 
to  reinstate  the  fallen  autocracy  with  the  aid  of  machine- 


14       FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

guns.  In  two  days  they  were  swept  away.  On  Monday 
the  foremost  soldiers  of  the  revolt  marched  to  the 
Taurida  Palace,  and  already  by  Wednesday  the  last  of 
the  police  machine-gunners  were  picked  by  the  crowd 
off  the  roof  of  St.  Isaac's  Cathedral,  while  the  half- 
insane  Minister,  Protopopoff,  who  directed  the  police- 
men's military  operations,  was  under  arrest  in  company 
with  other  Ministers.  The  coup  d'etat  was  accomplished 
almost  without  struggle  and  bloodshed.  The  arms  with 
which  the  insurgents  had  furnished  themselves  were 
almost  unneeded.  It  seemed  as  if  power  would  pain- 
lessly pass  over  to  the  people.  Public  men,  soldiers, 
workmen,  the  intelligentsia — all  flocked  to  the  Taurida 
Palace,  feeling  that  within  these  white  walls  were  the 
chief  mainstay  and  the  legal  succession  of  Russian 
stateship.  Towards  the  very  first  evening,  however, 
two  centres  were  already  formed  in  the  Palace — ^the 
Committee  of  the  Duma  and  the  Soviet  of  Workmen's 
Deputies. 

At  the  first  meeting  of  the  Soviet,  held  at  about  nine 
in  the  evening,  very  few  workmen  were  present.  On 
either  side  of  the  long  table  one  saw  the  familiar  faces  of 
doctors,  lawyers,  engineers,  of  all  the  radical  Petrograd 
intelligentsia,  long-standing  adversaries  of  the  Tsarist 
regime.  The  day,  long  dreamed  of  by  generations  of 
Russian  educated  people,  had  dawned  at  last.  The 
revolutionary  people  had  overthrown  autocracy.  The 
role  of  the  intelligentsia,  as  that  of  an  irresponsible 
opposition,  was  over.  It  had  now  to  pass  to  construction, 
and  in  the  first  place  to  build  up  a  government  and  learn 
to  obey  it. 

Few  at  that  moment  realised  that  the  most  strenuous 
work  of  all  still  lay  ahead ;  that  however  difficult  had 
been  the  overthrow  of  the  old  order,  the  establishment 
oi  the  new  would  be  still  harder. 


I      THE  DOWNFALL  OF  THE  OLD  EEGIME     15 

The  Social-Democrat,  Chheidze,  a  Georgian  member 
of  the  Duma  for  Transcaucasia,  was  elected  chairman  of 
the  first  meeting  of  the  Soviet. 

The  proclamation  issued  that  same  night  by  the 
Soviet  already  bore  a  trace  of  the  fatal  cleavage,  which 
subsequently  split  all  Eussia  in  twain.     It  said  : 

Yesterday,  12th  of  March,  a  Soviet  of  Workmen's  Deputies 
was  formed  in  the  capital,  composed  of  delegates  from  factories 
and  workshops,  of  revolted  military  units  as  well  as  of  repre- 
sentatives of  democratic  and  socialist  parties  and  groups.  The 
Soviet  of  Workmen's  Deputies  sitting  in  the  Duma  considers 
its  fundamental  task  to  be  the  organisation  of  popular  forces, 
and  the  struggle  for  the  final  consolidation  of  the  people's  govern- 
ment in  Russia.  The  Soviet  has  appointed  district  commissaries 
for  establishing  the  people's  power  in  the  Petrograd  areas.  We 
invite  the  entire  population  of  the  Capital  to  rally  round  the 
Soviet,  to  organise  local  Committees  and  take  over  the  manage- 
ment of  all  local  affairs. 

In  this  way  two  centres,  issuing  appeals  and  orders, 
came  into  being  simultaneously.  This,  of  course,  was  not 
a  chance  event.  This  duality  only  reflected  a  funda- 
mental divergency  of  principle.  Kepresentatives  of 
these  two  groups  held  different  conceptions  of  Eussia's 
political  and  social  needs.  But  infinitely  more 
dangerous  proved  the  difference  in  their  standards  of 
security  for  the  State,  and  on  that  they  split  up  Eussia. 
On  the  one  side  were  those  who  rejoicing  in  liberty  were 
strongly  convinced  that  Eussia's  independence  and 
future  were  closely  bound  up  with  the  efiiciency  of  the 
army,  that  the  Motherland  must  be  defended  not  by 
declarations  and  meetings  but  by  force  of  arms.  On 
the  other  side  were  internationalists  of  various  shades. 
The  best  among  them  believed  that  German  and  Austrian 
proletarians  could  be  persuaded  to  throw  down  their 
rifles,   to   turn   their   swords   into   ploughshares.     The 


16       FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       oh. 

thoughts  and  deeds  of  the  worst  can  only  be  judged 
after  the  publication  of  the  secret  documents  in  German 
archives.  The  Duma  Committee  placed  itself  at  the 
head  of  the  first,  the  defencist,  party. 

It  cannot  be  said  that  no  one  but  defeatists  were  to 
be  foimd  in  the  Soviet  or  around  it.  Such  a  statement 
would  be  incorrect.  Socialists  of  all  denominations 
rallied  around  the  Soviet,  recognising  it  as  their  own 
democratic  organisation,  and  the  Socialists  also  included 
some  defencists.  But  the  fact  of  Chheidze's  election  as 
President  of  the  Soviet  was  in  itself  a  bad  sign. 

From  the  first  days  of  the  war  Chheidze  had  made 
speeches  in  the  Duma  demanding  the  liquidation  of  the 
war.  From  motives  of  prudence,  for  fear  of  persecution, 
he  was  obliged  to  veil  his  undoubted  pacifism  in  vague 
allusions  and  innuendoes.  But  as  a  consistent  Social- 
Democrat  he  could  not  be  pro-war,  because  he  placed 
class -principle  above  devotion  to  the  Motherland. 
Zimmerwald  and  its  mottoes  were  comprehensible  and 
familiar  to  Chheidze.  But  Russia,  her  integrity,  and 
her  interests  were  alien  to  him.^ 

A  Georgian  by  origin,  speaking  broken  Russian,  a 
man  of  little  education  and  limited  intelligence,  Chheidze 
acquired  prominence  in  the  Social-Democratic  faction 
not  on  account  of  his  talent,  but  because  other  members 
were  still  more  colourless.  This  schoolmaster  from  a 
small  town  of  Transcaucasia  combined  the  secret  cunning 
of  an  Asiatic  with  a  negligent  disdain  for  the  interests  of 
the  State  whose  destinies  he  aspired  to  govern.  History 
had  raised  him  to  unmerited  heights  and  temporarily 
endowed  him  with  an  amount  of  influence  over  the 

^  Chheidze  definitely  proved  this  later,  when  with  German  assistance  and 
in  company  with  other  Georgian  Social-Democrats  he  proclaimed  the  inde- 
pendence of  Georgia.  And  when  the  Germans  were  defeated,  he  started  for 
Paris  with  another  "  Russian  "  revolutionary,  Tsereteli,  to  obtain  the  Allies* 
sanction  for  an  independence  originally  received  from  the  Germans. 


'      THE  DOWNFALL  OF  THE  OLD  REGIME     17 

affairs  of  the  Russian  people  to  which  he  had  no  right, 
either  by  his  personal  qualities  or  by  his  nationality. 
In  general  the  part  playeJ  in  the  Russian  Revolution  by 
non-Russian  leaders  may  be  looked  upon  as  a  sort  of 
reaction,  as  a  historical  Nemesis  for  the  injustice  of  the 
Russian  Government  towards  these  un-Russian  citizens 
of  Russia.  But  this  abstract  interpretation  does  little 
to  mitigate  the  bitterness  of  this  foreign  domination 
over  the  Russian  people  at  the  time  of  its  most  terrible 
historical  upheavals  and  trials. 

In  contrast  with  the  Soviet  a  man  of  totally  different 
character  appeared  at  the  head  of  the  Committee  of  the 
State  Duma.  This  was  Michael  Vladimirovich  Rodzi- 
anko,  a  true  Russian,  a  wealthy  landowner,  who  had 
served  in  the  Guards  in  his  youth,  a  courtier  to  whom 
proximity  to  the  Court  and  the  Dynasty  was  habitual, 
and  loyalty  to  the  autocracy  one  of  the  fundamental 
principles  of  his  political  creed.  To  a  man  of  this  type' 
the  Revolution  could  not  in  a  sense  be  anything  but  a 
catastrophe.  But  feeling  insulted  in  his  national  pride 
he  had  some  time  before  joined  the  opposition.  Military 
disappointments,  fear  for  Russia's  future,  patriotic 
indignation  that,  owing  to  the  unpreparedness  of  the 
Tsarist  regime,  no  genius  in  her  generals,  no  amount  of 
heroism  in  ofl&cers  and  men  could  achieve  decisive 
victory  for  Russia — all  this  forced  Rodzianko,  as  well  as 
the  class  of  society  to  which  he  belonged,  to  join  the 
opposition.  The  same  feeling  manifested  itself  in  the 
persistent  demands  of  the  Duma,  and  in  that  as  yet 
imformulated  ferment  of  military  and  society  circles 
which  found  expression  in  the  murder  of  Rasputin  and 
was  to  have  exercised  pressure  upon  the  Tsar  himself. 

The  opposition  of  which  M.  Rodzianko  found  himself 
the  head  as  President  of  the  Duma  was  a  patriotic 
opposition.     These  men  placed  as  their  foremost  and 

c 


18       FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

fundamental  task  the  organisation  of  the  country  for 
defence  and  war  with  Germany  to  a  victorious  end. 
They  consider  that  this  object  may  only  be  achieved 
by  introducing  into  the  Government  men  having  the 
confidence  of  the  country.  And  these  new  Ministers 
would  undertake  to  see  that  a  series  of  necessary  re- 
forms were  carried  through. 

Various  parties  of  the  Duma  united  upon  this  plat- 
form and  formed  the  so-called  Progressive  bloc. 

The  Socialists,  including  Chheidze  and  Kerensky,  did 
not  join  the  bloc,  as  they  did  not  share  the  attitude  of 
the  others  in  regard  to  the  war.  They  were  in  opposition 
to  the  Government  in  the  name  of  international  pacifism, 
but  not  in  the  name  of  Russia's  interests.  Aims, 
methods,  psychology — everything  differed  in  these  two 
groups  of  the  opposition. 

So  much  personal  enmity  had  accumulated  between 
Chheidze  and  Rodzianko  during  the  years  of  their 
association  in  the  Duma,  that  this  too  could  not  but 
influence  the  relations  between  the  Committee  of  the 
Duma  and  the  Soviet  of  Workmen's  Deputies. 

As  President  of  the  Duma  Rodzianko  frequently 
called  Chheidze  to  order,  cut  short  his  speeches,  and  even 
expelled  him  for  several  sittings.  Before  the  war  such 
encounters  were  provoked  by  the  too  pronounced 
attacks  against  the  Government  or  the  too  glowingly 
Socialistic  speeches  of  Chheidze  and  his  adherents;  in 
war-time — ^by  the  defeatist  tendencies  clearly  displayed 
in  all  the  speeches  delivered  by  the  entire  Social-Demo- 
cratic group. 

Later,  however,  Chheidze  settled  all  scores.  On  one 
of  the  very  first  days  of  the  revolution,  when  soldiers 
crowding  the  Catherine  Hall  were  still  eagerly  listening  to 
all  the  members  of  the  Duma,  Chheidze,  pointing  to  the 
President  of  the  Duma,  asked  in  his  bitter,  rasping  voice : 


I      THE  DOWNFALL  OF  THE  OLD  REGIME     19 

"  You  had  better  ask  Mr.  Rodzianko  whether  he 
intends  parting  with  his  lands  and  also  what  he  thinks 
of  the  form  of  government  ?  " 

This  was  sheer  provocation,  but  Rodzianko  remained 
unperturbed.    His  reply  was  simple  and  concise. 

"  Yes,  I  am  a  landowner.  But  if  the  Constituent 
Assembly  decrees  to  give  my  land  to  the  peasants  I  will 
submit  to  the  will  of  the  people.  I  will  submit  to  it, 
too,  if  the  Constituent  Assembly  establishes  a  Republic. 
I  will  serve  the  Republic  as  loyally  as  I  have  served  the 
Monarchy." 

As  a  matter  of  course  such  strained  dialogues  did 
not  tend  to  ameliorate  the  mutual  relations  of  the  two 
men  or  to  smooth  over  their  differences.  Meanwhile 
the  Committee  of  the  Duma  and  the  Soviet  of  Work- 
men's Deputies,  headed  by  these  diametrically  opposed 
politicians,  became  the  two  centres  which  attracted 
public  forces  and  sympathies,  and  the  Provisional 
Government  was  the  outcome  of  an  agreement  between 
the  two. 

The  first  agreement  between  the  Committee  of  the 
Duma  and  the  Soviet  was  reached  very  rapidly.  Both 
the  composition  of  the  Cabinet  and  the  programme 
announced  by  Prince  LvofE's  Government  were  worked 
out  in  common.  Details  of  these  negotiations  remained 
unknown  to  the  public.  They  took  place  in  one  of  the 
apartments  of  the  Taurida  Palace  which  the  most 
prominent  political  leaders  never  left  at  all  during  those 
ardent  early  days.  There  they  slept,  hither  were  their 
meals  brought  to  them  as  though  they  were  under 
arrest.  The  palace  was  overrun  by  a  heterogeneous, 
restless,  noisy  crowd.  Soldiers  came  up  in  complete 
units  and  singly.  Young  ladies  scurried  about  bringing 
tea  and  sandwiches.  Workmen,  members  of  the  Duma, 
arrested    Ministers    and    policemen.      Military    cadets 


20       FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

mounted  guard.  Officers  of  Allied  missions  were 
visible  here  and  there ;  A.D.C.'s  and  Generals  came  to  the 
Duma  to  declare  their  loyalty  to  the  new  Government. 
All  this  motley  crowd  surged  through  the  endless  halls 
and  corridors  of  the  Duma.  Incessant  meetings  were 
held  all  over  the  building.  Speeches  were  uttered, 
excited,  ardent  speeches,  already  savouring  of  demagogy. 

It  happened  now  and  again  that  soldiers  occupying 
the  centre  of  the  hall  would  listen  breathlessly  to  a 
Socialist  orator  shouting  in  a  hoarse  voice  : 

"  The  Revolution  continues !  All  the  land,  all 
freedom  is  yours  !  " 

And  surrounding  the  electriiSed  crowd  stood  three 
rows  of  queues.  One  queue  was  composed  of  workmen 
with  agitated  faces,  fully  conscious  of  the  importance 
of  the  moment.  Each  held  a  mandate  in  his  hand. 
These  were  the  delegates  elected  by  the  factories  to  the 
Soviet  of  Workmen's  Deputies,  one  delegate  to  every 
thousand.  Alongside  of  these  representatives  of  the 
newly  born  Democratic  power  were  serried  ranks  of 
men,  also  clad  for  the  most  part  in  mufti,  but  surly  and 
gloomy,  looking  like  beasts  that  had  been  run  down. 
Now  and  then  amid  their  ranks  one  could  catch  a  glimpse 
of  the  familiar  police  uniform.  These  were  the  arrested 
members  of  the  police  force.  Many  of  them  bore  bloody 
marks  and  traces  of  blows  upon  their  faces.  A  regular 
hunt  for  policemen  was  going  on  in  those  days.  There 
were  cases  of  cruel  shooting  and  lynching.  But  more 
often  than  not  they  were  merely  seized  and  dragged  to 
the  Taurida  Palace.  Every  one  and  everything  were 
brought  at  the  time  to  the  palace — arms,  cartridges, 
sacks  of  flour,  prisoners — everything,  in  fact,  whether 
good  or  bad. 

Dividing  the  workmen-delegates  from  their  van- 
quished disarmed  enemies — the  police — stretched  the 


I      THE  DOWNFALL  OF  THE  OLD  REGIME     21 

orderly  lines  of  the  cadets.  These  young  men  were 
charged  from  the  very  outset  with  the  task  of  preserving 
order  and  mounting  guard.  Amidst  the  general  con- 
fusion and  excitement  the  cadet  schools  alone  preserved 
discipline  and  order.  These  three  closely  contiguous 
but  imblending  groups,  surrounding  the  tossing  crowd 
of  soldiers,  remain  graven  in  my  memory  as  one  of  the 
symbols  of  Russia's  various  tendencies  and  forces. 
But  this  was  no  time  for  observation  or  reflexion.  Like 
leaves  whirling  in  the  wind,  men  and  thoughts  rush 
onwards  in  the  turmoil  of  revolution. 

Amidst  the  clamour  and  rumbling  which  filled  or 
rather  broke  into  the  Taurida  Palace  as  the  reflexion  of 
the  general  outdoor  efiervescence  of  all  Petrograd  and  all 
Russia,  the  political  leaders  sitting  in  close  consultation 
in  the  apartments  of  the  President  of  the  Duma  were 
obliged  to  formulate  their  decisions. 

Machine-guns  stopped  firing  on  the  14th  of  March, 
and  on  the  15th  the  composition  of  the  new  Cabinet  and 
its  programme  were  already  decided  upon. 

The  latter  was,  in  its  way,  a  sort  of  Magna  Charta. 
It  contained  all  the  necessary  political  promises,  but 
not  a  word  was  said  of  the  war  with  Germany.  Later 
on  members  of  the  Government  explained  this  omission 
by  the  fact  that  at  the  time  every  one  considered  the 
continuation  of  the  war  as  so  absolutely  inevitable,  that 
there  had  been  no  argument  about  the  matter.  Never- 
theless, the  impression  created  was  unfavourable. 

The  political  clauses  of  the  programme  voiced  the 
aspirations  which  had  long  united  all  Russian  progressive 
elements. 

A  political  amnesty,  freedom  of  speech,  of  trade 
unions  and  strikes,  abolition  of  all  privileges,  both  class 
and  national,  a  people's  militia  instead  of  a  police,  and 
lastly,  the  two  principal  clauses — elections  for  local  self- 


22       FEOM  LIBEETY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       oh. 

government  upon  the  principle  of  universal  suffrage, 
and  immediate  preparatory  measures  for  the  calling  of 
a  Constituent  Assembly  elected  by  universal,  equal,  direct, 
and  secret  suffrage  which  would  establish  the  form  of 
Government  and  the  Constitution  of  the  country. 

All  these  clauses  had  been  long  accepted  in  theory 
by  all  the  principal  opposition  parties.  Here  was  no 
cause  for  divergencies,  and  a  vast  majority  of  thinking 
Russians  were  perfectly  satisfied  with  the  political  part 
of  the  programme.  Two  clauses,  however,  at  once  gave 
rise  to  anxious  thoughts.  The  first  concerned  the 
permanent  stay  at  Petrograd  of  ''  the  garrison,  which 
had  participated  in  the  revolutionary  movement,"  and 
the  second  ran,  "  While  conserving  strict  discipline  in 
the  ranks  and  in  the  performance  of  military  duties, 
all  restrictions  limiting  the  soldier's  enjoyment  of  all 
the  rights  granted  to  other  citizens  shall  be  withdrawn. 
The  Provisional  Government  considers  it  a  duty  to  add 
that  it  has  no  intention  whatever  of  using  the  military 
situation  as  a  plea  for  delaying  the  realisation  of  the 
above-mentioned  reforms  and  measures."  This  point 
was  doubly  dangerous.  It  predetermined  the  army's 
participation  in  political  life,  which  proved  fatal  to 
Russia,  and  reflected  the  mistrust  towards  the  newly 
formed  Government  on  the  part  of  those  Socialist  circles 
which  grouped  themselves  around  the  Soviet  of  Work- 
men's Deputies  under  the  general  title  of  the  Revolu- 
tionary Democracy.  The  Socialists  ceded  the  power  to 
more  moderate  elements  as  if  recognising  their  greater 
maturity  or  their  own  incompetence.  But  from  the  very 
first  moment  they  mistrusted  them  and  endeavoured  to 
transmit  to  the  masses  this  mistrust  of  the  new  authority 
bom  of  the  Revolution. 

The  Provisional  Government  was  organised  without 
any  compromise  with  the  autocracy,  as  a  result  of  a 


I      THE  DOWNFALL  OF  THE  OLD  REGIME     23 

real  all-national  democratic  movement.  Nicholas  II. 
was  still  Emperor  of  All  the  Russias,  when  a  new 
list  of  Ministers  was  drawn  up  and  the  draft  of  the 
new  Constitution  outlined  in  the  Duma.  More  than 
that.  When  the  Provisional  Committee  of  the  Duma, 
under  the  chairmanship  of  Rodzianko,  was  laying  the 
foundations  of  a  people's  government,  no  one  knew 
which  side  would  prove  the  stronger.  The  Petrograd 
garrison  was  on  the  side  of  Revolution.  But  these  were 
home  units.  They  had  a  special  psychology  of  their 
own.  Whither  would  the  front  troops  turn  ?  What 
were  they  thinking  of  ?  Were  there  any  units  ready  to 
support  the  Tsar  by  armed  force  ?  Maybe  Nicholas  II. 
was  leading  them  against  the  mutinous  capital  to 
transform  the  victorious  Revolution  into  a  mere  revolt 
suppressed  by  gunfire  ? 

But  few  believed  in  such  an  alternative.  When  the 
abdication  signed  by  Nicholas  II.  came  to  hand  every 
one  received  it  as  something  that  was  long  expected 
and  fatally  inevitable,  and  immediately  forgot  that  only 
yesterday  the  autocracy  had  seemed  impregnable  and 
the  Autocrat  inaccessible. 

Upon  the  very  day,  March  15,  when  a  Provisional 
Government  was  formed  at  Petrograd,  Nicholas  II. 
signed  his  abdication  at  Pskoff. 

The  destiny  of  Russia,  the  honour  of  Our  heroic  army,  the 
good  of  the  people,  the  entire  future  of  Our  beloved  Motherland, 
demand  the  prosecution  of  the  war  at  all  costs  until  a  victorious 
end.  ...  In  these  days  that  are  supremely  decisive  for  Russia, 
We  have  considered  it  as  a  duty  laid  upon  Our  conscience  to 
faciUtate  for  Our  people  the  close  union  and  rallying  of  all  popular 
forces  for  the  purpose  of  a  speedy  achievement  of  victory,  and 
in  concert  with  the  Duma  We  have  deemed  it  good  to  abdicate 
from  the  throne  of  the  Russian  Empire,  and  to  divest  Ourselves 
of  the  supreme  power.    Not  wishing  to  part  with  Our  beloved 


24       FEOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       oh. 

son,  We  transmit  Our  inheritance  to  Our  brother  tlie  Grand  Duke 
Michael  Alexandrovich,  and  give  him  Our  blessing  on  his  ascend- 
ing the  throne  of  the  Russian  Empire. 

Thus  wrote  the  Tsar  in  his  last  Manifesto. 

The  Duma,  which  had  but  recently  bent  beneath 
the  weight  of  the  Tsar's  will,  now  delegated  to  him  a 
member  of  the  State  Council,  A.  T.  Guchkoff,  and  a 
member  of  the  Duma,  V.  V.  Sbulgin,  with  a  prepared 
draft  of  the  abdication  edict.  The  former,  although 
belonging  to  the  Octobrist  party,  i.e.  the  moderate 
Constitutionalists,  entertained  an  inveterate  and 
passionate  hatred  towards  the  Romanoff  family.  His 
restrained,  but  bold  parliamentary  speeches  had  more 
than  once  given  ample  evidence  of  this  sentiment. 

The  latter,  V.  V.  Shulgin,  one  of  the  most  gifted  and 
intelligent  of  the  younger  Russian  politicians,  began  his 
political  career  not  only  as  a  monarchist  but  as  a 
reactionary.  The  war  altered  many  of  Shulgin's  views 
and  made  him  realise  the  many  mistakes  and  crimes  of 
autocracy.  Nevertheless,  even  when  he  started  for 
Pskoff  to  meet  the  Tsar,  his  feelings  were  those  of  the 
mingled  bitterness  and  respect  of  a  sincere  monarchist. 
Both  messengers  who  felt  so  differently  towards  Nicholas 
II.  were  struck  by  the  Tsar's  strange  indifference  to  the 
catastrophic  events  that  had  come  tumbling  on  Russia. 
Asking  no  questions,  making  no  objection,  the  Autocrat 
of  All  the  Russias  signed  the  abdication  of  the  throne 
of  his  forefathers,  as  if  he  had  long  known  that  sooner 
or  later  this  was  bound  to  happen.  Such  indifference 
served  as  an  additional  proof  that  the  old  regime  was 
already  dead  and  had  no  supporters.  The  soldiers  who 
had  mutinied  at  Petrograd  attacked  no  one,  struggled 
against  no  one.  They  simply  stretched  a  hand  and  tore 
the  pall  off  the  face  of  a  dead  Tsarism. 

Next  day,  the   16th  of  March,   the  Grand  Duke 


I      THE  DOWNFALL  OF  THE  OLD  REGIME     25 

Michael    Alexandrovich    also    signed    an    abdication, 
although  a  provisional  one. 

Inspired  by  the  idea,  common  to  all  the  people,  that  the  good 
of  our  Motherland  should  be  considered  above  all,  I  have  adopted 
the  firm  resolve  in  no  wise  to  assume  the  supreme  power  unless 
such  is  the  will  of  our  great  people,  when  through  their  repre- 
sentatives in  the  Constituent  Assembly  elected  by  universal 
suffrage,  they  establish  the  form  of  government  and  the  new 
fundamental  laws  of  the  Russian  State. 

Meantime  the  Grand  Duke  appealed  to  all  citizens 
"  to  submit  to  the  Provisional  Government  formed  by 
the  Duma  and  invested  with  the  full  power  of  control." 

With  the  publication  of  this  document,  signed 
merely  with  the  Christian  name,  Michael,  Russia  prac- 
tically became  a  Republic,  ruled  by  the  Provisional 
Government. 

Individuals  and  organisations  expressed  their  loyalty 
to  the  new  power.  The  Stavka  as  a  whole,  followed  by 
the  entire  commanding  staff,  recognised  the  Provisional 
Government.  The  Tsarist  Ministers  and  some  of  the 
assistant  Ministers  were  imprisoned,^  but  all  the  other 
ofl&cials  remained  at  their  posts.  Ministries,  offices, 
banks,  in  fact  the  entire  political  mechanism  of  Russia 
never  ceased  working.  In  that  respect  the  March  coup 
d'etat  passed  ofi  so  smoothly,  that  even  then  one  felt  a 
vague  presentiment  that  this  was  not  the  end,  that  such 
a  crisis  could  not  pass  off  so  peacefully. 

In  company  with  officers  and  generals,  the  Grand 

^  There  had  been  no  order  for  their  arrest.  Any  one,  if  so  inclined,  arrested 
this  or  the  other  Minister  and  brought  him  to  the  Taurida  Palace.  The  prisoners 
felt  in  greater  safety  there  than  at  home,  because  the  revolutionary  mob  might 
have  easily  given  way  to  excesses.  But  owing  to  the  energy  of  prominent 
political  leaders  the  first  revolutionary  days  at  Petrograd  were  but  slightly 
stained  with  blood,  unless  separate  instances  of  cruel  Ijniching  of  policemen  are 
taken  into  account.  Great  merit  is  due  to  A.  Kerensky  that  owing  to  his  bold 
and  decided  action  not  one  of  the  Ministers,  not  even  the  execrated  Minister  of 
War,  Sukhomlinoff,  was  killed  by  the  soldiers  and  sailors. 


26       FEOM  LIBERTY  TO  BEE8T-LIT0VSK       oh. 

Dukes  presented  themselves  one  after  another  at  the 
Taurida  Palace  to  declare  their  allegiance  to  the  revolu- 
tionary government. 

Even  the  former  Commander-in-Chief,  the  Grand 
Duke  Nicholas  Nikolaievich,  now  Viceroy  of  the  Cau- 
casus, a  monarchist  not  only  by  birth  but  by  conviction, 
bowed  down  before  the  new  regime,  and  on  the  17th  of 
March  issued  the  following  order  : 

I  command  all  military  chiefs,  both  senior  and  junior,  to 
announce  and  explain  to  all  ranks  of  the  army  and  navy,  that 
after  the  publication  of  both  acts  they  must  cahnly  await  the 
testimony  of  the  will  of  the  Eussian  people,  and  that  it  is  their 
sacred  duty,  by  remaining  in  complete  submission  to  their 
lawful  chiefs,  to  safeguard  our  Motherland  from  her  stern  foe, 
and  by  their  valiant  deeds  to  support  our  Allies  in  this  unpre- 
cedented struggle. 

From  all  towns  throughout  the  length  and  breadth 
of  Eussia  came  tidings  of  the  people's  joyful  welcome  to 
liberty. 

The  personal  qualities  of  the  members  of  the  Pro- 
visional Government  helped  to  strengthen  the  confidence 
which  it  immediately  inspired  to  the  country.^ 

At  the  head  of  the  Government  stood  Prince  George 
Lvoff.  He  was  known  to  all  Eussia  as  a  Zemstvo 
worker,  as  the  President  of  the  Zemstvo  Union.  This 
organisation,  which  united  all  the  provincial  Zemstvos 
(local  government  councils),  came  into  being  during  the 
war  and  rendered  important  services  in  the  task  of 
caring  for  the  sick  and  wounded  soldiers.  Prince  Lvoff 
had  always  held  aloof  from  a  purely  political  life.    He 

^  The  Provisional  Government  consisted  of  the  following  :  Prime  Minister, 
Prince  G.  E.  LvoflE ;  Minister  of  War,  A.  S.  GuchkofE ;  Minister  for  Foreign 
Affairs,  P.  N.  Milyukoff ;  Minister  of  Finance,  M.  S.  Tereshchenko ;  Minister 
of  Agriculture,  A.  S.  Shingareff  i  Minister  of  Justice,  A.  F.  Kerensky ;  Minister 
of  Ways  and  Communications,  N.  V.  Nekrasoff  ;  Minister  of  Education,  A.  A. 
Manuiloff ;  Minister  of  Commerce  and  Industry,  A.  I.  Konovaloff ;  State 
Controller,  I.  Godneff ;  Chief  Procurator  of  the  Holy  Synod,  V.  N.  Lvoff. 


I      THE  DOWNFALL  OF  THE  OLD  REGIME     27 

belonged  to  no  party,  and  as  head  of  the  Government 
could  rise  above  party  issues.  Not  till  later  did  the 
four  months  of  his  premiership  demonstrate  the  conse- 
quences of  such  aloofness  even  from  that  very  narrow 
sphere  of  political  life  which  in  Tsarist  Russia  was 
limited  to  work  in  the  Duma  and  party  activity.  Neither 
a  clear,  definite,  manly  programme,  nor  the  ability  for 
firmly  and  persistently  realising  certain  political  problems 
were  to  be  found  in  Prince  G.  Lvoff. 

But  these  weak  points  of  his  character  were  generally 
unknown. 

All  rejoiced  at  having  got  rid  of  mercenary,  dishonest 
nonentities,  like  the  Ministers  Sukhomlinoff  or  Protopo- 
poff,  and  were  glad  to  see  an  irreproachably  honest 
patriot,  such  as  Prince  G.  Lvoff  always  was  and  will  be, 
placed  at  last  at  the  head  of  the  Russian  Government. 

Among  the  members  of  the  Government  Paul 
Milyukoff  was  the  one  who  possessed  the  most  strongly 
marked  political  individuality.  He  was  a  historian,  and 
his  works  on  the  history  of  Russian  culture  are  still 
looked  upon  as  leading  studies  in  the  subject.  But  his 
academic  career  was  soon  ended.  The  Tsar's  Govern- 
ment regarded  P.  N.  Milyukoff  with  great  suspicion,  and 
he  was  forbidden  to  lecture  or  to  reside  in  university 
towns.  He  himself  gradually  abandoned  scientific  re- 
search and  gave  himself  up  to  politics,  preferring  to 
make  history  rather  than  to  study  it.  Milyukoff  took 
an  energetic  part  in  the  Constitutional  movement,  when 
it  still  bore  a  conspirative  character  (before  the  Treaty  of 
Portsmouth),  and  after  the  first  revolution  in  1905 
became  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  newly  formed  Con- 
stitutional-Democratic (Cadet)  party. 

He  became  the  leader  of  the  opposition  in  the  Third 
and  Fourth  Dumas,  and  his  speeches  caused  far  greater 
irritation  in  Government  circles  than  did  the  sharper 


28       FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

but  narrowly  Socialistic  speeches  of  the  extreme  Left 
orators. 

A  man  of  rare  erudition  and  of  an  enormous  power 
for  work,  Miljnikoff  had  numerous  adherents  and  friends, 
but  also  not  a  few  enemies.  He  was  considered  by  many 
as  a  doctrinaire  on  account  of  the  stubbornness  of  his 
political  views,  while  his  endeavours  to  effect  a  com- 
promise for  the  sake  of  rallying  larger  circles  to  the 
opposition  were  blamed  as  opportunism.  As  a  matter 
of  fact  almost  identical  accusations  were  showered  upon 
him  both  from  Right  and  Left.  This  may  partly  be 
explained  by  the  fact  that  it  is  easier  for  Milyukoff  to 
grasp  an  idea  than  to  deal  with  men,  as  he  is  not  a  good 
judge  of  either  their  psychology  or  their  character. 

Not  merely  able  but  honest  and  courageous,  he  was 
one  of  the  first  who  in  the  days  of  boundless  revolu- 
tionary dreams  and  raptures  uttered  warnings  against 
the  dangers  lurking  on  all  sides,  and  even  had  the 
temerity  to  declare  aloud  that  it  would  be  better  to 
settle  on  a  constitutional  monarchy,  without  being 
carried  away  by  the  idea  of  a  republic  which  Russia  as 
yet  was  incapable  of  realising. 

These  words,  as  well  as  his  persistent  and  constant 
reminder  that  Russia  would  become  free  and  powerful 
if  only  she,  together  with  her  Allies,  succeeded  in  com- 
pletely defeating  Germany,  gave  Milynkoff's  enemies 
the  opportunity  of  raising  a  campaign  against  him  from 
the  very  outset.  He  also  added  strength  to  the  enemy's 
position  by  emphasising  in  his  statement  of  war  aims  that 
the  possession  of  the  Dardanelles  was  Russia's  vital 
need.  This  gave  the  Revolutionary  Democracy  occasion 
to  clamour  about  Milyukoff's  predatory  aspirations  and 
imperialism.  During  the  Revolution  all  those  to  the 
right  of  him  rather  supported  him.  Those  to  the  left 
feared  or  even  hated  him. 


i 


I      THE  DOWNFALL  OF  THE  OLD  REGIME     29 

Within  the  Government  Milyukoff  proved  himself  to 
be  much  weaker  than  might  have  been  expected.  The 
Cabinet  was  a  Coalition.  Out  of  11  members,  4  (P.  N. 
Milyukoff,  A.  S.  ShingarefE,  A.  A.  Manuiloff,  and  N. 
Nekrasoff )  belonged  to  the  Cadet  party  ;  3  (A.  Guchkoff , 
Godneff ,  and  V.  N.  Lvoff)  to  the  Octobrist  party ; 
A.  S.  Konovalof!  was  a  Progressist ;  2  (M.  Tereshchenko 
and  Prince  G.  E.  Lvoff)  were  non-party;  and,  lastly, 
A.  Kerensky  was  the  only  Socialist,  but  extremely 
popular  at  the  time.  His  presence  in  the  Cabinet 
strengthened  the  link  between  the  Provisional  Govern- 
ment and  the  Soviet  of  Workmen's  Deputies,  where 
Kerensky  was  Assistant  President  of  the  Central  Execu- 
tive Committee. 

A.  F.  Kerensky  and  P.  Milyukoff  presented  the  two 
most  characteristic  and  influential  figures  of  the  Cabinet. 
Unfortunately  they  were  divided  not  merely  by  a  diver- 
gence of  views,  but  also  by  personal  ill-will.  Kerensky, 
as  the  more  emotional  and  impulsive  of  the  two,  gave 
way  to  this  sentiment  of  enmity  and  made  no  endeavours 
to  conceal  it  even  at  Cabinet  meetings.  On  his  part 
P.  Milynkoff  lost  no  opportunity  of  emphasising  the 
logical  unsteadiness  and  political  immaturity  of  the 
Revolutionary  Democracy,  and  incidentally  of  Kerensky 
himself,  as  its  gifted  representative. 

A.  F.  Kerensky  was  considerably  younger  than 
P.  N.  Milyukoff.  In  a  revolutionary  epoch  this  is  an 
important  privilege,  as  the  stormy  vacillations  accom- 
panying each  upheaval  claim  great  versatility  and 
flexibility  from  revolutionary  leaders.  A  lawyer  by 
education,  A.  Kerensky  possessed  the  pleader's  super- 
ficial eloquence.  His  speeches  in  the  Duma — he  was  a 
member  of  the  Third  and  Fourth  Dumas — were  neither 
profound  nor  original,  yet  nevertheless  Kerensky 
occupied  a  prominent  place  upon  the  Left  benches, 


30       FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       oh* 

for  in  both  these  Dumas  the  Socialists  were  rather 
feebly  represented  and  lacked  prominent  members. 
Although  a  member  of  the  Social  Revolutionary  party 
Kerensky  officially  belonged  to  the  party  of  Toil.  This 
was  a  compulsory  conspirative  camouflage,  for  members 
of  the  Social  Revolutionary  party,  which  employed 
terroristic  methods,  were  cruelly  persecuted  by  the 
Tsarist  Government.  Even  before  the  Revolution  A. 
Kerensky  was  extremely  popular  in  Socialist  circles  of 
various  shades.  Later,  as  Head  of  the  Provisional 
Government,  he  exhibited  the  meagreness  of  his  political 
outlook  and  the  instability  and  levity  of  his  character. 
But  at  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution  it  seemed  as  if 
some  inner  fire  had  been  kindled  within  him,  and  he  at 
once  became  enormously  popular.  In  those  early  days 
Kerensky,  protecting  the  honour  of  the  Revolution  at  the 
risk  of  his  own  life,  saved  the  Tsarist  Ministers,  whom 
he  hated,  from  the  ever-growing  wrath  of  the  mob. 
This  was  a  magnanimous  and  daring  act.  He  gave 
proof  of  a  similar  courage  when  at  the  risk  of  losing  his 
rapidly  increasing  popularity  he  consented  to  enter  the 
Provisional  Government  without  asking  permission  of 
the  Soviet.  This  was  an  act  of  temerity.  The  Socialists 
grouped  around  Chheidze  preferred  that  Prince  Lvoff's 
Cabinet  should  remain  a  purely  bourgeois  one,  so  that 
they  might  assume  the  position  of  an  irresponsible 
opposition.  But  Kerensky  first  consented  to  accept  a 
portfolio  and  then  placed  before  the  Soviet  a.  fait  accompli, 
forcing  their  approval  of  his  act  by  a  short  but  powerful 
and  skilfully  framed  speech. 

In  those  days  his  speeches  were  full  of  an  infectious 
revolutionary  passion.  Amid  the  roar  and  clamour  of 
the  ever-growing  popular  movement  Kerensky  rose  to 
heights  of  real  eloquence.  And  he  did  not  become  a 
tribune,  only  because  he  lacked  what  seems  to  be  the 


I      THE  DOWNFALL  OF  THE  OLD  REGIME     31 

primary  and  absolutely  necessary  quality — the  intellect 
of  a  statesman.  And,  it  may  be,  also  a  more  delicate 
conscience. 

Kerensky  was  perhaps  the  only  member  of  the 
Government  who  knew  how  to  deal  with  the  masses, 
since  he  instinctively  understood  the  psychology  of  the 
mob.  Therein  lay  his  power  and  the  main  source  of 
his  popularity  in  the  streets,  in  the  Soviet,  and  in  the 
Government. 

Ministers  who  apparently  stood  far  apart  from  his 
political  views  supported  him.  VI.  Lvoff,  Godneff, 
Tereshchenko,  Konovalofi,  and  Nekrasoff  frequently 
voted  with  him,  although  the  first  two  were  formerly 
far  to  the  right  even  of  the  Cadets.  Godneff  was  a 
colourless  Octobrist.  VI.  Lvoff  was  a  Monarchist, 
unintelligent  and  muddling,  who  became  member  of 
the  Government  through  a  sheer  misunderstanding. 
The  appointment  to  the  Ministry  of  M.  Tereshchenko  was 
also  a  chance  affair.  A  young  millionaire  interested  in 
the  theatre  and  art,  he  began  to  take  part  in  public  life 
owing  to  the  war,  occupying  himself  mainly  with 
supplies.  Like  all  the  other  Ministers  of  Prince  G. 
Lvoff's  Cabinet,  M.  Tereshchenko  was  an  honest  man 
and  a  patriot.  But  he  had  received  neither  a  political 
education  nor  even  ordinary  political  practice.  His 
native  intelligence  and  ability  could  not  protect  him 
against  a  whole  series  of  most  heedless  mistakes.  The 
fact  that  he  was  made  Minister  of  Finance,  without 
having  studied  financial  questions,  added  little  depth 
to  the  ministerial  activity  of  this  agreeable  young  man. 

In  saying  that  all  the  Ministers  of  the  first  Cabinet 
were  honest  men,  I  must  admit  a  reserve  in  the  case  of 
N.  Nekrasoff.  From  the  very  outset  he  played  a  double 
game,  manoeuvring  between  the  Cadet  party,  which  had 
brought  him  out,  and  those  of  the  Socialist  groups  which 


i^ 


32       FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

were  acquiring  an  ever  greater  influence.  His  intrigues, 
bordering  on  treachery,  increased  dissension  within  the 
Government  and  weakened  it.  N.  Nekrasoff  had  a 
great  influence  of  a  negative  character  over  both 
Kerensky  and  Tereshchenko.  They  formed  a  trium- 
virate, which  at  a  certain  period  controlled  the  whole 
policy  of  the  Government. 

At  first  Nekrasoff  had  some  influence  over  A. 
Konovaloff,  who  was  also  on  friendly  terms  with 
Kerensky.  One  of  the  largest  manufacturers  in  Russia, 
enthusiastic  for  democratic  ideas,  A.  Konovalofi 
presented  that  type  of  a  Radical  millionaire  (so  very 
characteristic  of  Russian  life)  who  was  ever  ready  to 
subsidise  a  revolution,  and  not  only  a  political  but  even 
a  Socialistic  movement,  although  he  himself  was  not  a 
Socialist,  but  belonged  to  the  small  Progressive  party. 
Konovalofl  was  a  sincere  and  intelligent  man,  and 
the  Revolution  quickly  sobered  him.  As  Minister  of 
Commerce  and  Industry  he  was  one  of  the  first  to  warn 
the  democracy  of  the  dangerous  game  of  reckless 
industrial  democratisation. 

Such  were  the  five  Ministers  who  supported  Kerensky. 
As  a  matter  of  fact  only  three  took  sides  with  Milyukoff  : 
A.  A.  Manuiloff,  a  professor  of  political  economy,  a 
distinguished  specialist,  but  ill-prepared  to  weather 
revolutionary  storms  ;  A.  Shingareff,  who  had  for  years 
shared  with  P.  MilyukojS  all  the  diflB.culties  of  parlia- 
mentary struggle  and  all  the  tension  of  party  life.  A 
doctor  by  profession,  he  became  a  poUtician  because 
the  autocracy  had  developed  into  a  disease  of  which 
Russia  had  to  be  cured  at  any  cost.  A.  Shingarefi 
possessed  the  same  keen  sense  of  mass  psychology  as 
A.  Kerensky,  although  in  a  lesser  degree.  Honest, 
almost  to  rigidity,  he  held  aloof  from  all  demagogy,  yet 
his  popularity  grew  day  by  day.    He  possessed  the  rare 


I      THE  DOWNFALL  OF  THE  OLD  REGIME     33 

gift  of  attracting  people,  of  gaining  their  goodwill,  of 
imbuing  them  with  his  own  ideas  and  frame  of  mind. 
He  lacked  P.  MilyukofE's  obstinate  persistency.  And 
because  of  that  A.  Shingareff  was  better  loved  and  less 
obeyed. 

The  third  Minister,  who  generally  shared  the  views 
of  Milyukoff  and  ShingarefE,  was  A.  T.  Guchkoff.  He 
and  Milyukoff  had  been  political  enemies  for  many 
years.  Once  they  very  nearly  fought  a  duel,  thereby 
disregarding  all  the  traditions  of  the  Russian  intelli- 
gentsia. But  war  and  revolution  compelled  them  to 
work  together.  Both  shared  the  same  anxiety  to 
safeguard  Russia  as  a  State,  and  therefore  both  saw 
the  first  task  of  the  Government  in  securing  victory 
over  Germany.  Guchkoff,  able  and  well-educated,  had 
long  been  considered  as  one  of  the  highest  non-pro- 
fessional authorities  on  military  affairs  in  Russia.  As 
Chairman  of  the  Military  Commission  of  the  Duma  he 
had  succeeded  in  drawing  up  a  series  of  army  reforms, 
a  small  part  of  which  had  been  carried  out  in  spite  of 
Sukhomlinoff's  resistance. 

Great  hopes  were  centred  in  Prince  G.  Lvoff's 
Cabinet  upon  Guchkoff  as  Minister  of  War,  for  he 
enjoyed  the  reputation  of  being  an  energetic  man. 
Guchkoff  was  unable,  however,  to  realise  these  hopes. 
He  could  hardly  be  blamed  for  this,  for  the  Revolution- 
ary Democracy,  which  the  Government  dealt  with  very 
tenderly,  directed  the  main  current  of  its  irresponsible 
revolutionism  towards  the  disintegration  of  the  army. 

Neither  did  the  Head  of  the  Provisional  Govern- 
ment, Prince  G.  Lvoff,  fulfil  all  the  high  expectations 
centred  in  him.  Whether  he  succumbed  to  the  then 
fashionable  infatuation  with  A.  Kerensky,  or  whether 
Milynkoff's  sober  directness  was  personally  disagreeable 
to  him,  at  all  events  Prince  G.  Lvoff's  vote  and  influence 

D 


34       FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK     ch.i 

strengthened  A.  Kerensky's  group,  i.e.  the  Left  wing. 
This  involved  less  struggle  and  tension,  as  the  common 
torrent  rushed  in  that  direction.  Prince  G.  Lvofi  was 
not  a  fighter.  He  liked  vagueness  and  slatternly  incom- 
pleteness, and  for  this  many  had  blamed  him  in  the 
Zemstvo  Union.  These  qualities,  carried  to  the  summit 
of  State  power,  which  demanded  a  clear  vision  and  iron 
firmness  of  will,  proved  to  be  far  more  prejudicial  than 
in  Zemstvo  affairs,  where  separate  individuals  and 
institutions  could  be  granted  great  independence  without 
any  special  detriment  to  the  whole,  and  where  one  might 
confidently  expect  "  something  to  turn  up." 

Such  were  the  men  who  formed  the  first  free  Russian 
Grovernment,  and  such  were  their  inner  mutual  relations. 

What  forces  did  they  lean  upon,  who  aided  them  in 
their  tremendous  task  of  creating  a  new  Government, 
strong  and  free,  and  in  the  not  less  difficult  task  of 
prosecuting  the  war  with  Germany  to  the  end  ?  And 
by  whom  were  they  hindered  ? 

Correction 

In  Chap.  I.  p.  24,  a  mistake  has  been  made  in  saying  that 
Nicholas  II.  signed  the  abdication  edict  brought  him  by  the 
members  of  the  Duma — A.  Guchkoff  and  V.  Shulgin. 

It  is  true  they  did  bring  from  Petrograd  to  Pskov  a  draft  of 
the  abdication,  but  the  Tsar  did  not  sign  that,  but  another  mani- 
festo apparently  prepared  beforehand  by  some  of  the  officials  at 
the  Stavka.  This  shows  that  Nicholas  II.  himself  had  come  to 
the  conclusion  that  his  abdication  was  inevitable.  I  base  this 
correction  on  the  words  of  A.  GuchkofF,  who  came  to  London  when 
the  book  was  already  set  up  in  type. 


CHAPTER  II 

PATRIOTISM   OR  INTERNATIONALISM  ? 

Whom  to  obey  ? — Parties  before  the  revolution — Liberalism  and  Cadets 
— Populist  Socialists  and  Marxists — Order  No.  1,  and  persecution  of 
officers — Democratic  peace — Soviet  and  Provisional  Government — 
Bolshevist  influence — Dual  power. 

After  the  downfall  of  the  old  regime  even  educated 
people  found  it  difficult  to  decide  in  whose  hands  the 
new  power  was  now  concentrated,  while  the  broad  masses 
were  completely  baffled.  For  a  time  the  Taurida  Palace 
was  indeed  the  centre  of  power.  But  there  were  to  be 
found  both  the  Provisional  Government  and  the  Soviet 
of  Workmen's  Deputies.  Later,  the  Provisional  Govern- 
ment settled  down  in  the  Marie  Palace,  forming  a  sort 
of  third  centre.  Which  of  them  was  to  be  obeyed  ? 
Who  was  supreme  ?  Deputations  from  the  provinces 
became  frequently  confused  between  these  three  organ- 
isations, not  knowing  to  whom  to  present  themselves  to 
express  their  loyalty  to  the  new  regime. 

Still  more  serious  was  the  fact  that  the  Government 
itself  did  not  actually  know  whom  to  lean  upon.  It 
did  lean,  one  might  say,  upon  all  in  general  and  no  one 
in  particular.  A  Government  can  be  strong  only  when 
backed  by  well-organised  public  opinion  and  a  well- 
organised  military  force.  Prince  G.  Lvoff's  Govern- 
ment possessed  neither  the  one  nor  the  other.  It  was 
a  bourgeois   Government  in  its  composition,  for   the 

35 


36       FEOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

Cabinet  contained  only  one  Socialist  Minister,  A. 
Kerensky,  but  the  bourgeoisie  itself,  of  which  the 
Soviets  stood  in  such  fear,  was  unorganised.  The  only 
numerous  non  -  Socialist  party,  the  ''  Cadets,"  could 
offer  a  moral  and  logical  resistance  to  the  Socialist 
whirlwind,  but  was  too  weak  to  give  any  serious  support 
to  the  Government. 

The  Tsarist  regime,  like  every  other  despotic  power, 
feared  its  subjects,  distrusted  them,  placed  obstacles 
in  the  way  of  every  attempt  at  organisation,  of  every 
awakening  of  intellectual  forces.  The  whole  nineteenth 
century  of  Russian  history  is  filled  with  the  hard  and 
unequal  struggle  between  the  autocracy  and  the  Russian 
intelligentsia.  It  was  a  struggle  not  merely  for  political 
liberty,  but  also  for  the  right  to  impart  ideas  and 
knowledge  to  the  people.  The  Government  was  niggardly 
and  grudging  in  opening  new  schools,  forbidding  private 
persons  to  teach  the  peasants'  children  without  special 
license,  impeding  the  Zemstvos  in  their  task  of  public 
education.  That  is  why  in  some  provinces  half  the 
population  is  still  illiterate.  A  special  license  was  also 
necessary,  but  very  seldom  obtained,  for  opening  a 
village  library,  for  giving  lectures  and  magic-lantern 
shows,  for  organising  a  choral  society,  for  lending  books 
to  read.  For  venturing  on  such  pernicious  courses, 
people  were  frequently  put  into  prison  or  exiled  to 
Siberia. 

Even  co-operative  institutions  were  placed  under 
suspicion,  and  while  the  Ministry  of  Agriculture 
encouraged  co-operators,  the  police  persecuted  and 
oppressed  them. 

Any  organisation  of  political  parties  or  meetings  in 
the  country  was  out  of  the  question.  This  was  per- 
mitted only  to  the  Union  of  Russian  people.  In  such 
wise  the  vast  majority  of  the  population  was  purposely 


II      PATRIOTISM  OR  INTERNATIONALISM  ?      37 

kept  by  the  Tsarist  Government  in  complete  ignorance 
of  the  political  needs  and  the  general  life  of  even  their 
native  country,  while  the  political  workers  were  arti- 
ficially estranged  from  those  whom  they  were  both 
willing  and  able  to  serve.  When  the  storm  broke  out 
it  was  foimd  that  the  intelligentsia,  that  flower  and  brain 
of  the  nation,  were  completely  severed  from  the  masses. 
The  masses  had  not  the  faintest  idea  of  what  Russia 
really  was,  and  of  why  every  citizen  must  possess  both 
rights  and  duties  within  his  own  country  ?  And  most 
important  of  all,  they  had  no  idea  of  the  meaning 
of  the  State  and  why  the  existence  of  a  State  was 
necessary  for  each  individual.  This  latter  consideration, 
as  a  matter  of  fact,  was  but  vaguely  realised,  even  by 
most  of  the  intelligentsia. 

Nevertheless,  among  the  thin  upper  strata  of  the 
town  population  there  was  some  semblance  of  political 
life,  and  political  parties  became  organised  ;  of  these, 
the  Duma  included  about  ten.  It  would  be  difficult  to 
identify  the  parties  by  their  social  composition,  for  the 
division  was  not  one  of  classes,  but  of  ideas. 

The  priests,  who  were  fairly  numerous  in  the  last 
Duma,  were  mostly  grouped  on  the  extreme  Right 
benches.  But  some  of  them  belonged  to  the  Opposition. 
Not  a  few  landowners,  particularly  from  the  rich 
"  black  earth  "  provinces,  also  belonged  to  the  Right 
wing.  Yet  landowners,  to  whose  class  had  belonged 
the  vast  majority  of  Russian  writers  and  public  men, 
were  to  be  found  not  only  on  the  Right,  but  also  in  the 
Centre  and  on  the  Left.  It  was  the  same  with  the 
peasants.  Only  workmen  clustered  jealously  beneath 
the  Marxist  banner  hoisted  upon  the  extreme  Left  wing. 

The  political  divisions  were  manifold.  The 
monarchists  were  divided  into  several  groups.  At  the 
extreme  Right  were  the  reactionaries  who  professed  the 


38       FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

long  outworn  theory  of  absolute  autocracy.  They  were 
opposed  to  any  kind  of  national  representation,  and 
although  themselves  members  of  the  Duma,  never  made 
the  slightest  efiort  to  protect  the  rights  and  honour  of 
the  Russian  Parliament.  Some  of  them  belonged  to  the 
Union  of  the  Russian  People.  This  was  an  obscure 
organisation,  which  did  not  scruple  to  make  use  of  any 
methods  of  political  struggle,  including  political  murder, 
and  was  patronised  by  the  Tsarist  Government. 

The  most  prominent  of  the  convinced  monarchists 
was  VI.  Purishkevich,  a  capable  man,  but  unrestrained 
almost  to  the  point  of  hooliganism.  He  became  greatly 
changed  during  the  war.  Perhaps  the  highest  proof  of 
both  his  monarchism  and  patriotism  was  given  by  his 
participation  in  Rasputin's  murder.  Purishkevich  sub- 
mitted to  the  new  regime,  realising  Russia's  urgent  need 
of  fundamental  reforms.  But  the  Revolution  proved 
that  monarchical  organisations  had  no  roots  whatever 
in  the  country.  The  Tsar  received  no  support,  neither 
from  above  nor  from  below.  After  the  Revolution  the 
Right  currents  were  no  longer  of  any  importance. 

The  centre  of  the  Duma  was  represented  by  moder- 
ately constitutional  parties — the  Nationalists  and  the 
Octobrists.  Both  of  them  prized  their  close  relations 
with  the  Tsarist  Government  which  helped  them  during 
elections  and  treated  them  with  a  certain  contemptuous 
favour.  The  Octobrist  programme  was  very  similar  to 
that  of  the  former  Premier,  Peter  Stolypin.  The 
Octobrists  were  particularly  persistent  in  their  support 
of  Stolypin's  agrarian  reform,  by  which  he  hoped  to 
establish  small  peasant  holdings  without  the  confisca- 
tion of  private  property  in  land.  It  seemed  probable 
at  one  time  that  the  Octobrists  might  become  the 
Government  party,  but  the  Tsar  and  his  councillors 
proved  too  self-centred  and  blind  even  for  that.     The 


n      PATRIOTISM  OR  INTERNATIONALISM  ?      39 

old  regime  neither  would  nor  could  seek  serious  public 
support.  When  the  blow  fell  it  was  V.  Shulgin  and 
A.  GuchkofE,  the  leaders  of  the  two  parties  which  might 
have  been  the  support  of  the  Throne,  who  brought  to 
Nicholas  II.  the  Duma's  demand  that  he  should  sign 
the  act  of  abdication  drafted  beforehand  by  the  Duma. 

The  Left  wing  of  the  Duma  was  represented  by 
Radicals  and  Socialists.  The  small  group  of  "  Pro- 
gressists "  was  sometimes  to  the  right,  sometimes  to 
the  left  of  the  Cadets.  Mischievous  tongues  said  that 
the  Progressists  were  distinguished  from  the  Cadets 
simply  by  their  refusal  to  submit  to  Milyukoff.  But 
their  main  distinction  lay  in  their  greater  readiness  to 
submit  to  the  insinuations  and  solicitations  of  the 
Socialists.  Among  the  members  of  the  Cabinet,  A. 
Konovaloff  belonged  to  the  Progressists,  but  later 
joined  the  Cadets.  The  Progressists  were  of  no  real 
importance  in  the  country. 

The  only  influential  and  numerous  radical  party 
were  the  Cadets. 

It  may  be  considered  as  one  of  the  special  features 
of  Russian  political  life  that  owing  to  the  absence  of 
political  freedom  the  Liberal  parties  in  Russia  had  been 
formed  after  the  Socialist  ones. 

Liberalism  had  been  engendered  as  a  movement  and 
a  political  creed  already  in  the  eighteenth  century.  It 
became  strengthened  and  acquired  a  more  active,  or 
rather  a  more  revolutionary  character  after  the  Napo- 
leonic wars.  Both  in  Russian  literature  and  in  Russian 
political  life  Liberalism  had  played  an  important  part. 
It  acquired,  however,  a  serious  political  importance 
only  at  the  beginning  of  the  twentieth  century,  when 
public  forces  were  drawn  to  it  in  a  conspirative  manner, 
forming  the  Union  of  Liberation.  In  the  October 
revolution  of  1905  the  Union  of  Liberation  was  trans- 


40       FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

formed  into  an  open  party  with  a  definite  programme 
and  organisation.  This  was  the  party  of  the  People's 
Liberty  or  the  Constitutional-Democratic  party  (hence 
"  Ca-dets  "  from  the  initial  letters). 

The  party's  character  is  precisely  defined  by  its 
name.  The  Cadets  were  constitutional  monarchists, 
who  held  that  Russia  stood  in  urgent  need  of  wide 
democratic  reforms.  In  their  programme  they  per- 
sistently advocated  the  principle  that  the  interests  of 
all  the  people,  the  interests  of  Russia  as  a  whole,  were 
above  those  of  a  separate  class  or  group.  As  social 
reformers  the  Cadets  adopted  the  Social-Democratic 
minimum  Labour  programme.  The  basis  of  their 
economic  programme  lay  in  endowing  the  peasants  with 
land  out  of  the  Crown  reserves,  appanages,  church,  and 
private  lands.  Private  lands  were  to  be  expropriated 
from  their  owners,  but  compensation  given  somewhat 
upon  the  principle  of  land  resumption  for  railway  or 
other  public  purposes.  For  their  scheme  of  compulsory 
expropriation  the  Cadets  were  attacked  from  the  Right 
by  the  landowners,  who  considered  this  as  a  robbery. 
Socialists  attacked  them  because  of  the  compensation, 
as  they  wished  to  have  the  land  taken  for  nothing.  The 
Cadets,  however,  could  never  agree  to  such  a  scheme, 
as  they  recognised  the  right  of  property  as  a  necessary 
foundation  of  contemporary  Russia's  economic  order 
and  development. 

Great  irritation  among  the  Right  parties  was  also 
provoked  by  the  Cadets'  demand  for  the  granting  of  a 
wide  cultural  and  national  self-determination  to  all  the 
peoples  inhabiting  Russia.  The  monarchists  considered 
this  to  be  an  attempt  against  the  autocratic  rights  of 
the  Crown  and  the  integrity  of  the  Russian  Empire. 
The  Left  parties,  on  the  other  hand,  were  displeased  that 
the  Cadets  did  not  go  as  far  as  the  principle  of  a  federa- 


II      PATRIOTISM  OR  INTERNATIONALISM  ?      41 

tion  of  Sovereign  States,  but  drew  the  line  at  national 
and  regional  autonomy. 

The  foremost  and  fundamental  aim  of  the  Cadet 
party  was  the  realisation  in  Russia  of  a  constitutional 
form  of  government  and  the  establishment  of  political 
liberties.  They  therefore  attached  great  importance  to 
work  in  the  Duma.  The  party's  history  is  indissolubly 
linked  up  with  the  brief  history  of  the  Russian  Parlia- 
ment, where  the  Cadets  never  possessed  an  absolute 
majority  but  always  occupied  a  prominent  place.  The 
most  powerful  speeches  denouncing  the  imperfection  of 
the  Tsarist  regime  resounded  from  the  Cadet  benches, 
for  the  Cadets  numbered  many  brilliant  speakers  (Rodi- 
cheff,  Milyukoff,  Maklakofi,  Shingareff,  Nabokoff,  Koko- 
shkin).  Such  speeches  raised  the  prestige  of  the  Duma, 
and  if  in  the  days  of  revolutionary  exaltation  the  crowd 
rushed  to  the  Taurida  Palace,  thereby  proving  its  trust 
in  national  representation,  one  may  boldly  assert  that 
the  Cadets  had  done  much  to  create  such  confidence. 

The  Cadet  party  had  never  been  in  power,  it  always 
filled  the  place  of  a  responsible  Opposition.  But  when 
the  war  broke  out  the  Cadets  declared  at  once  that  all 
differences  and  contradictions  were  to  be  sunk  in  the 
common  task  of  national  defence  and  the  struggle 
against  German  militarism.  Their  behaviour  had  an 
important  influence  upon  the  attitude  of  Russian  public 
opinion  and  united  all  forces  around  the  cause  of  defence. 

In  all  its  stormy  and  diJficult  political  career  the 
Cadet  party  never  once  changed  either  its  programme  or 
its  leaders  and  never  split  into  factions,  always  remaining 
one.  Only  one  serious  alteration  of  the  programme  was 
adopted  after  the  Revolution  and  the  Tsar's  abdication  ; 
the  Cadets  recognised  the  desirability  of  a  republic  in 
lieu  of  a  constitutional  monarchy. 

Such  was  the  radical  party. 


42       FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

The  Socialists  were  divided  into  two  principal  groups 
— the  Populist  Socialists  and  the  Marxists.  They  were 
not  united.  Their  fundamental  divergence  lay  in  that 
the  former  group  idealised  the  muzhik  and  held  that, 
owing  to  the  village  commune,  the  Russian  peasant  was 
a  potential  Socialist,  and  that  once  the  land  should 
become  common  property  the  most  important  step 
towards  reaching  the  Socialist  order  of  society  would  be 
accomplished.  For  decades  such  ideas  were  developed 
in  Russian  literature,  and  entire  generations  of  Russian 
youths  were  brought  up  upon  this  idealisation  of  the 
people. 

In  contrast  with  these  views  the  Social-Democrats 
expounded  the  ideas  of  Karl  Marx,  asserting  that 
Russia,  like  other  peoples,  was  bound  to  pass  through 
various  stages  of  economic  development.  They  con- 
sidered the  factory-workers  to  be  best  fitted  to  be  the 
bearers  of  advanced  Socialist  ideas,  and  made  the 
dictatorship  of  the  proletariat  one  of  their  primary  aims. 

Marxism  made  its  appearance  in  Russia  as  a  definite 
political  force  only  in  the  'eighties  of  the  last  century. 
One  of  its  chief  Russian  sponsors  was  the  emigre, 
G.  Plekhanoff,  a  gifted  publicist  and  polemist.  Simul- 
taneously, with  him,  three  young  economists,  who 
rapidly  became  prominent,  opened  the  struggle  against 
the  Populist  Socialists,  opposing  the  Marxian  doctrine, 
which  to  them  seemed  scientifically  proved,  to  the 
Utopia  of  their  rivals.  These  three  were  Michael 
Tugan-Baranovsky,  Peter  Struve,  and  Vladimir  Ulianofl[ 
Lenin.  Later,  each  of  them  went  his  own  way,  but  they 
appeared  on  the  political  arena  underneath  a  common 
Marxian  banner. 

The  two  principal  Socialist  parties  were  divided  into 
several  groups,  and  these  groups  were  split  into  factions. 

From  the  Populist  Socialists  originated  the  Party  of 


11      PATRIOTISM  OR  INTERNATIONALISM  ?      43 

Toil  and  the  Social-Revolutionaries.  The  former  came 
into  being  in  the  days  of  the  first  Duma,  where  it  repre- 
sented a  motley  and  chaotic  mixture  of  peasants,  little 
accustomed  to  literary  intricacies,  but  eager  to  get  the 
land,  and  of  an  idealistically  benevolent  Socialist 
intelligentsia,  to  whom  the  peasant  represented  the  very 
essence  of  wisdom.  During  the  second  Revolution  the 
Party  of  Toil  became  merged  in  a  group  of  literary 
Populist  Socialists  led  by  the  two  editors  of  a  very 
popular  review — Russhoie  Bogatstvo — B.  Miakotin  and 
A.  Peshekhonoff.  They  formed  a  moderate  Populist 
Socialists'  Party  of  Toil,  which  had  no  influence  either 
during  elections  or  upon  the  masses. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  Social-Revolutionary  party 
acquired  at  once  tremendous  influence  and  a  wide  sphere 
of  action.  Its  trump  card  lay  in  its  agrarian  programme 
expressed  by  the  brief  mottoes :  "  The  land  is  the 
Lord's  "  and  "  All  the  land  to  all  the  people." 

Translated  into  less  picturesque  language,  this 
signified  that  all  land,  whether  belonging  to  the  State, 
appanages,  monasteries,  or  private  owners,  was  to  be 
merged  into  a  State  land  fund,  whence  each  toiler  might 
receive  his  share.  Land  property  is  confiscated  without 
compensation.  Private  possession  of  land  is  abolished. 
Land  can  neither  be  sold  nor  inherited. 

The  nationalisation  of  factories  is  not  mentioned  in 
the  Social-Revolutionary  programme.  Politically,  the 
Social-Revolutionaries  always  advocated  a  federative 
Russian  republic.  The  composition  of  the  party  was 
extremely  varied.  School  teachers  and  small  intelli- 
gentsia became  afiiliated  with  it.  The  more  prominent 
leaders  numbered  several  important  Moscow  Jewish 
merchants. 

Psychologically  the  Social-Revolutionary  party  at- 
tracted persons  with  a  more  romantic  turn  of  mind  who 


44       FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

were  repelled  by  the  dry  Maridan  doctrine  of  economic 
materialism.  Maybe  the  dangers  and  adventures  that 
its  tactics  involved  served  as  an  inducement  to  others. 
Holding  that  historical  events  are  vitally  influenced  by 
the  personality  of  those  in  power  the  Social-Revolution- 
aries were  terrorists,  and  before  the  Revolution  had 
committed  several  political  assassinations.  Gentle 
visionaries  and  poets,  deeming  that  isolated  heroic  deeds 
and  sacrifices  could  revolutionise  the  world,  frequently 
became  the  executors  of  such  terroristic  acts.  The 
Social-Revolutionaries  attached  great  importance  to 
political  liberty  and  led  an  active  and  self-denying 
struggle  against  autocracy.  When  the  longed-for  hour 
of  freedom  struck  they  were  naturally  bound  to  fill  a 
prominent  place  among  other  political  parties. 

When  the  Social  Revolutionaries  assembled  at 
Petrograd  from  Siberia  and  from  exile  abroad,  where 
many  of  them  had  been  compelled  to  live  for  years,  it 
became  apparent  that  this  was  not  one  united  party 
firmly  bound  together  by  a  common  political  outlook 
and  a  unity  of  leadership,  but  rather  a  chaotic  mixture 
of  various  tendencies  and  individuals  of  far  from  equal 
morality.  The  Social-Revolutionaries  were  divided  into 
those  of  the  Right,  the  Centre,  and  the  Left.  These 
groups  were  also  split  up  into  various  factions  which 
need  not  be  described  in  detail,  but  which  increased  the 
vagueness  and  disorderliness  of  Social-Revolutionary 
policy.  The  Right  wing  was  composed  of  the  so-called 
Social-Revolutionary  patriots.  To  them  belonged  the 
old  revolutionary  Mme.  Breshko-Breshkovskaja,  Lebe- 
defi,  Boris  Savinkoff,  and  finally  Kerensky.  The  Centre 
was  led  by  Victor  Chernoff,  an  ambitious  publicist,  a 
demagogue,  unscrupulous  in  his  speeches  and  methods. 
On  the  Left  was  a  group  of  Social-Revolutionary  Maxi- 
malists with  the  hysterical  Marie  Spiridonova  at  their 


11      PATRIOTISM  OR  INTERNATIONALISM  ?      45 

head.  The  true  substance  of  these  factions  and  their 
leaders  was  mainly  defined  by  their  attitude  in  relation 
to  the  war  and  to  Bolshevism. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution  the  Bolsheviks 
were  not  yet  considered  a  separate  party,  but  formed 
part  of  the  United  All-Russian  Labour  Social-Demo- 
cratic party,  as  the  Russian  Marxists  styled  themselves. 
The  party  became  divided  into  Mensheviks  and  Bol- 
sheviks in  1903  at  a  party  conference  filled  with  the 
usual  squabbling  over  formulas  and  words.  Lenin,  who 
demanded  that  the  party  should  adopt  more  revolu- 
tionary, or,  as  was  then  termed,  Blanquist  tactics, 
asserted  that  he  had  behind  him  the  majority  of  the 
delegates  (hence  the  term  "  Bolsheviks  " — majority). 
Others  declared  that  Lenin  had  falsified  the  representa- 
tion of  provincial  committees,  a  trick  to  which  Lenin 
was  much  inclined.  However,  in  spite  of  that,  he  and 
his  adherents  stubbornly  insisted  that  their  adversaries 
who  supported  the  evolutionary  method  were  in  the 
minority  (hence  the  term  "  Mensheviks  " — minority). 
From  that  time  on  both  these  groups  waged  a  constant 
strife  within  the  party,  but  outwardly  held  together, 
attaching  great  value  to  their  external  unity.  Their 
divergencies  were  mainly  concerned  with  questions  of 
tactics  and  party  organisation.  The  programme  was 
identical  for  both  groups.  It  was  the  programme  of 
international  Social-Democracy.  Some  supplements  and 
alterations  were  introduced  into  the  agrarian  programme 
merely  in  order  to  keep  pace  with  the  Social-Revolu- 
tionaries. Lenin,  however,  attaching  great  value  to 
the  growth  of  the  proletariat,  was  against  the  trans- 
ference of  the  land  to  the  peasants. 

During  the  first  Revolution  (1905)  the  Bolsheviks 
employed  such  questionable  methods  of  struggle  and 
exhibited  such  a  low  standard   of   political  morality 


46       FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

that  it  seemed  as  if  the  Mensheviks  ought  sharply  to 
sever  all  ties  with  their  comrades  of  the  Left.  But  as 
the  Bolsheviks  were  much  more  dexterous  in  gaining 
access  to  the  masses,  the  Mensheviks  still  clung  to  them 
in  order  not  to  lose  touch  with  the  workmen,  and  there- 
fore became  co-partners  in  the  spreading  of  Bolshevist 
poison. 

It  was  hard  for  the  Mensheviks  to  sever  relations 
with  the  Bolsheviks,  when  both  the  Right  and  Left  wings 
of  the  party  set  out  the  theory  of  class-war  as  the 
immutable  law  of  life  in  every  human  society.  They 
were  bound  to  deny  the  principle  of  nationality,  as  the 
proletarians  have  no  fatherland.  The  dictatorship  of 
the  proletariat  constituted  their  primary  aim.  True, 
the  Mensheviks  differed  from  the  Bolsheviks  in  their 
estimate  of  the  proper  moment :  they  held  that  the 
Social  revolution  ought  not  to  be  precipitated  since  it 
was  necessary  first  to  consolidate  political  liberty  by 
passing  through  the  stage  of  a  bourgeois  republic,  but 
the  ultimate  aim  of  concentrating  all  the  economic  life 
in  the  hands  of  the  State  was  common  to  both. 

Within  their  own  house,  at  party  conferences, 
Mensheviks  sometimes  indulged  in  passionate  arguments 
with  Bolsheviks.  But  apparently  considering  their 
differences  as  purely  family  matters,  they  attached  no 
significance  to  them  whatever,  and  thought  not  of  a 
separation  but  rather  of  complete  fusion. 

On  his  return  from  Siberian  exile,  Tsereteli  hastened 
to  declare  in  one  of  his  earliest  speeches,  "  Factions  no 
longer  exist.  Bolsheviks  and  Mensheviks  are  united. 
All  are  ranged  in  one  Revolutionary  Democracy." 

Besides  these  two  principal  Social-Democratic  factions 
there  existed  also  a  group  of  Internationalists,  which 
stood  to  the  Left  of  the  Mensheviks  and  but  slightly 
differed  from  the  Bolsheviks.     Its  leader  was  Martoff- 


11      PATRIOTISM  OR  INTERNATIONALISM  ?     47 

Zederbaum,  who  returned  to  Russia  with  Lenin  through 
Germany  and  held  views  closely  akin  to  Lenin's. 

Standing  beside  them,  or  rather  set  aside  by  them, 
was  the  Group  of  Unity  organised  by  G.  Plekhanoff. 
He  was  contemptuously  called  the  Social-patriot  because 
he  warned  the  people  of  the  German  peril  and  demanded 
the  prosecution  of  war  to  the  end.  His  was  not  revolu- 
tionary, but  evolutionary  Marxism.  Plekhanoff  was 
sufficiently  intelligent,  well-educated  and  honest  to 
know  that  it  was  impossible  to  step  straight  from  the 
Empire  of  Nicholas  II.  into  the  reign  of  Marx.  His 
views  differed  so  entirely  from  those  of  the  Executive 
Committee,  that  supreme  organ  of  the  Soviet,  that 
Plekhanoff  was  not  admitted  to  its  membership.  Yet 
Lenin,  Zinovieff,  Trotsky,  even  Radek,  an  Austrian, 
were  elected,  although  the  rest  of  the  Socialists  were 
perfectly  aware  of  their  political  immorality.  They  did 
not,  however,  consider  honesty  and  integrity  as  being 
the  foremost  and  indispensable  qualities  of  any  man, 
still  less  so  of  a  politician. 

Such  were,  broadly  outlined,  the  principal  parties 
and  political  tendencies  existing  in  Russia  at  the 
moment  of  the  Revolution.  At  that  time  they  only 
included  the  numerically  insignificant  educated  and 
literate  upper  circles.  Whereas  an  enormous  majority, 
tens  of  millions  of  citizens,  who  would  soon  be  called 
upon  to  fashion  the  State's  and  their  own  destinies  by 
means  of  voting  papers,  knew  nothing  of  these  parties, 
and  were  utterly  incapable  of  distinguishing  one  from 
another. 

Very  soon,  however,  setting  aside  party  divisions 
and  subdivisions,  the  political  thoughts  and  will  of  the 
people  began  to  concentrate  themselves  on  the  two 
fundamental  problems — the  war,  and  the  character  of 
the  new  order. 


48       FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

On  the  one  side  were  the  defencists,  who  held  that 
the  war  must  be  carried  on  to  a  victorious  end,  and 
that  the  Revolution  should  be  political,  but  not  social. 
This  standpoint  was  defended  by  the  Cadets,  and 
Socialists  of  the  Right,  the  Populist-Socialists  as  well 
as  the  "  Unity  "  group.  At  the  head  of  this  movement 
stood  the  Committee  of  the  Duma.  Towards  them 
turned  the  Officers  and  Generals.  Former  emigres  and 
revolutionaries,  like  the  anarchist,  Prince  Kropotkin, 
Herman  Lopatin,  Pankratoff,  and  others,  at  the  risk 
of  losing  their  popularity  supported  the  defencist  move- 
ment. Their  patriotic  task  was  complicated  by  the 
fact  that  they  found  themselves  obliged  to  refute  the 
tempting  watchwords  of  the  other  Socialists,  and  to 
agree  upon  many  points  not  merely  with  the  Cadets, 
but  also  with  the  Octobrists  and  conservatively  disposed 
Generals.  Demagogues  skilfully  availed  themselves  of 
this  opportunity  to  incite  the  masses  against  all  con- 
ceptions of  national  Socialism. 

The  watchwords  of  the  opposite  side  were  the 
liquidation  of  the  war  and  the  deepening  of  the  Revolu- 
tion, ix.  a  realisation  of  Socialist  aims  by  means  of  a 
further  revolution. 

An  enormous  majority  of  the  rank  and  file  and  the 
Central  Committees  of  both  the  important  Socialist 
parties — ^the  Social-Democrats  and  the  Social-Revolu- 
tionaries— ^whose  chief  stronghold  was  the  Soviet  of 
Soldiers'  and  Workmen's  Deputies,  represented  the 
second  tendency.  In  relation  to  the  war  they  stood 
not  for  defence,  but  for  a  democratic  peace,  concluded 
with  the  aid  of  the  united  international  proletariat, 
including  the  Austro-German  proletariat. 

Russia's  tragedy  lay  in  the  fact  that  the  Revolution 
broke  out  amid  the  complications  of  an  exliausting  war, 
which  had  to  be  carried  on  at  all  costs  to  a  victorious 


II      PATRIOTISM  OR  INTERNATIONALISM  ?     49 

end  to  save  the  country  from  slavery  and  destruction. 
And  it  so  happened  that  the  revolutionary  leaders  were 
semi-defeatists  who  had  remained  concealed  in  the 
rear,  Socialists  whose  minds  were  filled  with  the  doctrines 
of  Marx  to  the  exclusion  of  patriotism,  or  else  actual 
defeatists  like  Chheidze.  For  three  years  Chheidze  made 
speeches  in  the  Duma  on  the  necessity  of  liquidating 
the  war  as  soon  as  possible,  and  in  spite  of  this,  or  it 
may  be  for  this  very  reason,  he  was  elected  President  of 
the  Petrograd  Soviet.  For,  in  the  early  days  of  the 
Revolution,  the  word  "  Motherland  "  was  banned  by 
the  Socialist  majority.  The  Revolutionary  Democracy 
shrugged  its  shoulders  contemptuously  even  when  such 
popular  Socialist  writers  as  Vladimir  Korolenko  sounded 
the  warning  that  "  the  Motherland  was  in  danger." 

Korolenko    wrote    a    passionate    appeal    to    the 
Democracy,   imploring    them    to    forget    all   quarrels, 
because  "  the  same  cloud  which  of  yore  threatened 
Russia  from  the  east  is  now  approaching  from  the  west. 
.  .  .  The  HohenzoUern  wants  Russia  to  remain  for  long 
obscure  and  oppressed.  ..."     But  patriotic  speeches, 
whatever  their  origin,   awoke  no  response  from  the 
Revolutionary  Democracy.     On  the  contrary,  as  if  a 
prey  to  some  spiritual  perversion  fatal  to  Russia,  the 
majority  of  the  Socialists  behaved  with  extreme  sus- 
picion towards  all  defencists,   even  when  they  were 
Socialists.     The  idea  of  a  struggle  against  Germany 
became  in  the  mentality  of  the  Left  mysteriously  linked 
with  the  idea  of  a  struggle  against  the  Revolution.    This 
may  be  partly  explained  by  the  hypnotic  influence 
of  German  ideas  through  the  medium  of  Social-Demo- 
cracy, through  faith  in  the  Internationalist  sentiments 
of  the  German  proletariat,  and  through  the  utterly 
unfounded  fear  of  a  counter-revolution  which  haunted 
the  Socialists  from  the  very  first  days.     It  would  not 

E 


50       FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

be  an  exaggeration  to  say  that  counter-revolution  was 
infinitely  more  terrible  to  them  than  the  Kaiser.  That 
is  why  they  were  incapable  of  safeguarding  the  army. 

The  Government  had  barely  been  established  when 
on  the  14th  of  March  the  Soviet  issued  its  famous  Order 
No.  1.  It  was  addressed  to  the  Petrograd  garrison,  but 
was  sent  out  in  millions  of  copies  to  all  units  at  the 
front  and  in  the  rear,  and  served  as  a  signal  for  the 
disintegration  of  the  Russian  Army.  The  Soviet  ordered 
all  military  units  "  to  proceed  immediately  to  the 
election  of  committees  composed  of  representatives  of 
the  rank-and-file."  Delegates  of  these  committees  were 
incorporated  in  the  Soviet  of  Workmen's  Deputies, 
which  was  to  be  called  henceforth  the  Soviet  of  Work- 
men's and  Soldiers'  Deputies.  All  arms  were  to  be 
taken  over  and  controlled  by  the  Soldiers'  Committees 
and  under  no  circumstances  to  be  handed  over  to  officers, 
not  even  at  their  express  demand. 

By  this  order  the  Soviet  destroyed  discipline  at  one 
stroke,  subordinating  officers  to  the  privates  and 
heedlessly  introducing  the  elective  principle  into  the 
army. 

Certainly  no  one  would  have  the  boldness  to  assert 
that  discipline  might  not  have  been  destroyed  in  the 
Russian  Army  by  the  Revolution  merely  taking  its 
course.  But  even  a  revolution,  whatever  its  likeness 
to  a  storm,  an  earthquake,  or  collective  insanity,  still 
contains  some  elements  of  intelligent  purpose.  As  a 
man  in  a  fit  of  passion  may  sometimes  be  prevented 
from  committing  a  crime,  so  in  a  revolution  the  appeal 
of  wisdom,  of  conscience,  or  honour,  sometimes  re- 
strained the  mob  when  it  was  on  the  verge  of  committing 
a  collective  crime.  The  leading  organs  of  Revolutionary 
Democracy,  as  the  Soviets  had  styled  themselves  from 
the  very  outset,  should  have  reflected  both  in  word  and 


"      PATRIOTISM  OR  INTERNATIONALISM  ?      51 

deed  the  highest  standard  of  Socialist  and  Revolutionary 
intelligence.  They  constituted  the  brain,  and  it  was 
their  duty  to  give  a  wise  lead  to  the  people's  newly 
awakened  will  for  freedom,  and  not  to  submitting  to 
blind  elemental  forces.  But  in  social  questions,  as  well 
as  in  their  attitude  towards  the  war,  the  Russian 
Socialists  showed  no  evidence  of  any  statesmanlike  or 
constructive  wisdom.  Not  only  did  they  not  endeavour 
to  retain  the  discipline  and  with  it  the  fighting  eflS.ciency 
of  the  army,  but  in  a  sort  of  frenzied  blindness  they 
scattered  the  seeds  of  strife  and  corruption  throughout 
the  army. 

Both  Order  No.  1  and  all  the  subsequent  behaviour 
of  the  Soviet  was  penetrated  with  a  distrust  of  the 
officers.  Although  the  Stavka  and  the  entire  com- 
manding staff  had  immediately  recognised  the  authority 
of  the  Provisional  Government,  the  Soviet  had  never- 
theless placed  all  ofl&cers  under  suspicion.  On  the  very 
day  when  the  Soviet  adopted  its  appeal  to  the  peoples 
of  the  world,  breathing  the  love  of  international  peace, 
rancorous  speeches  against  the  officers  of  the  Russian 
Army  were  being  uttered  at  a  Soviet  meeting.  A  petty 
journafist,  Stekloff  (Nakhamkes),  one  of  those  who  had 
found  shelter  from  the  war  behind  an  office  desk,  now 
as  a  member  of  the  Soviet  thundered  against  the  former 
Tsarist  Stavka,  which  according  to  him  was  a  centre  of 
coimter-re volution.  "  Rebellious  generals,  not  wishing 
to  submit  to  the  will  of  the  Russian  people,  are  openly 
conducting  an  agitation  among  the  soldiers.  We  have 
demanded  that  the  Provisional  Government  proclaim 
beforehand  as  outlaws  all  those  rebellious  generals  who 
dare  thus  to  raise  their  miserable,  sacrilegious  arm.  It 
is  not  only  every  officer's  but  every  soldier's,  every 
citizen's  right  and  duty  to  kill  him  before  he  raises  his 
arm." 


52       FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

This  speech,  with  its  incitement  to  bloodshed,  with 
its  criminal  appeal  to  the  soldiers  to  murder  the  com- 
manders, was  greeted  with  applause  by  the  Soviet,  and 
printed  in  the  Soviet  Izvestia,  No.  18. 

The  occasion  of  the  speech  was  a  proclamation  of 
the  Minister  of  War,  Guchkoff,  and  the  Commander- 
in- Chief,  General  Alexeieff,  reminding  the  army  that 
"  Russia  is  menaced  with  fresh  trials.  We  are  faced 
by  stern  dangers  from  the  enemy."  If  the  soldiers 
do  not  retain  a  strong  military  discipline,  "  the  army 
will  cease  to  be  a  menace  to  the  enemy,  and  will  easily 
become  its  prey.  Any  one  who  tells  you  otherwise, 
who  incites  you  to  disorder  and  to  disobedience  of  your 
superiors,  is  a  traitor  to  his  country,  working  to  the 
German's  profit  and  Russia's  destruction."  The  army 
leaders  insisted  that  ofl&cers  should  remain  in  command 
of  their  units.  "  The  orders  of  the  Provisional  Govern- 
ment alone  are  compulsory  for  the  army,  for  divided 
control  will  lead  to  complete  disruption  "  (March  23). 

That  prophecy  has,  as  we  know,  been  fulfilled.  But 
the  Soviet  groups  did  not  understand  the  language  of 
statesmen.  Imbued  with  the  Marxian  doctrine  of  class- 
war,  they  immediately  applied  narrow  party  dogmas  to 
all  national  problems,  and  bent  all  their  energies  to 
discover  the  lurking-place  of  the  imperialist  and  capitalist 
counter-revolution  which  they  were  bound  to  fight. 

And  since  the  first  Provisional  Government  was 
above  all  a  defencist  government,  it  was  immediately 
placed  under  suspicion. 

A  few  days  after  its  formation,  the  Provisional 
Government  issued  a  manifesto  beginning  with  the 
following  words : 

The  sublime  work  is  accomplished.  The  powerful  impulse 
of  the  Russian  people  has  overthrown  the  old  order.    A  new 


II      PATRIOTISM  OR  INTERNATIONALISM  ?      53 

free  Russia  is  bom.    The  great  upheaval  has  crowned  the  long 
years  of  struggle. 

Ratifying  their  original  promise  of  calling  a  Con- 
stituent Assembly  within  the  shortest  possible  period 
of  time  and  of  meanwhile  embodying  all  the  political 
liberties  in  legal  forms,  the  Government  of  Prince  LvofE 
pointed  out  the  necessity  of  defending  the  country  from 
the  outward  enemy. 

The  Government  believe  that  the  same  spirit  of  lofty 
patriotism  that  was  exhibited  by  the  people  in  their  struggle 
against  the  old  regime  will  inspire  our  gallant  soldiers  upon  the 
field  of  battle.  The  Government  will  for  its  own  part  do  every- 
thing in  its  power  to  provide  our  Army  with  all  necessary  supplies 
to  bring  the  War  to  a  victorious  end.  The  Government  will 
strictly  adhere  to  all  alliances  which  bind  us  to  other  Powers, 
and  will  unswervingly  fulfil  all  agreements  with  our  Allies. 
(March  19.) 

An  appeal  to  the  army,  signed  by  Prince  LvofE  and 
the  Minister  of  War  and  Marine,  Guchkoff,  was  issued 
simultaneously.  It  appeared  in  a  measure  as  an  answer 
to  the  fatal  Order  No.  1. 

Russia  firmly  believes  that  the  Army,  inspired  by  the  lofty 
spirit  of  patriotism,  will  immovably  preserve  the  foundations  of 
its  power :  unity,  and  a  firm  internal  order  of  authority  and 
subordination.  No  alteration  of  the  military  order  and  command 
can  take  place  otherwise  than  by  order  of  the  Provisional  Govern- 
ment, or  by  the  supreme  military  authorities  acting  on  their 
behalf.  .  .  .  The  subordination  of  soldiers  to  officers  constitutes 
the  foundation  of  the  Army's  might  and  the  country's  safety. 
The  collapse  of  such  submission  would  hurl  the  Army  and  the 
nation  into  an  abyss  of  destruction.    This  shall  not  be. 

Such  was  the  Provisional  Government's  view  of  its 
own  and  the  army's  duties.  But  the  Soviet  pursued 
totally  difEerent  aims  and  spoke  a  different  language. 

On  March  27  the  Soviet  issued  an  address  to  the 


54       FEOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

Peoples  of  the  World,  filled  with  revolutionary  ardour 
and  faith  in  a  world  revolution  : 

We  declare  the  time  ripe  for  the  beginning  of  a  decisive 
struggle  against  the  predatory  tendencies  of  the  Governments 
of  all  countries.  The  time  has  come  for  the  peoples  to  take  into 
their  own  hands  the  decision  concerning  War  and  Peace.  Filled 
with  the  consciousness  of  its  revolutionary  might,  the  Russian 
democracy  declares  that  it  will  use  every  means  to  oppose  the 
predatory  policy  of  its  governing  classes,  and  summons  the 
peoples  of  Europe  to  combined  action  in  favour  of  peace. 

Turning  to  the  Germans,  the  Petrograd  Soviet 
invited  them  to  "  overthrow  the  yoke  of  a  semi-auto- 
cratic order,"  declaring  at  the  same  time  that  it  will 
"  staunchly  defend  its  own  liberty  against  all  reactionary 
attempts,  whether  from  within  or  from  without." 

The  entire  document  exactly  reflects  the  naive  and 
magniloquent  exaltation  of  the  first  stage  of  the  Russian 
Revolution,  and  strikes  one  by  its  complete  absence  of 
any  consciousness  of  external  danger. 

These  men,  dazed  by  their  own  catchwords  and  the 
crowd's  applause,  had  ceased  to  hear  the  rumble  of  guns 
upon  the  as  yet  distant  German  front.  Any  reminder 
of  the  fact  that  the  enemy  occupied  a  vast  stretch  of 
Russian  territory,  that  only  after  driving  him  back  to 
the  German  frontiers  could  any  talk  of  a  democratic 
peace  become  possible,  was  looked  upon  as  unseemly 
Imperialism. 

Other  watchwords  sounded  from  the  Left  wing : 
revision  of  treaties,  clear  statement  of  war  -  aims, 
immediate  armistice,  fraternisation. 

And  it  was  not  easy  to  distinguish  which  of  the 
Socialist  factions  supported  these  demands  as  a  whole, 
and  which  did  not ;  or  how  far  were  they  due  to 
Bolshevist  influence.  All  the  Socialists,  with  the  excep- 
tion of  the  Social-Patriots,  were  rather  closely  associated 


II      PATRIOTISM  OR  INTERNATIONALISM  ?      55 

with  each  other,  and  endeavoured  not  so  much  to  clear 
up  as  to  smooth  over  their  existing  differences. 

The  Social -Revolutionaries  always  called  the 
Bolsheviks  their  "  comrades-in-idea,"  and  agreed  with 
them  upon  the  main  issues.  At  the  Congress  of  Soviets 
in  May,  the  Social-Revolutionary  leader,  V.  Chernoff, 
addressing  himself  to  Lenin,  said  quite  rightly,  "  My 
appetite  is  not  less  than  the  appetites  of  the  Bolsheviks.'' 
Though  not  Marxists,  the  Social -Revolutionaries  ad- 
vocated class-war,  and  at  their  Petrograd  conference 
in  May  carried  a  resolution  defining  their  attitude  to 
both  the  crucial  questions,  those  of  War  and  Revolution. 
"  It  has  become  the  happy  lot  of  the  Russian  people 
to  be  the  first  skirmisher  in  the  transfer  of  the  front 
from  without  to  within,  in  the  sacred  task  of  trans- 
forming the  military  into  a  revolutionary  crisis." 

Still  closer  were  the  ties  which  bound  the  Bolsheviks 
to  other  Marxian  factions.  Bolshevist  Maximalism, 
alluring  by  its  successes  in  easy  popularity  and  the 
imagined  possibility  of  a  speedy  realisation  of  Socialist 
ideals,  was  filtering  through  all  circles  of  the  Revolu- 
tionary Democracy.  Common  points  of  departure  in 
the  Marxian  programme  and  similarity  of  revolutionary 
traditions  were  the  threads  which  bound  all  Socialists 
firmly  to  their  Socialist  centre,  i.e.  the  Soviet,  which 
included  both  Social-Revolutionaries  and  Social-Demo- 
crats. But  as  gradually  through  Soviet  speeches  and 
the  Soviet  Press,  Bolshevist  ideas  became  increasingly, 
not  assimilated,  but  caught  up  by  the  masses,  the 
position  of  the  Socialist  Centre  became  more  and  more 
difficult.  The  very  walls  of  the  Taurida  Palace  seemed 
to  shriek :  "  The  Revolution  is  not  over !  Deepen 
the  Revolution !  "  But  such  a  call  was  binding,  it 
pushed  the  Soviet  along  a  certain  definite  road,  and  in 
the  end  drove  it  into  an  impasse  and  confronted  it 


56       FKOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

with  contradictions  whose  only  solution  lay  in  a  fresh 
catastrophe. 

Accustomed  as  they  were  to  living  in  an  atmosphere 
of  an  abstract  and  irresponsible  dogmatism,  the  leaders 
of  the  Soviet  were  in  continual  fear  of  departing  from 
that  programme  of  which  the  main  principles  were  the 
struggle  against  the  bourgeoisie  and  the  seizure  of 
power  by  or,  more  correctly,  the  dictatorship  of  the 
proletariat.  The  Bolsheviks  took  advantage  of  the 
doctrinal  susceptibilities  of  their  comrades,  and  it  was 
no  easy  task  for  Socialists  of  the  Centre  to  object  when 
the  Bolsheviks  demanded  the  transfer  of  power  to  the 
Soviets. 

The  first  Soviet  would  not  agree  to  this.  It  had 
participated  together  with  the  Committee  of  the  Duma 
in  the  formation  of  the  Provisional  Government, 
thereby  in  a  way  guaranteeing  its  support  to  the  Cabinet. 
As  a  matter  of  fact  neither  the  Socialist  parties  nor  the 
Petrograd  Soviet  as  their  mouthpiece  ofiered  any 
confidence  or  support  to  Prince  Lvofi's  Cabinet.  They 
declared  with  reserve  that  they  trusted  the  Govern- 
ment in  so  far  as  it  defended  and  confirmed  the  "  con- 
quests of  the  Revolution."  This  was  a  vague  and 
variable  notion,  and  such  support  might  be  withdrawn 
at  any  moment.  Even  Tsereteli,  one  of  the  more 
statesmanlike  Social-Democrats,  declared  in  the  Soviet : 
"  The  fullness  of  executive  power  must  belong  to  the 
Provisional  Government  in  so  far  as  such  power  tends 
to  strengthening  the  Revolution  "  (April  3). 

In  mid-April  the  first  conference  of  Soviets,  after 
prolonged  and  passionate  debates  concerning  the 
bourgeois  character  of  Prince  Lvofi's  Cabinet,  adopted 
a  lengthy  resolution  of  warning.  The  conference 
recognised  that  the  programme  published  by  the 
Government  at  the  time  of  its  formation  "  contains  the 


"      PATRIOTISM  OR  INTERNATIONALISM  ?      57 

fundamental  political  claims  of  Russian  democracy,  and 
that  so  far  the  Provisional  Government  as  a  whole  is 
following  a  general  course  leading  towards  the  fulfil- 
ment of  its  accepted  obligations."  It  seemed  but 
natural  that  such  a  declaration  would  be  followed  by 
a  vote  of  confidence  and  support.  But  the  dogmatic 
necessity  of  fighting  the  bourgeoisie  prevented  the 
Soviet  Socialists  from  adopting  the  only  wise  and 
statesmanlike  decision,  therefore  they  added :  "  The 
Conference  invites  the  Democracy,  without  accepting 
responsibility  for  the  activity  of  the  Government  as  a 
whole,  to  support  the  Provisional  Government  in  so 
far  as  it  infallibly  advances  in  the  direction  of  a  con- 
solidation and  a  widening  of  the  conquests  of  the 
Revolution,  and  in  so  far  as  its  foreign  policy  is  based 
upon  a  rejection  of  predatory  tendencies.  In  order 
to  force  the  Government  to  submit  to  the  will  of  the 
Revolutionary  Democracy,  the  latter  must  rally  around 
the  Soviets  of  Workmen's  and  Soldiers'  Delegates  as 
being  the  organised  centres  of  democracy  created  by 
the  Revolution."  This  was  necessary,  it  was  ex- 
plained, for  the  realisation  of  the  following  clause  of 
the  resolution  : 

The  Conference  recognises  the  urgency  of  a  constant  political 
control  and  pressure  to  be  exercised  by  the  Revolutionary 
Democracy  on  the  Provisional  Government  and  its  local  agents 
for  the  purpose  of  stimulating  them  to  energetic  struggle  against 
counter-revolutionary  forces,  to  decisive  steps  towards  the 
entire  democratisation  of  Russian  life,  and  towards  the  prepara- 
tion of  a  universal  peace  without  annexations  and  indemnities, 
based  upon  the  self-determination  of  the  peoples. 

This  decision  placed  the  Government  under  control 
of  the  Soviets,  which,  after  all,  were  a  perfectly  chaotic 
organisation,  whose  composition  and  rights  were  most 
marvellously  ill-defined. 


58       FEOM  LIBEETY  TO  BEEST-LITOVSK       ch. 

But  even  before  this  decision  was  taken,  the  irre- 
sponsible politicians  of  the  Soviet  interfered  in  all 
affairs  of  State,  both  civil  and  military.  Eegimental 
committees  organised  by  them  were  disrupting  the 
army.  The  Izvestia  was  frantically  attacking  Generals, 
especially  the  Commander-in-Chief,  Alexeieff.  In  a 
despatch  of  April  14,  from  Headquarters,  General 
Alexeieff  announced : 

A  number  of  enemy  deserters  give  evidence  that  the  Germans 
and  Austrians  hope  that  various  organisations  working  inside 
Russia  and  at  present  impeding  the  work  of  the  Provisional 
Government  will  produce  anarchy  throughout  the  country,  and 
demoralise  the  Russian  Army. 

In  response  to  this  the  entire  Left  Press  raised  a 
campaign  against  the  Generalissimo.  Even  the  Men- 
shevist  Labour  Gazette  {Rabochaya  Gazeta)  declared 
that  these  were  "  counter-revolutionary  tendencies," 
and  expressed  the  hope  that  the  Provisional  Govern- 
ment "  will  be  able  to  show  Headquarters  its  proper 
place."  A  series  of  coarse  articles,  of  senselessly  insolent 
resolutions  concerning  officers  and  Generals,  were 
published  in  the  Socialist  papers,  which  were  read  with 
avidity  by  soldiers  at  the  front.  The  Socialist  Press 
repeated  over  and  over  again  that  a  revolution  was 
beginning  in  Germany.  This  was  said  in  the  Pravda^ 
the  Izvestia,  and  in  the  German  leaflets  which  the 
German  aviators  scattered  in  the  Eussian  trenches. 
The  Izvestia  wrote  in  the  beginning  of  April  (No.  27) : 

The  hourgeoise  papers  never  cease  to  talk  about  the  peril 
menacing  Russia  from  Germany,  and  attribute  our  mihtary 
reverses  to  our  internal  strife.  .  .  .  They  want  to  persuade  the 
soldiers  of  the  necessity  of  going  on  with  the  War. 

The  necessity  of  carrying  on  the  war  was  urged 
both  by  the  Provisional  Government  and  by  the  Generals 


II      PATRIOTISM  OR  INTERNATIONALISM  ?      59 

whom  it  had  placed  at  the  head  of  the  army.  Accordingly 
the  preposterous  assertions  that  the  war  could  be 
ended  without  fighting  prejudiced  the  soldiers'  con- 
fidence, not  so  much  in  the  bourgeois  Press  as  in  the 
Government  and  the  officers.  Generals  demanded  dis- 
cipline and  self-restraint.  The  Soviets  demanded  nothing 
and  promised  everything.  No  wonder  the  Russian 
soldier's  head  was  turned  and  that  he  felt  drawn 
towards  the  Soviet  and  away  from  the  Government. 

As  early  as  March  21,  the  Soldiers'  Section  of  the 
Soviet  declared,  *'  Military  units  may  be  led  out  of 
Petrograd  to  their  former  places  of  encampment  by 
order  of  the  Minister  of  War  countersigned  by  the 
Executive  Committee."  In  other  words,  military  units 
were  subordinated  not  to  the  military  authorities  but 
to  the  Soviet. 

The  Soviet  exercised  a  jealous  surveillance  over  the 
Government's  activity.  When  the  Minister  of  Finance 
insistently  urged  them  to  support  the  Liberty  Loan, 
they  procrastinated  for  weeks,  unable  to  decide  whether 
they  ought  to  support  it  or  not,  so  slightly  conscious 
were  they  of  their  ties  with  the  Russian  State.  Yet 
when  at  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution  the  papers 
mentioned  that  the  Government  intended  to  send  the 
Tsar  and  his  family  over  to  England,  the  Soviet 
immediately  interfered.  The  Izvestia  (No.  13)  published 
a  report  of  a  Soviet  meeting,  at  which  N.  Sotoloff^  (a 
Social-Democrat)  announced  the  measures  adopted  to 
prevent  Nicholas  II. 's  departure : 

We  have  mobilised  all  military  units  subjected  to  our  influence, 
and  have  rendered  the  situation  such  as  actually  to  make  it 
impossible  for  Nicholas  II.  to  leave  Tsarskoe-Selo  without  our 

1  N.  D.  Sokoloff,  a  lawyer  of  rather  limited  intelligence,  who  acquired  a 
shameful  celebrity  as  one  of  the  authors  of  Order  No.  1. 


60       FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

consent ;  we  have  wired  along  all  railway  lines  that  every 
railway  organisation,  each  station-master,  every  group  of  rail- 
way-workmen, is  bound  to  detain  Nicholas  II. 's  train  whenever 
and  wherever  it  may  appear. 

In  such,  a  manner,  setting  the  Government  aside  and 
frequently  acting  in  conflict  with  its  intentions,  the 
Soviet  Committee  issued  independent  orders  paralysing 
the  new-born  power,  which  was  still  too  weak  even  to 
struggle  for  its  independence.  For  instance,  Sokolofi 
declared  in  the  course  of  the  same  speech  that  "  the 
Government  which  had  at  first  somewhat  hesitated, 
subsequently  found  itself  obliged  to  sanction  all  our 
actions." 

In  order  to  prevent  the  Government  from  doing 
anything  disagreeable  to  the  Soviet  in  future,  a 
"  Contact  Commission  "  was  elected  consisting  of  five 
members  (Skobelefi,  Steklofi-Nakhamkes,  Sukhanofi- 
Gimmer,  Filipovsky,  and  Chheidze),  which  ''by  exercis- 
ing constant  organised  pressure  was  to  force  the 
Government  to  execute  all  and  sundry  demands " 
(words  uttered  by  Steklofi  at  the  same  meeting  of  the 
Soviet,  March  22).  This  commission  did  not  take  part 
in  the  Cabinet  meeting  but  came  to  the  Marie  Palace, 
where  mixed  meetings  were  arranged  between  Ministers 
and  members  of  the  Executive  Committee. 

The  Provisional  Government  denied  the  existence  of 
a  dual  authority,  and  when  delegates  from  the  front 
presenting  themselves  to  Prince  Lvofi  said  that  the 
front  was  disturbed  by  rumours  of  a  dual  authority, 
the  Ministers  hastily  reassured  them.  Kerensky 
announced  in  April :  "  Complete  unity  of  aims  and 
purpose  exists  between  the  Provisional  Government  and 
the  Soviet.  The  Provisional  Government  is  invested 
with  the  fullness  of  power"  (Izvestia,  No.  40).  And 
Tsereteli    announced    at    the    conference    of    Soviets : 


n      PATRIOTISM  OR  INTERNATIONALISM  ?      61 

"  Only  irresponsible  circles  can  speak  of  dual  authority. 
Only  one  order  is  now  conceivable  in  Russia,  and  that 
is  Revolutionary  Order.  The  Provisional  Government 
as  the  responsible  organ  of  the  bourgeoisie  now  stands 
in  the  same  path  "  (April  21). 

But,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  from  the  very  first  days 
of  the  Revolution  the  new  regime  was  double-headed. 
Such  acute  difference  in  relation  to  the  fundamental 
problems  of  the  political  reconstruction  of  Russia 
existed  between  these  two  groups  that  any  compromise 
became  impossible.  The  Bolsheviks  proved  to  be  the 
ballast  which  heeled  the  whole  ship  to  the  Left.  They 
were,  however,  only  able  to  do  so  because  the  Revolu- 
tionary Democracy  was  closely  akin  to  them.  At  first 
the  Bolsheviks  had  no  real  success  in  Soviet  circles,  and 
the  political  aspirations  and  doctrines  of  the  Soviet 
Centre  followed  an  independent  course  of  development. 
The  Bolshevist  current  was  only  one  of  many  factors, 
and  far  from  being  the  most  important  one. 

But  when  Lenin,  Trotsky,  Zinovieff,  and  many  other 
less  known  but  none  the  less  pernicious  Bolsheviks 
appeared  upon  the  scene,  they  drew  the  rest  of  the 
Socialists,  day  by  day  and  step  by  step,  ever  further  to 
the  Left.  And,  first  and  foremost,  they  started  to 
prepare  for  the  seizure  of  power,  availing  themselves  of 
every  means  within  their  reach  :  of  the  violence  and 
vagueness  of  the  rising  popular  forces,  German  aid,  the 
weakness  of  the  more  statesmanlike  elements,  and  the 
general  weariness  of  a  poverty-stricken,  ignorant  people 
exhausted  by  the  double  burden  of  an  evil  Tsarist 
regime  and  the  terrible  military  tension ;  and,  finally,  of 
the  blindness  of  their  Socialist  comrades. 


CHAPTER  III 

LENIN  AND   HIS   WATCHWORD 

Triumphal  entry  of  Lenin — Propaganda  of  Bolshevism — The  dancer's 
house — German  support  of  Lenin's  doctrines — Lenin's  estimate  of 
other  Socialists. 

Lenin  made  his  triumphant  entry  into  Petrograd  in  the 
clear  spring  night  of  April  16,  1917. 

The  Izvestia  of  Workmen's  and  Soldiers'  Soviets,  the 
official  organ  of  the  Soviets,  gives  the  following  descrip- 
tion of  the  event :  "  Lenin  appears  in  the  square.  The 
sea  of  faces  surges  and  sways.  Searchlights  cross  the 
place  from  end  to  end,  illumining  the  waving  banners 
and  the  multitude,  who  welcome  the  newly-arrived 
veteran  of  the  revolution  with  deafening  cheers.  The 
people  demand  a  speech,  and  Lenin  makes  his  first 
address  to  the  revolutionary  proletariat  of  Petrograd." 
Lenin  then  enters  not  an  ordinary  but  an  armoured 
motor-car  and  drives  away. 

This  lengthy  description  is  full  of  respect  and 
enthusiasm.  The  editors  of  the  Izvestia  naturally  have 
a  perfect  knowledge  of  Lenin's  views,  they  also  know 
perfectly  well  that  he  has  passed  through  Germany,  but 
their  friendly  ardour  is  by  no  means  cooled.  He  is  a 
revolutionist  and  a  Marxist.  That  is  the  main  point, 
the  rest  does  not  much  matter. 

Vladimir  Ilyich  UlianofE-Lenin  is,  certainly,  above 
all  a  revolutionist. 

62 


LENIN  AND  HIS  WATCHWORD  63 

The  son  of  a  schoolmaster  belonging  to  the  nobility 
of  the  Simbirsk  province,  he  became  a  conspirator  in  his 
university  days.  Towards  the  end  of  the  'eighties  his 
brother  took  part  in  an  unsuccessful  attempt  on  the  life 
of  Alexander  III.  and  was  condemned  to  death.  Vladi- 
mir Ulianoff,  who  most  frequently  wrote  under  the 
pseudonym  of  Lenin,  had  also  undergone  persecution, 
had  been  in  prison  and  in  Siberia  after  the  usual  fate  of 
the  Russian  intelligentsia.  From  exile  he  escaped 
abroad  and  was  an  emigre  for  many  years.  When  the 
revolution  of  1905-6  broke  out  he  returned,  then  fled 
once  more  abroad.  A  man  of  cold  and  scholarly  intellect, 
he  began  by  writing  several  works  upon  economics,  but 
soon  became  totally  absorbed  in  party  journalism  and 
party  struggles  in  all  their  polemic,  tactical,  and 
organising  details. 

He  was  a  Marxist  for  whom  the  theory  of  the  class- 
struggle  was  an  irrefutable  dogma,  entitling  its  adepts 
to  hold  in  contempt  all  scruples  of  conscience  and  all 
demands  of  logic.  From  his  youth  his  revolutionary 
work  was  characterised  by  the  spirit  of  cold  intrigue  and 
by  the  cruel  arrogance  of  a  man  convinced  that  he  was 
the  bearer  of  absolute  truth,  and,  therefore,  absolved 
from  all  moral  obligations. 

Ambitious  and  domineering,  utterly  unscrupulous  in 
his  choice  of  means,  Lenin  acted  upon  the  principles  of 
Divide  et  impera  and  sowed  discord  among  his  own 
party.  It  was  he  who  broke  up  the  party  into  the  two 
factions  of  Bolsheviks  and  Mensheviks  at  the  beginning 
of  the  twentieth  century.  The  difference  between  those 
factions  lies  chiefly  in  their  tactics,  or  rather  in  their 
moral  standard.  The  Bolsheviks,  who  were  Maximalists, 
did  not  admit  of  any  political  compromise,  and  demanded 
the  inunediate  realisation  of  Marxist  doctrines.  But 
they   admitted   all   kinds   of   moral   compromise    and 


64       FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       oh. 

were  on  easy  terms  with  conscience.  Members  of  the 
"  Okhrana "  (the  Imperial  secret  police)  were  more 
often  to  be  fomid  among  the  Bolsheviks  than  among  the 
Mensheviks.  The  Bolsheviks,  moreover,  were  not  over- 
scrupulous as  to  breaches  of  criminal  law,  only  that  they 
dignified  robbery  by  calling  it  expropriation.  Between 
the  various  factions  at  all  Social-Democratic  party 
conferences  and  in  the  party  Press,  dissension  was  the 
invariable  rule,  but,  officially,  the  party  still  remained 
one.  The  general  public  knew  little  of  these  theoretical 
differences,  for  till  the  downfall  of  Tsarism  all  Socialists 
were  persecuted.  All  alike  were  obliged  to  wear  a 
mask,  to  plot  and  hide,  and  use  underhand  methods  for 
propaganda  and  organisation.  This  developed  habits 
of  deceit,  concealment,  and  evasion,  and  imparted  a 
strange  bias  to  the  character  of  a  multitude  of  Russian 
Socialists.  They  became  estranged  from  real  life  ;  they 
lost  the  sense  of  political  responsibility  and  statesman- 
ship. Special  types  were  evolved  in  this  constant 
shifting  from  prison  into  Siberia,  from  Siberia  to  life  in 
exile,  in  an  all-pervading  atmosphere  of  persecution  and 
conspiracy.  Some  were  true  martyrs  of  their  idea, 
strong,  clean-minded  men  of  delicate  conscience.  But 
not  a  few  were  unscrupulous,  devoid  of  all  moral 
standards,  revelling  in  intrigues  and  conspiracies. 

The  Jesuit  motto — ^the  aim  justifies  the  means — 
explains  much  in  Lenin's  life  :  his  attitude  towards  his 
comrades,  his  party  intrigues,  his  unscrupulousness  in 
money  matters,  his  relations  with  Germany,  and  his 
entire  conduct  as  dictator.  His  aim  is  to  kindle  a 
imiversal  social  revolution,  and,  knee-deep  in  mire  and 
blood,  he  marches  towards  its  realisation  with  the  cold 
ardour  of  fanaticism  and  insatiable  ambition.  Yet  in 
justice  to  him  it  must  be  said  that  no  sooner  did  he  make 
his  appearance  in  Russia  than  he  openly  announced  his 


Ill  LENIN  AND  HIS  WATCHWORD  66 

Bolshevist  programme.  Ways  and  means  remained 
obscure,  nor  did  he  consider  it  necessary  to  make  them 
clear  and  clean,  but  his  theories  and  plans,  his  conception 
of  the  Socialistic  problems  of  the  hour,  were  made  per- 
fectly definite.  If  for  months  the  rest  of  the  Russian 
Socialists  of  various  shades  zealously  endeavoured  to 
draw  a  veil  over  the  Bolshevist  tendencies  of  his  demands, 
as  well  as  to  blot  out  the  dark  stains  upon  his  past 
career,  he  was  not  to  blame.  By  so  doing,  they  not  only 
became  responsible  for  his  activity,  but  led  astray 
millions  of  simple  folk  who  were  incapable  of  unravelling 
the  subtleties  of  intelligentsia  politics.  Yet  the  people 
felt  something  was  wrong.  At  first  when  Bolshevist 
influence  was  still  slight,  protests  against  certain  Bol- 
shevist watchwords  or  the  Bolshevist  actions  of  indi- 
viduals might  be  heard  even  from  crowds  of  soldiers. 

Such  a  protest  was  the  resolution  carried  a  few  days 
after  Lenin's  triumphant  entry  into  Petrograd  by  the 
sailors  of  the  2nd  Baltic  Company,  who  had  formed  the 
guard  of  honour  at  the  railway  station  :  "  Having  learnt 
that  Lenin  has  returned  to  Russia  by  gracious  permission 
of  His  Majesty,  the  Emperor  of  Germany  and  King  of 
Prussia,  we  deeply  regret  having  taken  part  in  his 
triumphant  entry  into  Petrograd." 

But  the  Soviet  of  Workmen's  and  Soldiers'  Deputies 
exhibited  a  marvellous  tolerance  in  regard  to  the  Imperial 
German  Government's  peculiar  courtesy  towards  Lenin 
and  his  friends.  And  this  condescension  was  not 
fortuitous.  It  reflected  the  attitude  of  many  Socialistic 
groups  towards  Germany.  They  regarded  her  not  as  an 
enemy  to  be  fought  to  the  death,  but  rather  as  a  friend 
led  astray,  whom,  perhaps,  it  might  be  possible  to 
persuade.    And  why  not  accept  the  services  of  a  friend  ? 

This  question  was  persistently  evaded  at  the  Soviet 
meetings.    Indignant  protests   were   drowned   in   the 


66       FEOM  LIBEETY  TO  BUEST-LITOVSK       ch. 

speeches  of  more  complacent  comrades.  In  any  case, 
Lenin,  though  he  demanded  the  publication  of  the 
Russian  secret  treaties,  never  on  his  own  part  revealed 
the  mystery  of  his  own  first  agreement  with  the  Kaiser. 

In  April,  a  month,  that  is,  after  the  outbreak  of  the 
Revolution,  Nedyelia,  the  Austrian  organ  for  propaganda 
among  the  Russian  troops,  wrote  concerning  Lenin : 
"  The  Provisional  Government  is  willing  to  force  the- New 
Russia  under  the  yoke  of  an  Anglo-French  dictatorship, 
but  these  opportunists  are  confronted  by  an  honest  and 
staunch  antagonist — ^Lenin,  the  true  friend  of  the 
Russian  people."  This  eulogy  was  reprinted  in  Russian 
papers,  but  the  Soviet's  attitude  towards  Lenin  remained 
unchanged. 

Lenin's  appearance  upon  the  scene  caused  the 
extreme  Socialist  wing  at  once  to  raise  its  head.  Now 
they  possessed  a  leader,  clever,  resolute,  not  over- 
scrupulous. It  was  far  easier  for  them  now  to  urge  their 
views  in  the  Soviet  and  also  in  the  Executive  Committee 
of  the  Social -Democratic  party  which  was  already 
strongly  Bolshevist  in  its  tendencies.  All  their  main 
points  had  been  made  clear  even  before  Lenin's  arrival. 

A  manifesto  of  the  Central  Committee  of  the  Russian 
Social-Democratic  party  had  been  published  in  the  first 
number  of  the  Izvestia  of  the  Petrograd  Soviet  of  Work- 
men's and  Soldiers'  Deputies,    It  ran  thus  : 

The  immediate  and  pressing  task  of  the  Provisional  Revolu- 
tionary Government  consists  iq  establishing  relations  with  the 
proletariat  of  belligerent  countries  in  order  to  organise  a 
revolutionary  struggle  of  all  the  peoples  against  their  tjrrants 
and  oppressors,  against  all  monarchical  Governments  and 
capitalistic  gangs  ;  and  also  to  put  an  end  to  the  bloody  slaughter 
forced  upon  the  enslaved  peoples. 

A  similar  resolution  was  passed  on  March  24  by 
the  Moscow  Social-Democratic  Committee :  "  The  Pro- 


LENIN  AND  HIS  WATCHWORD  67 

visional  Government,  composed  of  representatives  of  the 
bourgeois  classes,  is  a  counter-revolutionary  Govern- 
ment," therefore  it  behoves  the  Social  -  Democratic 
party  to  expose  its  attempts  to  retard  the  progress  of 
the  Revolution  and  **  to  rebuild  the  entire  structure  of 
the  State  upon  a  new  basis,  in  accordance  with  the 
interest  of  revolutionary  democracy,  and  to  organise 
its  forces,  isolating  those  of  the  counter-revolution  in  the 
same  process.  By  so  doing,  we  are  paving  the  way  to 
a  transference  of  power  into  the  hands  of  the  revolu- 
tionary democracy  at  the  propitious  moment." 

Lenin  himself  brought  out  these  ideas  with  perfect 
clearness.  We  must  give  Lenin  his  due.  From  the 
very  first  he  made  no  secret  of  his  chief  aim — ^to  kindle 
a  revolution  not  only  in  Russia  but  throughout  the 
world.  All  the  rest  was  for  him  mere  by-play.  The 
Russian  people,  in  whose  name  he  spoke,  were  but  a 
tool  in  the  hand  of  this  fanatic  of  the  Revolution,  and 
Russia  herself  but  a  vast  area  for  Socialistic  experiments. 
He  often  admitted  as  much  with  absolute  frankness, 
never  concealing  his  contempt  for  moral  law,  for  which 
he  substituted  the  laws  of  economic  materialism.  His 
numerous  articles  and  pamphlets  are  full  of  open, 
deliberate  contempt  for  right  and  justice.  As  far  back 
as  1906,  Lenin  had  published  a  pamphlet,  "  The  Victory 
of  the  Cadets,  and  the  Problems  of  the  Labour  Party," 
in  which  he  expounded  the  following  views :  "  The 
scientific  meaning  of  a  dictatorship  implies  nothing  else 
than  the  idea  of  a  power,  unlimited,  absolutely  unfettered 
by  any  laws  or  regulations  and  based  directly  upon 
violence."  The  dictatorship  of  a  revolutionary  people 
closely  resembles  this  definition.  "  The  mass  of  the 
population,  formless,  accidentally  assembled  at  a  given 
place,  itself  takes  action,  judges  and  condemns,  assumes 
full  power,  creates  new  revolutionary  rights." 


68       FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

"  Is  it  well  for  the  people  to  employ  such  illegal, 
disorderly,  unsystematic  methods  of  struggle  as  the 
seizure  of  power  and  acts  of  violence  against  the  people's 
oppressors  ?  Yes,  it  is  very  well,  for  it  is  the  highest 
expression  of  a  people's  struggle  for  liberty."  This  is 
but  a  theoretical  scheme  and  it  is  doubtful  whether,  in 
drawing  it  up,  Lenin  ever  dreamed  what  ample  oppor- 
tunity would  be  granted  him  by  history  for  making  the 
experiment  of  his  arm-chair  Socialistic  theory  on  the 
living  organism  of  the  Russian  State.  The  scheme  indeed 
was  akin  to  that  of  the  Socialists  of  other  sects,  not  only 
of  the  Marxists,  whose  doctrines  are  based  on  the  idea 
of  the  dictatorship  of  the  proletariat,  but  even  of  the 
Social-Revolutionaries.  It  was  not  without  significance 
that  at  the  very  beginning -of  the  Revolution,  Chernofi, 
the  most  prominent  leader  of  the  Social-Revolutionary 
party,  when  reproached  by  the  Right  because  the  Social- 
Revolutionaries  incited  the  peasants  to  violence  against 
the  landowners  and  to  the  arbitrary  seizure  of  the  land, 
replied  :  "  That  is  quite  as  it  should  be,  it  is  the  revolu- 
tionary creation  of  right."  These  were  the  very  words 
of  Lenin.  On  April  17,  at  a  Social-Democratic  Confer- 
ence, on  the  day  following  his  triumphal  entry  into 
Petrograd,  Lenin  appeared  with  the  mien  of  a  prophet 
carrying  the  tables  of  the  Marxist  Law.  He  read  out  a 
series  of  theses,  which  according  to  him  were  to  con- 
stitute the  basis  of  party  work  in  revolutionary  Russia. 
The  programme  seemed  at  the  time  so  impossible  as  to 
be  harmless.  But  later,  when  the  power  fell  into  the 
hands  of  this  cold  and  evil  visionary,  he  embodied  these 
theses  in  Government  decrees.  Transferred  from  news- 
paper columns  to  State  documents  and  thence  into 
real  life,  these  sentences  acquired  a  new  and  terrible 
significance. 

Lenin,  first  of  all,  proclaimed  that  the  decayed  and 


LENIN  AND  HIS  WATCHWORD  69 

discordant  Social-Democratic  party  must  be  transformed 
into  a  new  and  vigorous  Communistic  party  (this  he 
accomplished  after  the  coup  d'etat) ;  that  a  new  revolu- 
tionary International  was  to  be  created  in  opposition 
to  the  International  of  the  Socialistic  Chauvinists 
(this  was  also  accomplished  with  the  aid  of  a  liberal 
expenditure  of  the  Russian  people's  money).  Lenin 
further  said :  "  Our  immediate  task  lies  not  in  the 
establishment  of  Socialism,  but  in  establishing  Soviet 
control  over  public  production  and  distribution  "  ! 

And  in  order  to  accomplish  this,  it  was  necessary  to 
"  effect  an  inmiediate  amalgamation  of  all  the  banks  in 
the  country  into  one  all-national  bank,  controlled  by  the 
Soviet."     (That  was  also  accomplished.) 

All  landed  property  belonging  to  the  landowners 
was  to  be  confiscated.  All  land  was  to  be  nationalised 
and  placed  at  the  disposal  of  local  Soviets  composed  of 
the  poorest  peasants.  (The  confiscation  was  begun 
before  the  Bolsheviks'  day.  They  only  added  the  final 
touches.  But  the  attempt  to  nationalise  proved  abortive 
because  no  one  obeyed  the  local  Soviets.)  The  estab- 
lished form  of  Government  was  not  to  be  a  parliamentary 
republic,  but  a  republic  of  Soviets  "  all  over  the  country 
from  top  to  bottom."  This  was  to  be  the  Commune- 
State,  whose  archetype  had  been  given  in  the  Paris 
Commune.  This  organisation  was,  in  fact,  established. 
Under  this  new  order,  all  police,  army,  and  officials  were 
to  be  abolished.  The  abolition  of  officials  must,  however, 
be  understood  with  qualifications,  because  the  next 
point  announced  that  officials  would  be  elected  and 
would  be  liable  to  removal,  their  salary  not  exceeding 
that  of  an  average  workman. 

Naturally,  Lenin  in  declaring  these  party  aims 
demanded  that  no  support  should  be  granted  to  the 
Provisional  Government.     "  We  must  explain  and  make 


70       FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

clear,"  he  said,  "  tlie  absolute  falsity  of  all  its  promises, 
especially  of  those  concerning  the  refusal  of  annexa- 
tions." Moreover,  as  the  war  "  under  the  new  Govern- 
ment of  LvofE  &  Co.  still  remained  a  predatory  imperial- 
istic war  owing  to  the  capitalistic  character  of  the 
Government,"  there  could  be  no  concessions  to  revolu- 
tionary defencism.  ''  The  enlightened  proletariat  can 
give  its  sanction  to  a  revolutionary  war  which  would 
really  justify  a  revolutionary  defencism  only  under  the 
following  conditions  :  (a)  the  transfer  of  power  to  the 
proletariat  and  the  poorest  peasants  ;  (b)  the  abandon- 
ment of  annexations  not  merely  in  words  but  deeds  ; 
(c)  a  complete  and  real  breach  with  all  capitalistic 
interests."  (All  these  points  appeared  at  the  time  in 
No.  28  of  Lenin's  paper,  The  Social  Democrat)  Lenin 
laid  his  views  before  a  conference  called  for  the  purpose 
of  uniting  the  Social-Democratic  party,  which  had  been 
broken  up  into  several  sections  chiefly  as  a  result  of  the 
action  of  the  Bolsheviks.  Lenin  met  with  no  success 
at  the  Conference.  He  was  laughed  at.  Some  speakers 
openly  condemned  his  tactics  as  leading  to  civil  war. 
His  proposals  were  defeated  by  115  votes  to  20.  But  in 
the  end  he  proved  right  in  his  mocking  denial  of  the 
possibility  of  uniting  all  tendencies.  As  before,  so  also 
after  the  Conference,  in  spite  of  the  frantic  efforts  of 
all  the  intellectual  groups  forming  the  Right  wing,  the 
Bolsheviks  continued  to  rule  both  in  the  Central  Com- 
mittee and  in  other  influential  party  organisations. 
Moreover,  their  appeals  moved  the  masses,  and  when  the 
masses  moved  the  rest  of  the  Socialists  had  perforce  to 
follow,  themselves  half-intoxicated  by  the  excitement  of 
agitation,  and  never  clearly  realising  what  the  Bolshevist 
danger  would  bring  to  Russia. 

The    Bolsheviks    were    entirely    at   home   in   that 
influential    body    the    Petrograd    Soviet.    Within    its 


LENIN  AND  HIS  WATCHWORD  71 

precincts  they  were  often  hotly  opposed  in  argument, 
but  they  were  treated  as  true  comrades.  The  Soviet- 
otherwise  known  as  the  Revolutionary  Democracy — 
aimed  at  "  deepening  the  Revolution,"  and  for  that 
kind  of  work  the  Bolsheviks  might  obviously  be  very 
useful. 

Almost  simultaneously  with  Lenin's  entry  into 
Petrograd,  a  Social-Democratic  Conference  at  Moscow 
accepted  all  the  Bolshevist  watchwords.  "  The  task 
of  the  working  class,"  it  declared,  "  consists  in  securing 
and  spreading  conditions  which  will  guarantee  the 
maximum  development  of  the  Revolution.  Soviets  of 
Workmen's,  Soldiers',  and  Peasants'  Deputies  must  be 
created  all  over  the  country.  .  .  .  Intense  revolutionary 
work  must  be  carried  out  in  the  army.  .  .  .  The  working 
class  will  continue  to  struggle  against  the  present 
Government's  attitude  towards  the  war,  as  it  struggled 
against  that  of  the  old  regime,  for  the  war  is  being 
conducted  in  opposition  to  the  interests  of  the  people 
and  exclusively  to  satisfy  the  predatory  instincts  of  the 
governing  classes.  .  .  .  The  publication  of  the  secret 
treaties  shall  be  demanded  and  an  end  must  be  put  to 
the  war.  An  endeavour  must  be  made  to  ensure  that 
the  democratic  Russian  Revolution  shall  immediately  be 
continued  in  the  West,  so  that  the  Western  peoples,  cast- 
ing off  the  yoke  of  the  guilty  instigators  of  the  present 
fratricidal  slaughter,  may  without  fear  of  external 
invasion  devote  their  whole  strength  to  the  struggle  for 
freedom  from  all  exploitation.  The  Russian  proletariat 
must  immediately  come  into  touch  with  the  proletariat 
of  all  belligerent  and  neutral  countries  for  the  purpose 
of  calling  an  international  conference,  which  shall 
serve  as  a  step  towards  the  regeneration  of  the  prole- 
tariat International."  (Carried  at  the  Moscow  Social- 
Democratic  Conference,  April  16-17,  1917.) 


72       FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

Lenin's  programme  together  with  this  Moscow 
resolution  form  the  basis  of  all  Bolshevist  activities  in 
Russia.  But  some  points  {e.g.  imperialistic  war  can  be 
ended  only  by  agreement  between  the  international 
proletariat ;  the  deepening  of  the  Revolution,  etc.) 
found  a  place  in  the  working  programme  of  nearly  all 
the  Socialist  parties. 

Take  the  following  instances.  The  Menshevist 
Labour  Gazette  (Rabochaya  Gazeta),  the  mouthpiece  of 
Tsereteli  and  Chheidze,  wrote  :  ''  Russian  soldiers  must 
take  the  initiative.  Upon  all  sections  of  the  front,  they 
must  in  some  way  or  another  enter  into  communication 
with  their  brothers  the  enemy  on  the  other  side  of  the 
wire  entanglements,  and  mark  the  1st  of  May  as  the 
day  of  the  first  revolutionary  armistice  "  (April  25). 
Another  number  of  the  same  paper  announced  :  "  The 
Germans  are  waiting  for  communications  concerning 
the  frontal  congress  and  have  even  sent  out  delegates. 
Communication  has  been  received  by  aeroplane  to  the 
effect  that  the  German  people  are  demanding  peace." 

The  same  paper  gives  the  following  thrilling  descrip- 
tion :  "  Troop  trains  moving  along  the  front  are  decor- 
ated with  red  flags  bearing  the  inscriptions  :  '  Down  with 
the  policy  of  grab,'  '  Long  live  the  brotherhood  of  the 
peoples.'     This  call  unites  the  army  more  and  more." 

It  should  be  noted  that  at  the  Moscow  Conference, 
where  Lenin's  influence  was  not  as  yet  directly  felt, 
several  points  were  included  in  the  resolution  which 
were  absent  from  his  programme — ^probably  at  the 
instance  of  the  Menshevil^s.  Such  are  the  points  con- 
cerning the  creation  of  Zemstvo  and  municipal  self- 
government  based  upon  universal  suffrage,  absolute 
liberty  of  the  press,  of  meetings,  unions  and  strikes. 
Probably,  even  in  his  earlier  dreams  of  power,  Lenin 
realised  that  his  scheme  for  the  compulsory  socialisation 


LENIN  AND  HIS  WATCHWORD  73 

of  life  was  incompatible  with  the  principles  of  political 
freedom,  and  cautiously  avoided  these  questions  in  all 
his  speeches  and  articles. 

Lenin  established  his  headquarters  in  the  palace  of 
the  ballet-dancer  Kchesinska,  a  house  which  popular 
rumour  had  long  since  enveloped  in  mysterious  legends 
of  dark  German  intrigue.  It  now  became  the  open 
centre  of  furious  propaganda  against  the  Russian  State. 
Here  the  Central  Committee  of  the  Social-Democratic 
party  sat  enthroned.  Here  were  gathered  all  the  threads 
of  an  energetic  and  astute  propaganda  which  soon 
stretched  its  snares  over  the  whole  front,  over  working- 
class  districts,  and  out  to  the  principal  points  of  naval 
defence.  Cronstadt  and  Helsingfors  soon  became  Bol- 
shevist military  bases.  There  they  practised  with 
impunity  that  system  of  exterminating  Russian  officers 
which  later  became  one  of  the  features  of  the  Soviet 
Government  of  the  country.  Naval  officers  were  thrown 
into  prison  and  murdered  by  the  dozen.  The  sailor 
mob  scoffed  at  them,  and  soon  the  name  of  "  Cronstadt 
sailor  "  became  for  many  a  synonym  of  cruelty  and 
crime,  though  Chemoff  and  other  representatives  of  the 
Revolutionary  Democracy  thought  fit  to  call  them 
"  the  pride  and  glory  of  the  Russian  Revolution." 

The  Bolshevist  organ  Pravda  was  published  in 
enormous  quantities  and  distributed  gratis  at  the  front. 
After  Lenin's  arrival  via  Germany  the  Bolsheviks  found 
themselves  in  funds  and  spent  them  freely.  Soldiers  and 
sailors,  sent  to  the  villages  for  party  propaganda,  boasted 
to  the  peasants  of  the  hundred-rouble  notes  which  filled 
their  pockets.  And  long  before  the  Ganetzky-Fursten- 
berg  affair  came  to  light,  popular  rumour  decided  that 
the  Bolsheviks  were  working  with  German  money, 
especially  as  their  strenuous  efforts  to  destroy  the  army 
were  so  openly  favourable  to  Germany.     At  the  street 


74       FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

meetings,  which  hummed  and  buzzed  all  over  Petrograd 
during  the  whole  summer  in  1917,  Leninist  catchwords 
were  often  repeated  by  people  speaking  very  bad 
Russian.  Indeed,  the  German  shadow  which  covered 
Russia  in  1918  was  already  clearly  visible  behind 
Bolshevist  internationalism.  The  danger  of  Bolshevism 
was  even  then  plainly  apparent. 

But  the  Revolutionary  Democracy  was  leniently 
disposed  towards  its  comrades,  endeavoured  to  smooth 
over  all  divergencies,  and  concealed  under  a  flaunting 
of  red  banners  and  a  tumult  of  Socialistic  phraseology 
the  sinister  glint  of  civil  war  that  leered  out  in  the  Bol- 
shevist propaganda.  An  extremely  characteristic  resolu- 
tion was  carried  by  the  Executive  Committee  of  the 
Soldiers'  Deputies : 

Having  discussed  the  communication  of  our  comrades 
concerning  the  spreading  of  a  propaganda  of  disorganisation 
under  cover  of  revolutionary  and  often  even  of  Social-Democratic 
flags,  particularly  the  propaganda  of  the  so-caUed  Leninists,  and 
considering  such  propaganda  no  less  pernicious  than  any  other 
counter-revolutionary  propaganda ;  at  the  same  time  con- 
sidering it  impossible  to  adopt  any  repressive  measures  against 
propaganda,  while  it  remains  mere  propaganda,  the  Executive 
Committee  of  the  Soviet  of  Soldiers'  Deputies  recognises  the 
utmost  urgency  of  adopting  a  series  of  measures  to  coimteract 
this  propaganda  with  our  own  propaganda  and  agitation. 
(April  28.) 

However  strange  it  may  sound,  some  of  the  first  to 
raise  their  voices  against  Lenin  and  all  the  false  pacifists 
who  stupefied  the  soldiers'  brains  were  the  discharged 
invalid  soldiers.  Their  Union,  organised  at  the  very 
beginning  of  the  Revolution,  deserves  special  study. 
These  men,  who  had  sacrificed  their  youth  and  health 
to  their  country,  who  had  often  passed  through  the 
degrading  hardships  of  imprisonment,  now  saw  to  their 


} 


LENIN  AND  HIS  WATCHWORD  75 

horror  that  all  their  heroism,  all  their  sacrifices  were 
being  rendered  useless  by  revolutionary  catchwords,  and 
that  obscure  and  irresponsible  talkers  were  thrusting 
Russia  under  Germany's  heel.  There  was  something 
infinitely  touching  and  tragic  in  the  sight  of  those 
cripples,  without  arms  or  legs,  blinded  and  disfigured 
by  war,  straining  every  nerve  to  prove  that  the  war 
must  be  carried  on,  that  no  liberty  was  possible  without 
victory.  Members  of  the  Disabled  Men's  Union  organ- 
ised meetings,  visited  barracks,  appealed  to  the  Govern- 
ment and  made  street  demonstrations.  On  April  29 
an  enormous  crowd  of  invalids  gathered  in  the  Kazan 
Square  and  marched  towards  the  Taurida  Palace.  The 
placards  they  carried  bore  the  inscriptions  :  "  Lenin  & 
Co.  back  to  Germany,"  "  The  Motherland  is  in  danger," 
"  Our  wounds  .call  for  victory,"  and  so  on.  As  they 
approached  the  palace  they  were  met  by  members  of 
the  Executive  Committee  of  the  Soviet. 

"  We  have  come  here  to  expose  Lenin's  tactics  and 
your  attitude  towards  him,"  declared  one  of  the  invalids. 
Skobeleff,  Tsereteli,  and  other  Soviet  orators  said  in 
reply  that  although  they  did  not  entirely  agree  with 
Lenin,  they  did  not  deem  it  possible  to  oppose  him  by 
other  than  intellectual  methods. 

Apparently  the  disabled  men  were  not  particularly 
satisfied  by  the  explanations  received  from  the  Soviet 
orators.  The  future  Minister,  M.  SkobelefE,  did  use  the 
rather  risky  phrase  that  "we  must  beat  Germany," 
but  no  one  supported  him,  while  GvozdefE,  a  prominent 
Ijabour  leader,  declared  :  "  We  consider  the  war  should 
be  ended  by  an  agreement  with  the  German  proletariat." 

After  prolonged  discussions  out  in  the  square  the 
invalids  drafted  a  lengthy  resolution,  ending  thus  : 

We  greet  our  Allies,  and  ask  them  to  beheve  that  in  unity 


76       FEOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

with  them  the  Russian  army  and  people  will  bring  the  war  to 
a  victorious  end  for  the  consolidation  of  our  newly  acquired 
liberties  and  the  self-determination  of  all  oppressed  peoples. 

Meanwhile  around  them  stood  the  young,  strong,  and 
healthy  soldiers  of  the  Petrograd  garrison  who  had 
never  yet  been  in  the  trenches,  and  smirked  contemptu- 
ously. .  .  . 

Unfortunately  not  only  the  Soviet  but  the  Govern- 
ment itself  did  not  for  a  long  time  realise  the  danger  of 
Bolshevism.  Even  the  Cadet  leader,  Milyukoff,  the 
avowed  antagonist  of  the  entire  Soviet  policy,  speaking 
at  a  meeting  a  few  days  before  his  definite  rupture  with 
them  on  the  29th  of  April,  said  :  ''  Lenin  is  a  harmful 
fanatic,  but  you  cannot  demand  that  we  should  oppose 
him  with  the  methods  of  the  old  regime."  It  was  not 
till  later  that  Milyukoff  began  to  insist  on  the  arrest  of 
Lenin  and  the  Leninists.  But  having  rejected  the 
Tsarist  methods  of  diverting  the  currents  that  threatened 
to  undermine  the  State,  the  new  Government  had  failed 
to  discover  any  other  adequate  means  of  dealing  with 
them.  Those  were  right  who  ironically  called  Prince 
LvofE's  Government  a  Tolstoyan  Government  of  non- 
resistance  to  evil.  Both  in  Soviet  and  Government 
circles  there  existed  a  childlike  certitude  that  evil  should 
be  combated  by  force  of  conviction,  that  mere  persuasion, 
without  prohibition  and  compulsory  measures,  would  be 
suflSicient  to  prevent  anarchy  from  spreading  at  the  front 
and  in  the  rear.  Meanwhile,  not  only  in  intellectual 
circles,  but  among  the  crowd  in  the  streets,  Bolshevist 
speeches  at  first  excited  indignation  and  a  desire  that 
some  power,  strong  and  just,  would  put  a  stop  to  such 
iniquity. 

When  the  Bolsheviks'  summons  to  end  the  war  with 
Germany  and  begin  the  war  against  the  Provisional 
Government  was  first  proclaimed  from  the  balcony  of 


Ill  LENIN  AND  HIS  WATCHWORD  77 

Kchesinska's  house,  it  was  received  by  the  crowd  with 
the  same  disapproval  as  were  Lenin's  speeches  at  the 
Conference.  On  the  very  first  evening  (April  25)  the 
indignant  audience  arrested  about  twenty  people  at 
the  Troitsky  Square  and  conveyed  them  to  the  militia. 
This  was  absolutely  useless,  for  those  in  authority  found 
nothing  criminal  in  such  speeches.  But  the  same  kind 
of  speeches  were  uttered  not  only  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  Kchesinska's  house,  they  could  be  heard  all  over  the 
city,  in  the  army,  throughout  the  length  and  breadth 
of  the  land.  And  they  were  often  uttered  by  strange- 
looking  men,  speaking  broken  Russian.  While  a  certain 
discipline  still  remained,  it  is  curious  to  note  how  the 
army  reacted  against  such  propaganda.  Towards  the 
end  of  May  (according  to  a  Press  Agency  telegram) 
Ensign  Kruser,  arriving  at  the  Rumanian  front  from 
Cronstadt,  preached  fraternisation  and  distrust  of  the 
Government,  and  "  even  falsely  asserted  that  the  Odessa 
Congress  of  Frontal  Delegates  demanded  annexations 
and  indemnities."  He  was  arrested  and  sent  off  to  Jassy, 
because  the  workmen  at  Skudiany  had  promised  to 
"  stain  their  hands  in  blood  "  if  he  again  dared  to  make 
an  appearance.  The  Soviet  of  Soldiers'  and  Oificers' 
Deputies  at  Jassy  denounced  his  activities  as  harmful, 
but,  "  possessing  no  means  of  counteracting  them," 
despatched  him  to  Odessa  and  decided  "  to  appeal  to 
the  press  in  order  to  devise  some  means  of  opposing 
such  pernicious  agitation."  This  was  but  one  of 
countless  cases.  Yet  how  could  effective  means  of 
counter-action  be  found,  when  every  attempt  to  restrict 
the  irresponsible  agitation  at  the  front  met  with  indignant 
resistance  from  the  Soviet,  and  when  Generals  who  dared 
to  point  out  the  danger  of  such  propaganda  were  branded 
in  the  Izvestia  and  other  organs  of  the  Revolutionary 
Democracy  as  counter-revolutionaries?     At  the  same 


78       FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

time,  the  Germans  and  Austrians  lent  vigorous  aid  to 
this  extreme  Socialistic  propaganda.  They  propagated 
Bolshevist  ideas  in  proclamations  sown  broadcast  along 
the  front,  and  in  newspapers  printed  in  Germany  and 
Vienna  in  Russian.  These  papers  were  distributed  not 
only  among  the  prisoners,  but  among  the  soldiers  in  the 
trenches.  For  instance,  the  Berlin  Russian  Messenger, 
in  its  issue  of  April  27,  wrote  : 

Aided  by  the  English,  a  clique  of  deputies  to  the  Duma  have 
seized  the  power  and  formed  a  Provisional  Government.  The 
new  Cadet  party  is  preventing  the  workmen  from  taking  the 
power  into  their  own  hands,  and,  after  ridding  Russia  of  Enghsh 
aggression  and  the  supremacy  of  Enghsh  capital,  proclaiming  a 
social  republic  and  making  peace. 

The  Central  Powers  were  therefore  already  engaged 
in  active  propaganda,  incriminating  the  Provisional 
Government  and  advertising  Lenin  and  his  catchwords. 
This  strange  coincidence  between  the  ideas  of  the 
extreme  Russian  Socialists  and  those  of  the  official 
propagandists  of  His  Majesty  the  Emperor  of  Germany 
has  more  than  once  been  commented  upon  by  the  Russian 
Press,  and  not  only  in  the  bourgeois  papers. 

Plekhanoff's  small  but  lively  and  patriotic  paper. 
Unity  (Edinstvo),  carried  on  a  passionate  campaign  of 
accusation.  One  of  the  oldest  Russian  revolutionary 
emigres,  Leo  Deutch,  published  in  this  paper  information 
concerning  Trotsky's  propaganda  in  America.  Deutch 
justly  called  him  "  a  hater  of  Russia."  Madame  KoUon- 
tai's  activities  in  America  were  contemporary  with  those 
of  Trotsky.  ''  Her  tirades  against  us  (t.e.  against 
Defencist-Socialists)  were,"  said  Deutch,  "  so  revolt- 
ing that  Russian  workmen  in  several  towns  expressed, 
both  by  word  of  mouth  and  in  the  press,  the  sus- 
picion that  perhaps  she  had  been  expressly  sent  by 


( 


LENIN  AND  HIS  WATCHWORD  79 

German  Socialists  for  the  purpose  of  whitewasliing 
German  Social-Democrats,  by  calumny  directed  against 
those  who  advocated  the  defence  of  the  ravaged 
countries." 

But  all  these  warnings  and  facts  were  ignored  by 
the  Revolutionary  Democracy,  and  indeed  rather  tended 
to  enhance  their  friendliness  towards  the  Bolsheviks, 
whom  they  always  exalted  as  their  comrades-in-ideas. 
Soviet  leaders  and  journalists  defended  Lenin  and  his 
satellites  at  meetings  and  in  the  Socialist  Press,  and 
all  attempts  to  disclose  the  poisonous  substance  of 
Bolshevism  were  branded  as  bourgeois  calumny. 

Lenin  himself  felt  no  scruples  in  attacking  the 
Socialist  Centre,  and  did  so  with  great  polemic  astuteness. 

In  May  he  issued  a  pamphlet  entitled  "  Political 
Parties  in  Russia  and  the  Task  of  the  Proletariat,"  in 
which,  in  the  form  of  questions  and  answers,  he  gave 
character-sketches  of  both  the  bourgeois  and  Socialistic 
parties.  His  estimate  of  the  latter  was  ironical.  To  a 
question  as  to  the  attitude  of  the  Social-Democrats  and 
the  Social-Revolutionaries  towards  Socialism  he  gave 
the  following  answer :  "  They  stand  for  Socialism,  but 
to  think  of  it  now  and  to  take  immediate  practical  steps 
towards  its  realisation  they  have  not  the  courage,  for 
they  think  that  would  be  premature."  The  Bolsheviks, 
on  the  contrary,  are  all  for  trying  to  bring  about  Social- 
ism forthwith,  beginning  by  the  seizure  of  all  land  and 
the  nationalisation  of  the  banks.  Lenin  gives  a  sarcastic 
definition  of  the  non-Bolshevist  Socialists'  attitude 
towards  the  seizure  of  power.  "  If  the  Soviets  alone 
seize  power  we  shall  be  threatened  with  anarchy.  For 
the  time  being,  leave  power  to  the  capitalists,  and  the 
Contact-Commission  to  the  Soviet."  The  Contact- 
Commission  served  as  a  link  between  the  Revolutionary 
Democracy   and   the   Government.     Lenin   invariably 


80       FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LIT0V8K       oh. 

insisted  that  no  contact  was  necessary,  because  the 
Government  should  not  be  supported ;  "  the  people 
should  be  prepared  for  the  sole  and  absolute  power  of 
the  Soviets,"  and  "  all  propaganda,  agitation,  and 
organisation  should  be  directed  towards  the  delegation 
of  all  power  to  the  Soviets  in  the  immediate  future." 

The  Cadets,  Lenin  declared,  though  enemies,  were  at 
any  rate  straightforward.  But  those  whom  he  called 
Defencist-Socialists,  he  urged,  while  agreeing  with  the 
Bolsheviks  in  words,  drew  back  timidly  before  the 
necessity  of  at  last  suiting  the  action  to  the  word. 
And  he  exposed  the  ambiguity  of  their  attitude  with 
the  ruthless  familiarity  of  an  old  fellow-worker.  He 
accorded  the  same  treatment  to  the  Social-Revolu- 
tionaries and  to  the  non-Bolshevist  Social-Democrats, 
although  these  latter  still  regarded  themselves  as  being 
members  of.  one  undivided  party,  to  which  the  Bol- 
sheviks also  belonged. 

Lenin's  description  of  the  attitude  adopted  by  the 
Social  -  Revolutionaries  and  the  Social  -  Democrats 
towards  the  war  is  as  follows :  "  We  are  generally 
opposed  to  imperialistic  war,  but  are  ready  to  let  our- 
selves be  duped,  and  will  call  the  support  we  offer  to 
the  imperialistic  war  conducted  by  the  Guchkoff- 
Milyukoff  &  Co.  Government  by  the  name  of  revolu- 
tionary defencism."  And  as  to  fraternisation,  their 
attitude  was  :  *'  Yes,  it  is  useful.  But  we  are  not  all 
of  us  convinced  that  such  fraternisation  ought  to  be 
encouraged  at  once  in  all  belligerent  countries."  He 
himself  was  certainly  decidedly  against  the  war  and  for 
fraternisation.  ''It  is  useful  and  absolutely  necessary. 
It  is  urgently  necessary  to  encourage  attempts  at 
fraternisation  between  soldiers  of  both  belligerent  sides 
in  all  belligerent  countries." 

Only  on  the  question  of  army  organisation,  more 


LENIN  AND  HIS  WATCHWORD  81 

particularly  of  that  of  the  election  of  officers,  was  he 
ready  to  grant  that  his  Socialist  comrades  possessed  a 
definite  view.  Their  answer  was  brief.  "  Elections 
must  take  place."  The  Bolshevist  answer  was  more 
lengthy.  "  Not  only  must  officers  be  elected,  but  every 
step  of  an  officer  or  general  must  be  controlled  by  soldiers 
specially  elected  for  the  purpose."  To  the  question  : 
"  Is  the  arbitrary  dismissal  of  superiors  useful  ?  "  Lenin 
made  the  Social-Democrats  and  Social-Revolutionaries 
answer  :  "  Yes,  it  is  useful ;  but  it  remains  uncertain 
whether  the  dismissal  must  take  place  before  referring 
to  the  Contact-Commission  or  vice  versa.''  The  Bol- 
sheviks asserted  :  ''  It  is  useful  and  necessary  in  every 
way.    Soldiers  obey  and  respect  only  elected  superiors." 

Thus  point  by  point  Lenin  not  only  expounded  the 
views  of  his  party,  but  also  his  attitude  towards  that 
section  of  the  Revolutionary  Democracy  which,  at  that 
time,  still  played  the  leading  part.  His  subsequent 
behaviour  was  but  the  logical  outcome  of  all  his  actions 
and  declarations. 

It  was  futile  after  the  November  coup  d'etat  for  the 
defeated  Socialist  centre  to  raise  the  cry  that  the  Bol- 
sheviks were  traitors.  They  acted  openly  right  through, 
and  it  was  easy  enough  to  understand  what  deeds 
would  be  the  tragic  outcome  of  the  interminable  torrent 
of  speeches  so  often  uttered  in  imison  by  both  the  Right 
and  the  Left  Socialist  wings.  Upon  one  point  only  in  the 
above-quoted  pamphlet  did  Lenin's  words  differ  from 
his  subsequent  action.  "  Must  the  Constituent  Assembly 
be  convoked  ?  "  he  asked.  According  to  him,  the  Cadets 
did  not  desire  to  fix  a  date.  The  Social-Democrats  and 
the  Social-Revolutionaries  wished  it  to  be  called  as  soon 
as  possible,  but  were  unable  to  insist  upon  the  date 
being  fixed.  The  Bolsheviks  were  .the  only  ones  to 
desire  a  speedy  convocation.    "  There  is,  however,"  said 

G 


82      FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK     ch.  m 

Lenin,  "  only  one  guarantee  of  the  success  of  the  Con- 
stituent Assembly  :  the  increase  in  numbers  and  in 
strength  of  the  Soviets,  the  organisation  and  arming  of 
the  working  masses." 

Curiously  enough,  although  the  pamphlet  was 
published  in  May,  after  the  formation  of  the  Coalition 
Cabinet  with  a  Socialist  majority,  Lenin  did  not  modify 
his  acrid  criticism  of  his  ''  comrades-in-ideas."  On  the 
contrary,  he  added  a  note  declaring  that  the  pamphlet 
was  by  no  means  out-of-date,  '^  because  the  Contact- 
Commission  has  not  disappeared,  but  has  only  passed 
into  the  adjacent  room,  that  of  Messrs.  the  Ministers. 
That  Chernoff  and  Tsereteli  have  passed  into  another 
room  does  not  signify  that  their  policy  or  that  of  their 
party  has  changed." 

He  was  displeased  with  their  policy  of  words  without 
deeds,  but  "  in  view  of  the  undoubted  honesty  of  the 
great  mass  of  revolutionary  defencists,"  he  appealed  to 
his  comrades  to  explain  to  them  patiently  and  per- 
sistently "  the  indissoluble  links  uniting  capital  and 
imperialistic  war,  to  prove  that  it  was  only  by  over- 
throwing capital  that  they  could  without  violence 
achieve  a  truly  democratic  peace." 


CHAPTER  IV 

THE   FIRST  GOVERNMENT  CRISIS 

Shulgin  and  Tsereteli — ^Whence  is  the  danger  ? — Crisis  because  of  the 
word  "victory" — Resignation  of  MilyukofiE  and  GuchkofE — The 
Coalition  Ministry — ^The  Declaration  of  the  new  Government  and 
the  Zimmerwald  formulae — The  Sociahst  Ministers — ^Alexieffs  speech 
— His  retirement  of  the  post  of  GeneraUssimo. 

In  the  spring  of  1917  the  Revolutionary  Democracy  was 
blind  both  to  the  danger  of  Bolshevism  and  to  the 
military  peril.  Of  this  we  have  clear  evidence  in  the 
speech  delivered  on  May  10  by  the  Soviet  leader, 
Tsereteli,  a  Menshevik,  at  the  extraordinary  meeting 
of  the  four  State  Dumas,  which  reviewed  the  events  of 
the  first  two  months  of  the  Revolution.  This  first  public 
meeting,  the  first  public  skirmish  between  the  two 
principal  political  groups — the  Socialists  and  the  bour- 
geoisie— coincided  with  the  first  Ministerial  crisis. 

Warning  voices  sounded  from  the  Right.  They 
emphasised  the  German  peril  in  view  of  the  growing 
disruption  of  the  army,  pointed  to  the  spread  of  anarchy 
throughout  the  country,  the  land  riots  fraught  with  the 
menace  of  starvation,  and  the  ambiguous  position  of 
the  Government. 

The  Kiev  Deputy,  Shulgin,  a  courageous  and  able 
patriot,  said  in  his  pointed  way  :  "  The  Tsar's  Govern- 
ment is  shut  up  in  the  fortress  of  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul, 
while  the  Provisional  Government  is  under  domiciliary 

83 


84       FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

arrest.  A  keeper  is  appointed  to  guard  it  with  the 
instruction, '  Keep  a  sharp  look  out ;  they  are  bourgeois, 
they  must  be  closely  watched.'  "  Shulgin  spoke  of  the 
criminal  incitement  of  soldiers  against  the  officers,  of 
the  open  street  propaganda  against  the  Allies,  par- 
ticularly against  England,  adding  that  all  this  pacifist 
propaganda  among  the  ignorant  masses  emanated  from 
Lenin  and  "  his  pack." 

Tsereteli's  response  was  imbued  with  the  spirit  of 
the  Zimmerwald  Conference  and  its  denial  of  a  class- 
truce  during  war-time.  "  The  so-called  defence  of  the 
Fatherland  in  the  present  war  is  nothing  but  a  fraud, 
aiming  at  subjugating  the  people  to  the  service  of 
Imperialism,"  declared  the  manifesto  of  the  second 
Zimmerwald  Conference.  This,  too,  was  the  standpoint 
from  which  Tsereteli  estimated  the  war  and  Russia's 
relations  with  her  Allies.  ''  Everything  for  the  war," 
said  Shulgin  in  his  speech.  The  spokesman  of  the  Soviet 
objected  that  this  was  "  the  motto  of  the  autocracy, 
to  whom  war  was  both  an  aim  and  a  means."  From  the 
Benches  of  Deputies  he  was  reminded  that  in  England 
and  France  that  was  the  motto  of  the  whole  nation. 
But  Tsereteli  did  not  believe  that  unity  between  the 
people  and  the  Government  could  exist  anyivhere,  even 
in  free  countries.  "  The  French  and  English  nations 
are  one  thing,  and  the  Imperialistic  gang  another,  and 
you  will  soon  see  this  proved  there  as  triumphantly  as 
in  Russia.  We  are  profoundly  convinced  that  the 
English  working  classes  will  direct  the  policy  of  their 
Ministers  in  conformity  with  their  class  interests." 
Tsereteli  did  not  wish  "  to  re-establish  the  formula  of 
the  destruction  of  German  imperialism,"  because  "  the 
destruction  of  a  foreign  country's  imperialism  by  armed 
force  is  the  surest  way  of  implanting  imperialism  and 
barbarism  in  one's  own  country."    The  idea  of  vanquish- 


THE  FIRST  GOVERNMENT  CRISIS         85 

ing  the  Germans  was  as  abhorrent  to  him  as  it  was  to 
the  Bolsheviks.    Like  them,  he  did  not  so  much  desire 
to  fight  as  to  "  apply  the  utmost  endeavours  to  provoke 
a  certain  corresponding  (revolutionary)  movement  in 
other  countries."    Yet,  at  the  same  time,  he  expressed 
the  assurance  that  *'  so  long  as  our  country  was  threatened 
by  the  invasion  of  imperialistic  armies,  the  Russian 
Democracy  would  stand  firm  for  the  defence  of  its 
liberty,  and  no  wavering  would  be  possible  in  the  ranks 
of  the  army."    Not  only  the  Stavka  (Headquarters),  but 
all  the  Generals,  and  even  the  Army  Committees  ex- 
pressed alarm  at  the  growing  disintegration  of  the  army. 
But  Tsereteli  simply  did  not  believe  these  rumours,^ 
just  as  he  declined  to  believe  that  Lenin  was  leading 
Russia  to  civil  war.    **  I  do  not  agree  with  Lenin  and 
his  propaganda,"  said  Prince  Tsereteli,  "  but  Deputy 
Shulgin's  words  are  a  calunmy  against  Lenin.     Lenin 
has  never  preached  anything  preventing  the  onward 
march  of  the  Revolution.    Lenin  is  conducting  a  propa- 
ganda of  ideas  and  principles  which  is  nourished  by 
such  demonstrations  as  that  of  Shulgin  and  the  so-called 
moderate  propertied  elements.    Thus  the  possibility  of 
an  agreement  with  the  bourgeoisie  is  eliminated.   Accord- 
ing to  Lenin's  standpoint,  when  the  bourgeoisie  becomes 
incapable  of  dealing  with  problems  concerning  the  entire 
State,  it  must  be  set  aside  and  the  Soviet  of  Workmen's 
and  Soldiers'  Deputies  assume  full  power.     If  Shulgin's 
ideas  were  shared  by  all  the  bourgeoisie,  then  I  must 
say  that  the  only  hope  for  Russia's  salvation  lies  in  the 

P  ■  *  Tsereteli's  thoughtless  "  I  do  not  believe  it  "  was  cruelly  avenged  by 
merciless  fate.  After  the  Bolshevist  coup  d'itat  he  was  obliged  to  escape  to 
Georgia.  Only  after  witnessing  the  sufferings  of  his  own  Georgian  people  did 
he  realise  the  meaning  of  Bolshevism.  On  June  15,  1918,  he  printed  a  letter 
in  the  Izvestia  of  Tiflis,  describing  how  the  demoralised  army  plundered  the 
country,  sold  arms  and  munitions  to  the  enemy,  disarmed  the  national  troops, 
and^hoWjBolsheviks  scattered  ruin  and  death  wherever  they  went.  Then  only 
Tsereteli  and  his  Social-Democratic  comrades  understood — and  preferred  the 
friendship  of  German  Generals,  surrendering  Georgia  to  the' German  yoke. 


86       FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

dictatorship  of  the  proletariat  and  the  peasants.  Such 
ideas  as  Shulgin's  constitute  the  only  real  menace  of 
civil  war." 

Subsequent  events  showed  the  lamentable  short- 
sightedness of  Tsereteli.  It  was  not  the  bourgeoisie 
but  Lenin  and  his  satellites  who  unchained  the  demons 
of  civil  war  in  Russia.  But  the  Revolutionary  Demo- 
cracy, intoxicated  with  the  new  wine  of  liberty,  looked 
only  to  the  Right  for  its  enemies,  expected  blows  to  come 
only  from  that  quarter,  and  hastened  to  put  into  practice 
all  its  cherished  watchwords,  all  the  resolutions  adopted 
at  once  obscure  and  unpopular  but  very  long-winded 
Socialistic  meetings  and  congresses. 

The  Ministerial  crisis  which  took  place  in  May  was 
a  manifestation  of  that  distrust  of  the  "  Right  "  parties 
which  was  so  skilfully  and  persistently  fanned  into  flame 
by  the  Bolsheviks.  This  time  the  word  "  victory,"  used 
by  the  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  P.  MilyukofE,  in  a  Note 
addressed  to  the  Allied  countries,  served  as  a  motive  for 
the  crisis.  From  the  very  beginning  of  the  Revolution 
this  word  was  regarded  in  Soviet  circles  as  counter- 
revolutionary. On  March  30,  for  instance,  the  Izvestia 
published  an  article  advising  the  soldiers  taking  part  in 
manifestations  to  replace  on  their  banners  the  motto 
"  War  until  Victory  "  by  that  of  "  War  for  Liberty." 

A  demonstration  was  organised  against  MilyukofE 
on  account  of  his  Note  declaring  that  "  the  entire 
Russian  people  aspired  to  continue  the  war  until  final 
victory."  The  Bolsheviks  started  their  agitation  in 
the  barracks.  On  May  3  a  section  of  the  Finland 
Regiment  marched  up  to  the  Marie  Palace,  where 
the  Government  sat,  carrying  placards  with  the  in- 
scriptions :  "  Down  with  annexations,"  "  Down  with 
the  Government,"  "  Down  with  MilyukofE  and  GuchkofE." 
They  were  joined  by  other  military  units,  but  a  strong 


THE  FIRST  GOVERNMENT  CRISIS         87 

counter-demonstration  was  at  once  organised  in  support 
of  MilyukofE  and  the  Government.  Hot  disputes  for 
and  against  the  Government  raged  at  street  meetings. 
Soviet  orators  came  to  the  palace  and  urged  the  soldiers 
to  disperse.  General  Korniloff,  Commander  of  the 
Petrograd  Military  District,  also  appeared  in  the  square. 
*'  You  represent  an  armed  people,"  he  said.  ''  Therein 
lies  your  strength.  But  you  are  also  weak,  because  you 
are  not  as  well-disciplined  as  good  troops  should  be. 
Then  try  to  be  not  merely  an  armed  crowd,  but  a  real, 
well-disciplined  army." 

The  demonstrators  dispersed.  But  the  instigators 
of  the  demonstration  won  the  day.  A  split  was  created 
in  the  Provisional  Government.  The  Executive  Com- 
mittee of  the  Soviet,  which  from  the  first  had  looked 
suspiciously  on  the  firm  patriotism  of  Guchkoff  and 
MilyukofE,  secured  their  resignation. 

The  Izvestia  did  not  conceal  its  joy  when  the  Minister 
of  War,  GuchkofF,  resigned  on  the  15th  of  May  and 
MilyukofE  on  the  16th. 

This  important  Government  change  was  welcomed 
with  equal  rejoicing  by  the  Berlin  Press. 

In  point  of  fact  it  was  but  the  first  step  towards 
the  realisation  of  the  Bolshevist  demand — full  power  to 
the  Soviets.  The  Bolshevist  Central  Committee  of  the 
Social-Democratic  party  exerted  a  very  resolute  pressure 
upon  its  less  energetic  comrades  in  order  to  achieve 
this  end.  The  Pravda  published  a  lengthy  appeal  from 
the  Social-Democrats  to  the  soldiers  of  all  belligerent 
countries  calling  upon  them  to  put  an  immediate  end 
to  the  "  imperialistic  robbers'  war."  "  The  Russian 
Provisional  Government,"  wrote  the  Pravda,  "  published 
on  the  3rd  of  May  a  Note  confirming  the  old  predatory 
treaties,  and  expresses  its  readiness  to  continue  the  war 
until    complete    victory    is    attained,    thereby    raising 


88       FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

indignation  even  among  those  who  have  hitherto  trusted 
and  supported  it."  The  Pravda  therefore  demands  the 
transfer  of  power  to  the  revolutionary  Soviets  by  means 
of  a  workmen's  revolution.  The  appeal  ends  with  a 
new  war-cry  :  "  Peace  to  the  huts,  War  to  the  palaces  1 
Hurrah  for  Socialism  !  " 

Simultaneously  with  this  open  summons  to  civil  war 
the  Bolsheviks  wrote : 

Party  agitators  and  orators  must  refute  the  dastardly  lies  of 
the  capitalists  and  capitalist  papers,  accusing  us  of  being  the 
instigators  of  civil  war.  .  .  .  Party  agitators  must  again  and 
agaiQ  protest  against  the  hideous  calumnies  spread  by  capitalists, 
that  our  party  is  advocating  a  separate  peace  with  Germany. 
We  consider  William  II.  just  such  another  crowned  robber  deserv- 
ing of  execution  as  Nicholas  II.,  and  the  German  Guchkoffs  and 
German  capitalists  as  being  robbers,  grabbers,  and  imperialists 
as  much  as  Russian,  English  and  all  other  capitaUsts.  We  are 
opposed  to  negotiations  with  capitaUsts.  We  stand  for  negotia- 
tions and  fraternisation  between  the  revolutionary  workmen  and 
soldiers  of  all  countries.  We  are  firmly  persuaded  that  the 
Guchkoff-Milyukoff  Government  are  trying  to  render  the  situation 
more  acute  because  they  know  that  the  workmen's  revolution  is 
beginning  in  Germany,  and  "  this  revolution  will  strike  a  blow 
at  the  capitaUsts  of  aU  countries." 

All  the  subsequent  work  of  the  Bolsheviks 
demonstrated  the  hypocrisy  of  these  protests.  Both 
separate  peace  and  civil  war  were  but  the  logical 
consequences  of  their  agitation.  But  in  the  spring  of 
1917  the  masses  of  soldiers  and  workmen,  simple- 
minded,  ignorant,  bewildered  by  unintelligible  foreign 
words,  intoxicated  by  demagogic  promises,  firmly 
believed  that  it  suflSced  but  to  put  all  the  "  downs  " 
into  practice  for  the  war  to  end  as  if  by  magic,  and 
every  workman  to  become  a  gentleman.  Committee 
meetings  and  conferences,  all  packed  with  soldiers, 
adopted  without  demur  the  most  extreme  resolutions, 


THE  FIRST  GOVERNMENT  CRISIS         89 

particularly  those  which  promised  a  speedy  peace. 
Resolutions  rose  everywhere,  like  bubbles  on  the 
water's  surface.  Workmen,  schoolboys,  servant-maids, 
doctors,  soldiers'  wives,  railway-guards,  sextons — all 
hastened  to  embody  their  particular  needs  and  new- 
born political  ideas  in  lengthy  and  often  quite  amusing 
resolutions.  But  the  Soviets  lent  an  attentive  ear  to 
all  these  chance  decisions  of  chance  meetings. 

After  the  resignation  of  Milyukoff  and  Guchkofi  the 
Provisional  Government  found  themselves  definitely  in 
the  power  of  the  Soviet,  which  Could  no  longer  maintain 
the  attitude  of  an  irresponsible  critic.  The  formation  of 
a  Coalition  Government  with  the  participation  of 
Socialists  became  inevitable.  The  Bolsheviks,  led  by 
Trotsky,  who  by  that  time  had  returned  from  abroad, 
protested  very  sharply  against  the  coalition  headed  by 
the  bourgeois  Prince  Lvoff,  and  even  then  urged  the 
Soviet  to  take  the  power  into  its  own  hands.  But  the 
Soviet  would  not  go  so  far  and  only  introduced  five  of 
its  members  into  the  Government — ChemofE,  Peshek- 
honofi,  Skobeleff,  Tsereteli,  and  PereverzefE.  The  new 
Cabinet  was  composed  of  six  Socialists  (including 
Kerensky),  four  Cadets,  and  four  non-party  members.^ 

Since,  however,  one  of  the  Cadets,  Nekrasofi,  and  the 
Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs,  Tereshchenko,  frequently 
voted  with  the  Socialists,  all  the  power  was  practically 
concentrated  in  the  Socialists'  hands,  in  so  far  at  least 
as  the  Provisional  Government  represented  a  power. 

*  The  names  of  the  members  of  the  new  Cabinet  were  :  (1)  Premier  and 
Minister  of  the  Interior,  Prince  Lvoff ;  (2)  Minister  of  Labour,  Skobeleff 
(S.D.) ;  (3)  Minister  of  Justice,  Pereverzeflf  (S.R.) ;  (4)  Agriculture,  Chemoff 
(S.R.) ;  (5)  Supplies,  Peshekhonoflf  (Pop.-Soc.) ;  (6)  War  and  Marine,  Kerensky 
(S.R.) ;  (7)  Social  Assistance,  Prijice  Shakhovskoy  (Cadet);  (8)  Finance, 
Shingareff  (Cadet) ;  (9)  Post  and  Telegraph,  Tsereteli  (S.D.) ;  (10)  Commerce 
and  Industry,  KonovaloflF  (Progressist);  (11)  Foreign  Affairs,  Tereshchenko 
(non-party);  (12)  Railways  and  Communications,  Nekrasoff  (Cadet);  (13) 
state-Controller,  Godneff  (Oct.);  (14)  Education,  Manuiloff  (Cadet);  (14) 
Synod  Lvoff  (Oct.). 


90       FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

What  the  aims  of  these  new  statesmen  were,  and 
what  was  their  conception  of  their  duties  towards  the 
destiny  of  the  Russian  people,  may  be  gathered  from 
the  declarations  of  the  Executive  Committee  and  the 
Provisional  Government  respectively. 

On  entering  the  Provisional  Government  the  representatives 
of  the  Soviet,  while  associatbig  themselves  with  the  general 
and  insistent  aspirations  for  the  consolidation  of  liberty,  have 
imposed  on  themselves  the  following  task  :  to  pursue  an  active 
foreign  policy  openly  aiming  at  a  speedy  conclusion  of  peace 
based  upon  the  self-determination  of  peoples,  without  annexa- 
tions and  indemnities  ;  and  more  particularly  the  preparation  of 
negotiations  with  the  Allies  for  a  revision  of  the  agreement  based 
upon  the  declaration  of  the  Provisional  Government  of  May  9 
(April  27). 

Thus  spoke  the  Executive  Committee. 

The  declaration  of  the  Coalition  Government,  dated 
May  19,  repeated  the  same  words  with  regard  to  a 
speedy  conclusion  of  peace  (without  annexations  and 
contributions,  based  upon  the  self-determination  of  the 
peoples).  This  was  the  first  occasion  on  which  an 
official  document  of  the  Russian  Government  quoted 
a  part  of  the  formula  which  formed  the  basis  of  the 
invitation  to  the  third  Zimmerwald  Conference.  This 
invitation  had  been  sent  out  by  the  Swiss  Socialist, 
Robert  Grimm,  to  all  parties  and  organisations  that 
accepted  the  programme  of  "  a  fight  against  the  party 
truce  ;  the  renewal  of  class  war  ;  a  demand  for  an 
immediate  armistice,  and  conclusion  of  peace  without 
annexation  and  indemnities  based  upon  the  free  self- 
determination  of  the  nations."  After  the  Brest  peace 
the  tragic  irony  of  this  formula  appeared  in  all  its 
nakedness.  But  every  discerning  mind  had  perceived  it 
long  before,  and  a  large  section  of  the  Press  and  such 
politicians  as  MilyukofE,  Kropotkin,  Plekhanoff,  Potresoff, 


THE  FIRST  GOVERNMENT  CRISIS         91 

and  Korolenko  strained  every  nerve  to  disclose  the 
madness  and  criminality  of  such  watchwords  in  Russia, 
where  the  enemy  occupied  vast  stretches  of  territory 
inhabited  by  small  nations  whose  right  to  self-deter- 
mination would  certainly  not  be  granted  by  victorious 
German  troops.  It  was  a  hopeless  struggle.  No  amount 
of  logical  argument  could  overcome  the  academic 
socialistic  prejudices  which  held  far  more  powerful  sway 
over  the  minds  of  the  Revolutionary  Democracy  than 
all  the  realities  of  Russia's  internal,  external,  and,  in 
particular,  of  her  military  situation. 

The  Revolutionary  Democracy  sank  ever  deeper  into 
the  mire  of  Bolshevist  formulae  which,  disguised  or 
imdisguised,  pervaded  the  Soviet  declarations.  The 
second  point  of  the  declaration  of  the  Executive  Com- 
mittee that  explained  the  reason  for  the  Socialists 
joining  the  Government  demanded  "  the  democratisa- 
tion  of  the  army,  the  organisation  and  strengthening  of 
the  fighting  forces,  and  of  their  capacity  for  defensive 
and  offensive  operations  in  order  to  avert  a  possible 
defeat  of  Russia  and  her  Allies,  an  eventuality  not  only 
fraught  with  the  greatest  calamities  for  all  nations  but 
one  which  would  render  impossible  the  conclusion  of 
universal  peace  based  upon  the  above-mentioned 
principles." 

Admitting  in  word  that  the  defeat  of  Russia  and 
the  Allies  would  spell  calamity  to  all  mankind,  the 
Soviet  politicians  with  a  kind  of  frenzied  fury  went  on 
destroying  the  spirit  and  body  of  the  army.  Demo- 
cratisation  and  the  elective  principle,  thoughtless  or  pro- 
vocative committees  and  meetings  and  talk  of  a  speedy 
peace,  loosened  organisation  and  discipline  in  the  army, 
and  darkened  the  soul  of  the  weary  Russian  soldier. 

In  their  first  reports  to  the  Soviet  (May  26)  the 
Socialist  Ministers  stated  their  method  for  carrying  out 


92       FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

the  Soviet's  principles  of  home  and  foreign  policy. 
Tsereteli  announced  that,  despite  the  predictions  of 
their  antagonists,  nothing  alarming  had  occurred  in 
foreign  politics  ;  they  had  been  neither  obliged  "  to 
capitulate  before  the  Allies,  nor  to  seek  the  way  of  a 
separate  peace."  (This  was  said  a  week  after  the 
Socialists  had  entered  the  Government.)  He  described 
the  visit  of  the  Socialist  Ministers  to  the  British 
Ambassador,  whom  they  had  asked  whether  he  did  not 
find  the  time  ripe  for  a  revision  of  the  treaties.  They 
had  told  the  Ambassador  that  they  *'  acted  not  only 
through  diplomatic  channels,  but  tried  to  get  into 
touch  with  all  the  democracies  of  the  world,"  which 
would,  according  to  Tsereteli,  follow  revolutionary 
Russia.  As  Sir  George  Buchanan  made  no  response, 
Tsereteli  was  of  opinion  that  their  first  step  in  foreign 
policy  might  be  considered  a  success. 

It  is  hard  to  refrain  from  a  bitter  smile  on  reading 
the  report  of  this  naive  conversation  now,  when  it  has 
become  so  clearly  apparent  how  these  infants  in  states- 
manship, playing  at  international  politics,  were  only 
paving  the  way  for  the  Bolshevist  state-criminals  who 
were  stealthily  watching  for  their  turn.  At  the  same 
meeting  of  the  Soviet,  after  Tsereteli's  ingenuous  report 
on  his  diplomatic  achievements,  the  new  Minister  of 
Labour,  the  Social-Democrat  M.  Skobelefi,  made  a  still 
more  naive  declaration :  "I  had  meant  to  go  to  the 
Zimmerwald  Conference,"  he  said,  "  and  now  I  am  a 
Minister." 

According  to  him,  before  his  time  the  affairs  of 
State  were  conducted  by  ignoramuses,  and  Russia  was 
being  ruined.  Everything  must  be  altered,  all  branches 
of  social  life  interfered  with.  The  position  of  the  labour- 
ing masses  must  first  of  all  be  ameliorated,  and  to  this 
end  all  the  revenues  of  the  banks  and  commercial 


IV  THE  FIRST  GOVERNMENT  CRISIS         93 

enterprises  should  be  taken  over.  Propertied  classes 
should  be  taxed  up  to  100  per  cent.  "  If  capital  desires 
to  hold  to  the  bourgeois  system  of  economics,  let  it 
work  without  interest."  Shareholders,  bankers,  and 
factory-owners  would  call  upon  the  Government,  lay 
down  their  registers  and  keys,  and  say,  "  Take  over 
our  business  and  do  as  you  will."  "  But  we  know," 
Skobelefi  answered,  "  when  and  what  to  take.  We 
must  force  these  gentlemen  to  submit  to  the  state  and 
establish  for  them  a  labour  conscription.  It  was  their 
duty,  that  is  to  say,  to  remain  in  their  positions  at  the 
command  of  the  Government."  Such  was  the  scheme  of 
the  Minister  of  Labour  for  saving  Russia  from  ruin. 
In  the  same  breath  he  defended  the  workmen  accused 
of  a  "  democratisation  of  profiteering,"  i,e,  of  presenting 
economic  demands  which  destroyed  all  production. 
His  defence  was  extremely  biassed.  In  reality  the 
workmen's  excessive  demands  had  already,  in  the  spring 
of  1917,  undermined  Russian  industry.  The  Anarchist 
Bleichman  praised  the  speech  of  the  Minister  of  Labour, 
declaring  that  it  was  in  accordance  with  Lenin's  prin- 
ciples. But  both  the  Anarchists  and  Trotsky  thought 
that  the  Socialists  had  played  long  enough  at  supporting 
a  coalition,  and  that  the  Soviet  should  now  be  given  full 
power.  In  that  respect  they  were  more  logical  than  the 
Socialist  Ministers,  who  did  not  wish  themselves  or  the 
Soviet  to  be  wholly  responsible  ;  and  while  inciting  the 
masses  to  a  struggle  against  the  capitalists  and  land- 
owners, considered  that  the  bourgeoisie  must  share  their 
responsibility. 

In  order  to  dispel  all  doubts  as  to  the  adherence  of 
the  new  Socialist  Ministers  to  the  Zimmerwald  pro- 
gramme, the  Soviet  department  for  Foreign  Relations, 
then  still  directed  by  Skobeleff,  sent  out  a  Note  to  the 
nations  of  the  world.    It  appeared  as  a  sort  of  response 


94       FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       oh. 

to  an  article  by  Huysmans  published  in  the  Swedish 
Social  Demokraten,  in  which  he  compared  the  Russian 
Socialist  Ministers  with  their  French  and  English 
colleagues.  The  "  Russian  Socialist  Ministers,"  this  Note 
declared  didactically,  "  are  delegated  to  the  Government 
for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  a  peace  by  an  agreement 
between  the  nations  and  not  of  prosecuting  an  im- 
perialistic war  in  the  name  of  the  liberation  of  the 
nations  at  the  point  of  the  bayonet.  Russian  Ministers 
have  no  intention  whatsoever  of  supporting  the  party 
truce  which  had  been  created  by  the  military  menace. 
.  .  .  The  basis  of  the  Socialists'  participation  in  the 
Government  lay  not  in  the  cessation  of  class  war,  but, 
on  the  contrary,  in  its  further  development  with  the 
weapons  of  political  power  "  (Izvestia,  No.  70). 

This  conception  of  the  part  to  be  played  in  the 
Government  by  the  Socialists  obviously  struck  at  the 
very  roots  of  any  idea  of  a  coalition  based  upon  an 
agreement  between  the  Socialist  and  bourgeois  parties. 
It  created  an  inner  front  upon  the  very  heights  of 
authority.  The  German  army  occupied  the  whole  of 
Poland,  the  north-western  region  and  part  of  the  Baltic 
provinces.  The  menace  of  a  further  German  invasion 
was  perfectly  obvious  to  any  one  who  had  eyes  to  see. 
At  a  time  when  by  a  three  years'  war  and  the  criminal 
mistakes  of  the  Tsarist  regime  the  economic  life  of 
Russia  had  been  undermined,  the  new  power  of  the 
revolutionary  democracy  which  succeeded  it  saw  its 
prime  duty,  not  in  the  defence  of  the  State,  nor  in  the 
building  up  of  a  new  order  of  internal  freedom,  but  in 
the  deepening  of  class  war  in  fulfilment  of  the  sacred 
will  of  Karl  Marx.  Yet,  notwithstanding  all  this, 
Skobeleff  cries  with  a  fine  flourish  of  trumpets,  "  Let 
no  one  say  we  shall  be  a  plaything  in  the  Kaiser's 
hands  ;  no,  the  Kaiser  will  be  a  plaything  in  ours." 


IV  THE  FIRST  GOVERNMENT  CRISIS         95 

Given  this  puerile  misunderstanding  of  the  terrible 
burden  of  the  war  borne  by  the  Russian  people,  it  is 
not  surprising  that  the  Socialist  Ministers,  deeming  them- 
selves the  sole  exponents  of  the  people's  will,  listened 
angrily  and  impatiently  to  the  bitter  warnings  of  the 
military  leaders.  General  Alexeieff,  the  Commander- 
in-Chief  of  the  Russian  Army,  spoke  very  plainly  at 
the  first  officers'  congress  (May  10). 

"  Russia  is  going  to  ruin,"  he  said.  "  She  is  tottering  on  the 
brink  of  an  abyss.  A  few  more  thrusts,  and  with  all  her  weight 
she  will  crash  into  its  very  depths.  The  enemy  has  occupied  the 
eighth  part  of  our  territory.  He  cannot  be  bribed  by  the  Utopian 
phrase :  '  Peace  without  annexations  or  indemnities.'  He 
openly  desires  both  annexations  and  indemnities.  He  stretches 
out  his  greedy  paw  to  where  no  enemy  soldier  has  ever  been 
before,  he  stretches  a  hand  towards  wealthy  Volhynia,  PodoHa, 
the  Kiev  region,  towards  the  entire  right  bank  of  our  Dnieper. 
And  what  of  ourselves  ?  Will  the  Russian  army  ever  permit  it  ? 
Shall  we  not  hurl  this  insolent  foe  out  of  our  country,  and  then 
leave  diplomacy  to  conclude  a  peace  with  or  without  annexations  ? 
Let  us  be  frank ;  the  fighting  spirit  of  the  Russian  army  is 
exhausted.  But  yesterday  stern  and  powerful,  it  now  faces  the 
enemy  in  a  trance  of  fatal  inaction.  A  longing  for  peace  and 
quiet  has  replaced  the  old  traditional  loyalty  to  the  country. 
Base  instincts  of  self-preservation  are  re-awakened.  Where  is 
the  powerful  authority  at  home  for  which  the  whole  state  is 
yearning  ?  We  are  told — it  will  come  soon.  But  we  do  not 
see  it  yet.  What  has  become  of  our  love  for  the  Mother-country  ? 
Where  is  our  patriotism  ?  The  sublime  word  of  brotherhood  is 
inscribed  upon  our  banner,  but  it  is  not  written  in  our  hearts. 
Class  antagonism  is  raging  in  our  midst ;  whole  classes  who  had 
honourably  fulfilled  their  duty  to  their  country  are  placed  under 
suspicion.  As  a  result  a  deep  abyss  has  yawned  between  soldiers 
and  ofi&cers. 

"  We  each  think  only  of  ourselves,  of  our  own  interests.  Bread 
is  plentiful,  yet  the  Russian  army  is  imderfed,  while  the  horses 
are  completely  starved. 

"New  and  brighter  days  have  dawned,  but  where  is  the 


96       FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

animation,  the  transport,  the  enthusiasm  of  a  yomig  nation  that 
has  attained  to  the  supreme  blessings  of  humanity  ?  As  yet  we 
see  it  not.  .  .  . 

"Russian  ojQ&cers  must  imite  and  think  how  to  pour  this 
enthusiasm  into  our  hearts,  for  there  is  no  victory  without 
enthusiasm,  and  without  victory  there  is  no  salvation,  there  can 
be  no  Russia.  .  .  .  We  are  confronted  with  the  colossal  task  of 
restoring  discipline,  of  recasting  into  a  united  whole  that  which 
constitutes  the  Russian  army,  that  is  the  officers  and  privates,  of 
strongly  bridging  over  and  ultimately  completely  filling  up  the 
gulf  which  divides  the  private  from  the  officer,  of  once  more 
moulding  them  into  the  rock  which  was  the  old  Russian  army.  .  .  . 

"The  mass  of  the  army  has  sincerely,  honourably,  and 
rapturously  accepted  the  new  regime.  The  details  of  the  new 
state  organisation  will  be  decided  by  the  Constituent  Assembly. 

"  We  must  all  unite  upon  the  one  great  platform:  Russia  is 
in  peril,  we,  as  members  of  a  great  army,  are  bound  to  save  her. 
Let  this  standard  unite  you  all  and  give  you  the  strength  to  work. 
Let  there  be  ever  present  to  your  mental  vision  traced  in  fiery 
letters  the  words  :  *  Yes,  Russia  is  perishing.'  " 

Tliis  speech  with  its  clear  and  precise  prophecy  of 
the  terrible  danger  menacing  Russia  was  made  at  the 
very  time  when  the  Socialist  Ministers  were  promising 
peace  by  means  of  a  class  war.  The  Soviet  leaders 
responded  to  the  bitter  warnings  of  the  military 
authorities  and  honest  patriots  by  a  storm  of  frenzied 
abuse,  which  was  taken  up  by  the  entire  Socialistic 
Press.  Three  weeks  later  (June  4),  to  the  unconcealed 
joy  of  the  Soviet,  General  Alexeieff  was  obliged  to 
resign  the  post  of  Commander-in-Chief. 

By  that  time  Alexander  Kerensky  was  already 
Minister  of  War  and  Marine.  His  was  an  exceedingly 
difficult  position.  As  a  Social-Revolutionary  his  former 
attitude  in  regard  to  the  war  had  been  one  of  great 
reserve,  and  before  the  Revolution  he,  like  Chheidze, 
spoke  in  the  Duma  not  so  much  of  defending  the  State 
as  of  bringing  the  war  to  an  end.    After  the  Revolution 


THE  FIRST  GOVERNMENT  CRISIS         97 

Chheidze  stubbornly  held  to  his  former  views.  But 
Kerensky  was  changed.  Novel  experiences  drove  him 
to  new,  healthier  political  ideas.  He  essayed  to 
become  the  link  between  the  Revolutionary  Democracy, 
whose  favourite  he  was,  and  Government  circles. 
But  he  was  devoid  of  clear  ideas  of  statesmanship 
as  well  as  of  a  just  conception  of  his  own  powers. 
By  education  a  lawyer,  with  the  psychology  of  a  civilian 
and  the  ingrained  mental  habits  of  an  internationalist 
Socialist,  Kerensky,  intoxicated  by  the  success  of  his 
speeches  and  his  ever-increasing  popularity,  did  not 
hesitate  to  take  upon  himself  not  only  the  government 
of  the  Russian  State,  but  also  the  administration  of 
the  enormous  Russian  Army  at  a  time  when  the  country 
was  wearing  itself  out  in  a  military  struggle  beyond  its 
strength,  when  all  Government  activity  had  to  be 
concentrated  on  the  solution  of  the  most  complicated 
military  problems. 

How  could  Kerensky  achieve  this,  fettered  as  he 
was  by  the  dogmas  of  Revolutionary  Democracy,  which 
concerned  itself  chiefly  with  the  democratisation  of  the 
army,  not  with  its  military  efficiency  ?  He  proved 
incapable  even  of  defending  the  army's  highest  asset — 
its  Commanders.  The  resignation  of  the  able,  gifted, 
experienced  General  Alexeieff  was  one  of  the  many 
instances  of  the  blunt,  ruthless,  and  cruel  persecution 
of  officers  emanating  from  Soviet  circles.  At  times 
Kerensky  took  a  bold  stand,  but  the  essential  point  was 
beyond  his  comprehension — that  an  army  is  incapable 
of  existing,  much  less  of  fighting,  without  discipline  and 
compulsory  and  punitive  measures. 

Like  many  other  revolutionaries,  he  thought  that 
high-sounding  phrases  and  passionate  speeches  were 
sufficient  to  reawaken  the  old  fighting  spirit  that  had 
been  overstrained  by  a  prolonged  war  and  finally  shaken 

H 


98       FROM  LIBEETY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

by  propaganda.  Kerensky  rushed  from  staff  to  staff 
and  from  camp  to  camp  along  the  whole  front,  and 
made  speech  after  fiery  speech  to  the  soldiers,  while 
behind  his  back,  in  the  heart  of  the  Soviet,  his  own 
position  was  being  steadily  undermined.  The  temper 
of  the  Revolutionary  Democracy  was  so  much  the 
reverse  of  warlike  that  the  Minister  of  War  did  not  at 
once  obtain  permission  to  utter  the  word  "  offensive," 
while  all  talk  of  "  victory  "  was  absolutely  forbidden. 
To  take  one  example  out  of  many.  A  few  days  after 
the  reorganisation  of  the  Government  the  Social- 
Democrat  internationalist  SukhanofE  published  a 
threatening  article  in  one  of  the  most  influential  papers 
of  the  Left,  Novaia  Zhizn,  edited  by  Maxim  Gorky. 
''  The  watchword  of  an  offensive  that  has  eclipsed  all 
others  since  the  advent  of  the  new  Government  has 
acquired  not  its  ordinary  innocent  technical  meaning 
but  an  odious  political  significance.  The  entire  trend 
of  the  new  Government's  policy  gives  this  watchword 
a  menacing  character."  Sukhanoff  uttered  the  warning 
that  neither  agitation  nor  the  call  of  the  "  bourgeois 
press  "  would  obtain  any  results  "  until  every  measure 
has  been  taken  for  the  liquidation  of  the  war,  and  until 
the  war  is  purged  of  all  signs  of  national  and  allied 
imperialism." 

Now  we  know  how  the  Bolsheviks  have  done  the 
purging  and  its  results  are  seen.  Even  Gorky's  paper 
was  later  forced  to  oppose  those  with  whom  as  a  matter 
of  fact  it  marched  shoulder  to  shoulder  during  the  first 
stage  of  the  Revolution.  The  fruits  of  this  friendship 
proved  bitter  to  the  now  Bolshevist  Socialists,  yet  they 
ought  to  have  known  their  friends,  for  the  Bolsheviks 
never  concealed  either  their  programme  or  their  political 
and  social  aspirations.  Representatives  of  other  Socialist 
groups  were  well  acquainted  with  the  moral  worth  of 


THE  FIRST  GOVERNMENT  CRISIS  99 

Lenin  and  the  Leninistes.  In  the  chronicles  of  Russian 
refugees  and  in  the  history  of  the  Social-Democratic 
party  there  are  many  facts  proving  their  contempt  for 
truth,  justice,  and  honesty,  their  demoralisation  verging 
upon  moral  insanity.  But  the  Revolutionary  Demo- 
cracy shut  its  eyes,  blindly  worshipping  a  class  doctrine 
which,  it  believed,  obliterated  all  that  was  foul  and 
atoned  for  every  crime. 


CHAPTEK  V 

THE  INTEENATIONAL  POLICY  OF  THE   SOVIET 

Attitude  towards  President  Wilson — Cool  reception  of  Allied  Socialists — 
Friendly  relations  with  Zimmerwaldists — The  Robert  Grimm 
Scandal — The  Stockholm  Conference. 

The  Kevolutionary  Democracy  tried  to  lead  the  new 
Russia  along  the  path  indicated  by  the  resolutions 
passed  by  the  international  Socialistic  minority.  This 
also  determined  its  relations  with  the  Allies  and  with 
Germany. 

As  the  Soviet  politicians  persistently  asserted  that 
the  war  must  be  decided,  not  by  the  force  of  bayonets, 
but  by  that  of  the  Labour  "  Internationale,"  they  were 
not  too  pleased  when  the  United  States  joined  in  the 
war.  In  this  new  belligerent  coming  to  the  aid  of  the 
Allies  and  of  Russia  they  only  saw  a  new  obstacle  to  a 
democratic  peace.  When  on  the  7th  June  President 
Wilson  issued  his  Note  on  the  objects  of  the  war  in  which 
he  said  that  the  war  must  not  end  in  the  re-establishment 
of  a  status  quo  ante,  that  nations  must  not  be  subjugated, 
but  that  damage  done  should  be  made  good,  the  answer 
to  this  in  the  Izvestia,  the  official  organ  of  >the  Soviet  and 
of  Revolutionary  Democracy,  was  as  follows  : 

President  Wilson  is  mistaken  if  lie  thinks  that  such  ideas 
can  enter  the  hearts  of  the  Revolutionary  people  of  Russia. 
Russian  Revolutionary  Democracy  knows  too  well  and  feels  too 

100 


OH.  V 


INTERNATIONAL  POLICY  OF  SOVIET    101 


sure  that  the  road  to  the  passionately  longed-for  universal  peace 
lies  only  through  the  united  struggle  of  the  toilers  all  over  the 
world  against  world  imperialism.  It  cannot  be  misled  by  any 
hazy  and  high-flown  phrases.  It  is  obvious  what  feelings  will  be 
aroused  by  the  strange  attempt  to  represent  the  spirit  of  brother- 
hood and  peace,  which  is  growing  stronger  and  stronger  in 
international  Socialism,  as  being  the  result  of  German  intrigue. 
That  is  not  the  language  spoken  by  the  democracy  of  Russia. 

Other  Socialistic  papers  followed  suit.  The  Social 
Revolutionary  Dielo  Naroda  (People's  Cause)  declared 
that  "  Liberty  and  right  are  obtained  by  the  people  by 
means  of  an  internal  struggle,  by  revolution."  Gorky's 
half -Bolshevist  Novaia  Zhizn  (New  Life),  in  analysing  the 
Note,  says  :  "  Only  a  decisive  universal  rupture  of  civil 
peace,  only  the  most  pitiless  war  on  the  imperialistic 
cliques  of  all  countries  will  save  Europe  from  plunging 
into  savagery."  This  displeasure  at  Wilson's  "  imperial- 
ism "  found  official  expression  in  the  Note  which  on  the 
13th  June,  Tereshchenko,  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs, 
delivered  to  M.  A.  Thomas.  In  that  Note  the  Russian 
Government  proposed  to  convene  a  conference  of  the 
Allies  for  the  purpose  of  reconsidering  the  agreements  as 
to  the  aims  of  the  war.  By  this  means  did  the  Socialistic 
Ministers  carry  out  part  of  the  plan  of  international 
policy  drawn  up  by  the  Soviet.  Obviously  this  plan 
did  not  include  the  maintenance  of  friendly  relations 
with  the  Socialists  of  Allied  countries  who  had  come  to 
greet  the  Russian  people,  now  freed  from  the  yoke  of 
Tsarism.  They  had  a  cool  reception  from  the  Socialist 
Ministers,  and  a  still  cooler  one  from  the  Soviet.  And 
how  could  it  be  otherwise  ?  The  new  arrivals  were 
representatives  of  the  Socialistic  majority  which,  in 
England  and  France,  had  supported  the  policy  of 
defending  their  country  against  the  Germans,  while  the 
Soviet,  as  well  as  Lenin,  took  the  point  of  view  of  the 


102     FEOM  LIBEKTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

Zimmerwald   minority,    and   had   no    sympatliy   with 
'*  chauvinist  Socialists." 

When  the  first  delegation  of  French  and  English 

SociaKsts  came  to  Russia  in  April,  the  Bolsheviks  at 

once  raised  a  clamour  against  them.     On  the  29th 

April,  at  a  meeting  of  the  Social-Democratic  party  in 

Moscow,  convened  in  honour  of  the  Allied  Socialists,  the 

Bolsheviks  came  forward  with  a  declaration  of  protest 

in  which  they  pointed  out  that  the  Socialist  delegates 

represented  the  Government  and  not  the  people.     The 

Bolsheviks  reminded  them  that,  "  since  the  beginning 

of  the  war,  part  of  the  Socialists  had  forsaken  the  idea 

of  class  war  and  were  in  solidarity  with  the  imperialistic 

bourgeoisie.  .  .  .  The  representatives  of  this  political 

tendency  in  England  and  France  had  taken  part  in 

Government,    had   entered   bourgeois    Ministries,   and 

under  the  banner  of  '  War  to  a  finish  '  had  carried  on  a 

fierce  struggle  against  Zimmerwald  Socialists."    As  the 

delegates  were  representatives  of  the  Right  Socialistic 

wing  the  Bolsheviks  would  enter  into  no  negotiations 

with  them.     "  We  consider  it  necessary  to  protest  most 

decidedly  against  the  claims  of  the  delegates  to  speak 

in  the  name  of  all  the  Socialistic  proletariat  of  their 

respective  countries,  and  we  consider  it  our  duty  to 

explain  to  Russian  workmen  that  the  majority  of  the 

French  and  English  proletarians  are  far  from  taking  a 

Socialist-chauvinist  point  of  view." 

Similar  assertions  were  made  by  Russian  Zimmer- 
waldists  at  meetings  and  in  the  Press.  The  French  and 
English  Socialists  were  forced  to  publish  explanations 
that  they  were  no  pretenders,  but  fully  qualified  dele- 
gates of  their  respective  parties,  in  which  the  majority 
were  for  carrying  on  a  defensive  policy. 

The  French  delegates,  M.  Mouthey,  M.  Cachin,  E. 
Lafont,   reminded   their  hearers   that   among  French 


V        INTERNATIONAL  POLICY  OF  SOVIET     103 

Socialists  the  rift  was  not  by  any  means  as  great  as  the 
Bolsheviks  represented.  In  France  both  the  majority 
and  the  minority  voted  for  war  credits  (with  the  excep- 
tion of  three  votes).  The  English  delegates,  Messrs. 
Thorne,  O'Grady,  and  Sanders,  declared  that  the  Inde- 
pendent Labour  Party,  to  which  the  Bolsheviks  referred, 
hardly  represented  1  per  cent  of  organised  Labour  in 
England. 

The  very  necessity  for  entering  into  such  explana- 
tions shows  how  the  Allied  Socialists  were  received. 
And  it  was  not  only  the  Bolsheviks  who  were  hostile. 
The  Executive  Committee  also  issued  a  declaration 
which  again  showed  the  ambiguity  of  its  position,  so 
caustically  pointed  out  in  Lenin's  pamphlet.  The 
occasion  for  this  declaration  was  the  question  asked  by 
Mr.  Philip  Snowden  in  Parliament  concerning  the  visit 
of  the  British  delegates  to  Russia.  The  Executive 
Conmiittee  made  haste  to  reply,  indirectly  condemning 
the  Allied  Socialists  for  their  culpable  friendliness  to 
their  respective  Governments.  "  Being  fully  aware 
that  the  delegates  represent  only  one  fraction  of 
the  British  Labour  movement,  the  Executive  Committee 
has  not,  however,  been  informed  of  the  special  relation 
of  the  British  Government  to  its  mission." 

Then  follows  an  appeal  to  the  "  Socialistic  parties  and 
trade  unions  of  these  countries,  with  a  formal  invitation 
to  take  part  in  the  celebrations  of  Russian  Liberty, 
through  properly  elected  representatives  of  the  whole 
Labour  movement." 

This  hazy  declaration  is  full  of  half-expressed  con- 
demnation and  distrust  of  the  Allied  delegates  who  do 
not  hold  to  the  strictly  class  point  of  view. 

Even  such  prominent  Labour  leaders  as  Messrs  A. 
Henderson,  Albert  Thomas,  and  Vandervelde  met  with 
no  success  among  the  Revolutionary  Democracy.    But 


104     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

when  the  Socialists  of  the  Central  Powers  appeared, 
they  were  received  with  open  arms,  no  questions  were 
raised,  and  a  confidence  was  shown  them  that  disregarded 
not  only  caution  but  even  common  sense.  The  Austrian 
Otto  Bauer,  then  a  prisoner  of  war  in  Russia,  took  part  in 
meetings  of  the  Executive  Committee,  and  after  spending 
some  days  in  this  centre  of  the  Revolutionary  Democracy, 
left  for  Austria.  An  important  part  in  the  activities  of 
the  Soviet  was  played  by  the  Socialists  of  enemy  States 
who  had  come  from  abroad,  and  who  continued  to  work 
for  the  international  minority.  Afterwards  it  was  found 
that  this  internationalism  was  quite  compatible  with 
German  imperialism,  working  in  conjunction  with  the 
Kaiser's  diplomacy.  But  their  connection  with  Berlin 
has  not  been  fully  revealed.  Both  the  Bolsheviks  and 
members  of  the  Soviet  persistently  demanded  the 
abolition  of  secret  diplomacy.  They  were  diligently 
supported  by  the  agents  of  the  "  Internationale  "  from 
abroad.  But  their  own  diplomacy,  their  own  inter- 
national connections  and  affairs  were  carefully  veiled  in 
secrecy,  and  only  chance  lifted  the  curtain  here  and 
there. 

The  greatest  influence  on  the  Soviet  was  wielded  by 
Ganetski-Fiirstenberg,  Karl  Radek,  and  Robert  Grimm 
(especially  the  latter).  The  past  and  present  activities 
of  these  heroes  of  Zimmerwald  were  exposed  in  the 
Russian  press,  both  in  the  Cadet  (Constitutional- 
Democratic)  papers  and  in  those  of  the  national  Social- 
ists, especially  in  Plekhanov's  Yedinstvo  (Unity).  The 
resulting  portraits  were  far  from  attractive.  Karl 
Radek,  an  Austrian  Jew  and  a  journalist,  had  been 
expelled  from  three  Socialistic  parties,  from  the  Polish 
party  in  Galicia,  from  the  P.P.S.  in  Russian  Poland, 
and  from  the  German  Social-Democratic  party.  In 
the  Lemberg  Socialistic  paper  Naprzod  (Forward)  for 


J 


INTERNATIONAL  POLICY  OF  SOVIET     105 

September  7,  1910,  a  letter  was  published  from  E. 
Hecker,  the  editor,  announcing  that  Radek  had  been 
dismissed  from  the  editorial  stafi,  "  not  because  of  any 
difference  of  opinion,  but  because  he  lounged  about 
taverns,  and  called  for  food  and  drink  and  did  not  pay, 
and  because  when  he  was  on  the  staff  of  the  Nafrzod 
he  had  stolen  a  comrade's  watch.  A  poor  lady  teacher 
backed  a  bill  for  him,  which  he  did  not  meet,  and  the 
teacher  had  to  pay  it  with  her  last  penny.  This 
action  is  ethically  worse  than  the  theft  of  a  watch," 
says  E.  Hecker.  This  resulted  in  his  comrades  giving 
him  the  nickname  of  ''  Kradek,"  which  means  "  thief." 
Hecker 's  letter  was  reprinted  in  1917  in  the  Rech  and  was 
not  refuted  either  by  Radek  or  his  friends.  This  petty 
adventurer  came  with  Lenin  from  Switzerland  via 
Berlin  and  Stockholm. 

Ganetski-Fiirstenberg  was  an  adventurer  on  a  larger 
scale,  a  collaborator  with  Parvus  the  provocateur,  a 
Socialist  with  a  very  tarnished  reputation.  Parvus 
(Helf  and)  had  grown  rich,  as  he  asserted,  by  com  contracts 
in  Turkey,  or,  as  others  declared,  through  the  generosity 
of  the  German  Government.  During  the  war  Parvus 
settled  in  Copenhagen,  where  he  opened  a  suspicious 
Socialistic  bureau.  His  friend  Ganetski-Fiirstenberg 
had  been  sent  out  of  Denmark  for  shady  smuggling 
transactions.  This  same  Ganetski  was  an  old  friend  of 
Lenin's,  and  together  with  the  latter  and  with  Zinovieff, 
at  the  Congress  of  Russian  Social-Democrats  in  Austria, 
they  whitewashed  Malinovski,  the  important  agent 
provocateur.  Malinovski  had  been  a  Social-Democratic 
member  of  the  Duma,  where  he  was  an  extremist,  acting 
under  double  orders — those  of  Lenin  on  the  one  hand, 
and  of  the  director  of  the  Tsar's  police  on  the  other 
(the  exact  documents  referring  to  this  fantastic  affair 
have  been  published).     Through  Ganetski-Fiirstenberg 


106     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

the  Bolsheviks  used  to  obtain  large  sums  of  money 
from  an  unknown  source  abroad.  This  was  discovered 
after  the  first  attempt  at  a  cowp  d'etat  made  by  the 
Bolshevists  in  July  1917. 

The  activity  of  Robert  Grimm  is  even  more  curious 
as  characteristic  not  merely  of  Russian  Socialists  but  of 
Zimmerwaldists  in  general.  A  Swiss,  and  the  president 
of  the  Zimmerwald  Conference,  he  had  yet  on  August 
8,  1914,  voted  for  the  Swiss  army  estimates,  and 
wrote  in  the  Berner  Tageblatt :  ''  Our  valiant  soldiers, 
who  do  their  duty  without  a  murmur,  must  feel  behind 
them  the  unanimous  support  of  an  organised  people." 
But  it  proved  that  this  internationalist,  as  not  infre- 
quently happens,  had  two  standards— one  for  his  own 
country  and  another  for  Russia.  As  soon  as  the 
Revolution  began  Grimm  hurried  off  to  Russia. 
MilyukofE,  then  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  knew  that 
Grimm  was  not  only  bringing  with  him  the  resolutions 
of  the  Zimmerwald  and  Kienthal  Conferences,  but  had 
likewise  been  commissioned  by  the  German  Govern- 
ment to  prepare  the  ground  for  a  separate  peace. 
Milyukoff  refused  absolutely  to  let  him  into  the  country, 
in  spite  of  all  the  persistence  shown  in  the  matter  by 
the  Department  of  Foreign  Communications  attached 
to  the  Soviet.  When  Milyukoff  had  to  leave, 
Tereshchenko,  the  new  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs, 
allowed  Grimm  to  enter  Russia  after  Skobeleff  and 
Tsereteli  had  vouched  for  him.  Grimm  was  solemnly 
received  by  the  Soviet,  and  elected  member  of  the 
Executive  Committee,  to  which  the  Russian  Social 
Democrat  Plekhanoff  could  gain  no  admittance.  Grimm 
immediately  began  his  propaganda  in  the  barracks, 
preaching  a  separate  peace  with  Germany. 

The  Mensheviks  who  had  vouched  for  him  were 
abashed.    Skobeleff  said  they  did  not  think  that  separate 


INTERNATIONAL  POLICY  OF  SOVIET     107 

peace  was  part  of  the  Zimmerwald  programme.  But 
their  position  became  distinctly  delicate  when  on  the 
16th  June  the  Provisional  Government  published  a 
cipher  telegram,  dated  6th  June,  from  Hoffmann,  the 
Swiss  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,,  to  M.  Odiet,  the 
Swiss  charge  d'affaires  in  Petrograd.  In  this  telegram 
Hoffmann  commissioned  M.  Odiet  to  inform  Grimm  by 
word  of  mouth  that  "  Germany  will  not  make  any 
further  advance  as  long  as  an  agreement  with  Russia 
seems  possible.  After  conversing  with  people  of  high 
position  I  am  convinced  that  Germany  is  seeking  a 
peace  with  Russia,  honourable  to  both  parties."  Then 
came  the  possible  conditions  of  peace,  defined  in  very 
general  terms.  On  being  made  aware  of  the  existence 
of  this  telegram,  Tsereteli  and  Skobeleff  were  com- 
missioned by  the  Government  to  call  on  Robert  Grimm 
for  explanations.  The  latter  declared  that  he  knew 
nothing  of  the  matter,  that  he  considered  the  telegram 
''  a  German  attempt  to  make  use  of  his  Petrograd 
speeches  in  favour  of  a  universal  peace."  But  when 
the  Socialist  Ministers  demanded  that  the  Zimmerwald 
leader  should  declare  publicly  that  "  he  considered 
such  procedure  on  the  part  of  the  German  Government 
a  piece  of  underhand  provocation,  and  the  mediation  of 
the  Swiss  Minister  in  this  matter  as  flunkeyism  and  an 
encouragement  of  provocation,"  Grimm  of  course 
refused  to  do  so,  saying  that  such  a  declaration  might 
be  prejudicial  to  the  neutrality  of  his  native  country. 
This  internationalist  could  not  afford  to  quarrel  with 
his  country  or  with  Germany.  The  Ministers  who  had 
stood  surety  for  him,  instead  of  trying  to  penetrate 
further  into  his  pacifist  activity,  suggested  that  the 
president  of  the  Zimmerwald  Conference  should  leave 
Russia,  which  he  did  very  precipitately. 

On  the  day  after  his  departure  there  was  a  Congress 


108     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

of  Soviets  at  wluch  the  Left  wing  protested  agaiQst 
the  arbitrary  expulsion  of  such  a  prominent  iuter- 
nationaUst  as  Grimm.  The  Ministers  Skobeleff,  Tsereteli, 
and  Kerensky  had  to  defend  and  exonerate  themselves. 
As  yet  the  Bolsheviks  had  no  majority  in  the  Soviets, 
and  the  motion  by  which  it  was  found  that  Tsereteli 
and  Skobeleff  had  acted  "  in  accordance  with  the 
interests  of  the  Russian  Revolution  and  of  international 
Socialism  "  was  passed  by  a  majority  of  640  to  121. 

Then  the  Bolshevist  minority,  together  with  the 
internationalists,  billed  the  whole  of  Petrograd  with 
invitations  to  meetiogs  of  protest  against  the  expulsion 
of  their  comrade  Grimm.  A  few  days  after,  the  official 
Izvestia  No.  98  stated  that  the  cipher  telegram  from 
Hoffmann  was  merely  a  reply  to  a  cipher  telegram 
from  Grimm  himself,  in  which  he  had  described  the 
state  of  affairs  in  Russia  for  the  information  of  the 
German  Government.  "The  longing  for  peace  is 
universal,"  wrote  Grimm.  "  Obstacles  to  its  attainment 
are  raised  by  France  and  difficulties  made  by  England. 
At  present  negotiations  are  being  carried  on  with  them. 
.  .  .  One  of  these  days  it  may  be  expected  that  pressure 
will  be  put  on  them.  The  only  thing  that  might  prevent 
the  success  of  negotiations  would  be  a  German  advance 
on  the  eastern  front.  Let  me  know  about  the  military 
aims  of  the  Government  of  which  you  are  aware,  as 
this  will  guarantee  negotiations." 

Thus  part  of  Robert  Grimm's  secret  diplomacy  was 
unmasked.  He  turned  out  to  be  a  German  agent,  and 
had  succeeded  in  imposing  on  the  Russian  Socialist 
Ministers  by  an  impudent  Ue.  But  how  could  they  help 
believing  the  president  of  the  Zimmerwald  Conference 
himself,  when  that  Conference  was  to  them  what  Church 
Councils  were  to  Catholics  in  the  Middle  Ages  ? 

While   assuming   an   attitude   of   iQ-concealed   un- 


INTERNATIONAL  POLICY  OF  SOVIET     109 

friendliness  towards  the  Allied  Socialists,  who  supported 
their  respective  Governments  in  the  struggle  against 
Germany,  the  Soviet  considered  it  its  duty  to  take  the 
initiative  in  paving  the  way  to  peace. 

This  Socialist-pacifist  policy  reflected  the  political 
outlook  of  the  leaders  of  the  first  Soviet.  The  actual 
methods  of  realising  this  policy  were  as  yet  obscure, 
but  the  Soviet  leaders  knew  that  the  Socialist  Patriots 
who  were  represented  by  the  delegates  from  Italy, 
France,  and  England,  would  not  share  their  point  of 
view.  In  the  Entente  countries  the  Socialists  had 
proclaimed  a  class  truce  during  the  war  with  Germany. 
The  behaviour  of  the  German  Social-Democracy  had 
proved  that  the  solidarity  of  the  international  proletariat 
could  not  be  depended  upon,  whereas  it  was  precisely 
on  this  solidarity  that  the  Russian  Revolutionary 
Democracy  built  up  its  hopes  of  a  democratic  peace. 

One  of  the  means  towards  attaining  this  purpose 
was  the  so-called  Conference.  It  became  the  subject  of 
endless  talk  and  passionate  arguments.  Lengthy  pro- 
clamations and  resolutions  were  sown  broadcast  by 
telegraph  and  wireless.  And  although  the  Conference 
remained  a  mere  project,  nevertheless  this  unborn 
international  infant  had  its  passionate  defenders  and 
no  less  passionate  opponents. 

It  is  not  my  purpose  to  follow  the  endless  and  not 
excessively  interesting  history  of  the  correspondence 
and  intercourse  between  the  various  Socialist  groups 
and  committees  upon  the  subject  of  the  proposed 
Stockholm  Conference.  Especially  so  as  many,  and 
perchance  the  most  interesting  negotiations  of  all,  took 
place  in  the  secret  recesses  of  international  Socialist 
diplomacy,  still  jealously  concealed  from  the  criticism 
of  public  opinion. 

From  whom  did  the  initiative  proceed  ?     What  was 


110     FKOM  LIBEKTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

the  part  played  in  all  this  by  Austro-German  Socialists, 
and  what  did  they  seek  at  the  Conference  ?  Did  not 
Branting,  the  able  and  honourable  Swedish  Socialist, 
become  the  plaything  of  the  no  less  clever  but  dishonest 
adventurer  Parvus  ?  As  yet  it  is  extremely  difficult 
to  give  a  precise  answer  to  questions  like  these. 

In  any  case  Scheidemann's  and  Adler's  visit  to 
Copenhagen  in  April  1917  served  as  a  stimulus  for 
raising  the  question  of  a  Socialist  Conference,  at  which 
the  Socialists  of  all  belligerent  countries  should  discuss 
war  aims.  Meanwhile  Helfand-Parvus  had  made  Copen- 
hagen his  headquarters,  and  thence  this  adroit  adven- 
turer managed  his  miscellaneous  enterprises,  such  as 
the  contraband  sale  of  expensive  drugs  for  the  Russian 
Army,  the  supply  of  cheap  German  coal  for  the  needs 
of  Danish  co-operative  societies,  revolutionary  propa- 
ganda in  Russia,  and  perhaps  not  in  Russia  alone.  The 
coal  transaction,^  being  of  great  advantage  to  the  Danish 
Socialist  party,  tended  to  strengthen  Parvus's  position 
both  in  Germany  and  in  Denmark.  As  is  generally 
known,  the  Danish  Socialists  were  the  most  energetic 
in  advocating  the  meeting  of  the  Stockholm  Conference, 
the  invitation  to  attend  it  having  been  brought  to  the 
Petrograd  Soviet  at  the  beginning  of  May  1917  by  the 
Danish  Socialist  Borgbjerg.  But  this  representative  of 
[Socialist  diplomacy  had  the  imprudence  to  bring  in  his 
other  pocket  a  copy  of  Scheidemann's  peace  terms, 
thereby  clearly  establishing  the  connection  existing 
between  the  Stockholm  device  and  the  German  Social- 
Democrats,  who  supported  the  Kaiser's  policy. 

It  should  be  noted  that,  from  the  standpoint  of 
organised  international  Socialism,  the  preparations  for 
the  Stockholm  Conference  had  taken  an  illegal  course. 

^  A  detailed  account  is  given  in  the  booklet  of  the  French  Socialist  P.  G. 
La  Chesnais,  Parvus  et  It  parti  aocialiate  danois  (Paris). 


INTERNATIONAL  POLICY  OF  SOVIET     111 

The  right  of  calling  such  a  conference  belonged  exclu- 
sively to  the  Central  International  Bureau  and  to  its 
president  Vandervelde,  whereas  Vandervelde,  as  well  as 
most  of  the  Italian  and  French  Socialists,  was  opposed 
to  a  conference  with  German  Socialists.  A  separate 
Dutch-Scandinavian  comimittee  was  therefore  formed 
at  Stockholm,  and  this  committee  assumed  the  initiative. 
Simultaneously  R.  Grimm  was  sending  out  invitations 
to  yet  another  Socialist  Assembly — the  third  Zimmer- 
wald  Conference.  The  Russian  Socialists  of  the  Centre, 
the  then  guiding  spirits  of  the  Petrograd  Soviet,  held 
the  view  that  the  victory  of  the  Revolution  laid  an 
obligation  on  them  to  place  themselves  at  the  head  of  a 
world-wide  Socialist  movement.  They  believed  that 
history  had  placed  the  destinies  of  mankind  in  their 
hands,  and  therefore  declining  all  proposals  of  the 
newly-arrived  Socialists,  they  passed  the  following 
resolution : 

The  Executive  Committee  of  the  Soviet  of  Workmen's  and 
Soldiers'  Deputies  assumes  the  initiative  in  the  convocation  of 
an  international  Socialist  conference.  All  parties  and  groups  of 
the  proletariat  Internationale,  who  are  ready  to  adopt  the  plat- 
form of  the  Soviet  message  to  the  peoples  of  the  world,  must  be 
invited  to  take  part  in  the  Conference. 

It  should  be  added  that  the  Allied  Socialists,  dazzled 
by  the  revolutionary  successes  of  their  Russian  comrades, 
did  not  sufficiently  endeavour  to  sober  them  down  nor 
to  bring  them  back  from  the  abstract  realm  of  revolu- 
tionary formulae  to  the  unfortunate  realities  of  the  war. 
Such  friendly  reticence  only  strengthened  the  Petrograd 
Soviet's  childish  assurance  that  they  indeed  formed  the 
vanguard  of  world  Socialism.  Russia's  poverty,  the 
illiteracy  of  the  masses,  the  absence  of  organisation 
among  labour — all  this  faded  away  before  the  intoxicat- 
ing sonority  of  revolutionary  cant. 


112     FKOM  LIBERTY  TO  BEEST-LITOVSK       ch. 

Upon  the  question  of  the  Stockholm  Conference  some 
of  the  Allied  Socialists  seemed  inclined  to  grant  conces- 
sions to  the  Soviet.  The  British  Labour  leader,  A. 
Henderson,  became  one  of  the  most  passionate  defenders 
of  the  scheme.  But  upon  his  return  to  England  from 
Russia  he  was  met  by  strong  opposition  from  the  British 
workmen  themselves.  In  common  with  their  French 
and  Belgian  brothers  they  had  not  the  slightest  desire 
to  meet  the  Germans  until  France  and  Belgium  were 
evacuated. 

The  British  Government  learnt  from  a  telegram  of 
the  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs,  Tereshchenko,  that 
Kerensky's  Cabinet  had  adopted  a  very  reserved  atti- 
tude in  respect  to  the  Stockholm  Conference  and 
considered  this  enterprise  as  a  purely  party  matter, 
its  decisions  being  in  nowise  binding  upon  the  Russian 
Government. 

This  was  confirmed  by  Albert  Thomas  in  one  of  his 
speeches  :  "  The  resolution  to  take  part  in  the  Confer- 
ence, adopted  in  May,  was  provoked  by  a  feeling  of 
admiration  for  the  Russian  Revolution  and  the  desire 
to  lend  it  active  support.  At  present  it  is  an  open 
secret  that  Kerensky  no  longer  exhibits  the  same 
interest  in  the  Conference."  ^ 

Having  weighed  all  the  alternatives  in  the  balance, 
the  Governments  of  France  and  England  refused  pass- 
ports to  members  of  the  Stockholm  Conference,  thereby 
virtually  sealing  its  fate.  The  organisers  of  the  Con- 
ference desired  that  it  should  constitute  a  powerful 
peace  congress  dictating  its  will  to  the  Governments, 
but  not  a  conspirative  Socialist  meeting.     The  former 

^  This  quotation,  as  well  as  certain  other  data  concerning  the  Stockholm 
Conference,  is  taken  from  P.  MilyukofE's  book,  A  History  of  the  Second  Russian 
Revolution.  He  has  been  most  friendly  in  allowing  me  the  opportunity  of 
using  his  MS.  ch|ipter  upon  "  The  Struggle  for  a  Democratic  Peace."  The  book 
has  appeared  in  KiefE. 


V        INTERNATIONAL  POLICY  OF  SOVIET     113 

plan  proved  to  be  impossible  of  realisation.  The 
Russian  Socialist  Centre  groups  proved  incapable  of 
altering  the  course  of  international  relations. 

It  should  be  noted  that  the  Bolsheviks  were  opposed 
to  Stockholm.  They  did  not  wish  to  sit  with  the 
Socialist  Patriots,  who  according  to  Bolshevist  opinion 
had  falsified  the  Internationale  for  the  gratification  of 
their  governments  behind  the  Socialists'  backs. 

Perhaps  the  Bolsheviks  were  also  opposed  to  the 
Conference,  because  at  the  time  they  did  not  consider 
themselves  strong  enough  to  speak  at  a  responsible 
international  congress.  Or  perhaps  they  hoped  that 
Grimm  might  succeed  in  calling  a  third  Zimmerwald 
Conference,  the  principles  of  which  would  be  sympathetic 
not  only  to  the  Bolsheviks  but  also  to  Socialists  of  the 
Centre. 

The  Socialist  Ministers  gradually  became  more 
familiar  with  the  machinery  of  government ;  they 
gained  a  clearer  sense  of  the  realities  and  practical 
limitations  of  Russian  life,  and  began  to  make  earnest 
endeavours  to  frame  a  more  sober  policy.  But  the 
principles  of  the  Zimmerwald  Conference  obsessed  them 
like  an  evil  spirit,  distorting  their  good  intentions,  and 
drove  them,  sometimes  against  their  will,  along  a  path 
which  led  to  the  ruin  and  destruction  of  Russia.  And 
in  the  van,  a  noisy  and  brazen  mob,  ran  the  Bolsheviks, 
seducing  the  soldiers,  labourers,  and  peasantry  with 
lying  promises  and  poisonous  party  cries.  The  Revolu- 
tionary Democracy  resisted,  though  weakly,  and  still 
tried  to  fight  against  the  madness  of  these  party  cries. 
But  it  could  not  help  itself,  because  many  of  these  cries 
were  symbols  of  their  common  faith,  because  its  own 
banners,  as  well  as  those  of  the  Bolsheviks,  bore  the 
same  device — class  warfare  and  the  dictatorship  of  one 
class  over  the  whole  nation. 


114     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       oh. 

Professing  such  principles,  the  Revolutionary  Demo- 
cracy was  unable  either  to  defend  its  native  country  or 
to  reorganise  the  State  on  the  basis  of  the  new  liberty 
attained,  or  even  to  hold  the  power  it  had  for  any 
length  of  time. 

Perhaps  one  of  the  explanations  and  even  extenua- 
tions of  the  weakness  of  the  Socialistic  Centre  may  lie  in 
the  fact  that  it  was  more  scrupulous  and  humane  than 
the  extreme  Left  wing.  While  calling  on  the  masses  to 
wage  class  warfare,  the  Centre,  at  the  same  time,  did 
not  desire  any  coercion  and  stopped  half-way.  It 
intoxicated  and  weakened  the  soldiers  by  talking  about 
a  democratic  peace,  but  bashfully  withdrew  from  the 
idea  of  a  separate  peace,  justly  seeing  in  it  treachery 
and  destruction.  But  the  Bolsheviks  feared  nothing, 
lied  always  and  to  all,  and  were  not  squeamish  as  to 
their  tools  and  means. 

Although  the  whole  Soviet  welcomed  the  suspicious 
gang  of  Radek,  Fiirstenberg,  Grimm,  etc.,  as  comrades, 
the  latter  were  more  akin  to  the  Bolsheviks.  Leo 
Deutch,  the  old  Russian  Marxist  and  revolutionary, 
was  right  when  he  wrote  in  the  Yedinstvo  :  "  Why  have 
people  of  a  criminal  t3rpe  clustered  round  Lenin,  especi- 
ally from  1903,  when  the  split  in  the  Russian  Social- 
Democratic  party  was  brought  about  by  him,  until  the 
present  time  ?  The  spirit  of  the  agent  provocateur 
naturally  clung  to  Lenin  as  the  inevitable  consequence 
of  his  tactics,  expressed  in  the  maxim — Any  means  are 
good  enough.  It  is  known  to  the  chronique  scandaleuse 
of  our  party  that  Lenin  and  his  assistants,  Kamenieff- 
Rosenfeldt  and  Zinovieff-Radomysloif,  have  committed 
acts  which  are  clearly  criminal." 

These  and  other  accusations  of  the  corruption  of 
the  Bolsheviks  were  almost  daily  to  be  met  with  in 
the  pages  of  Russian  papers,  just  as  in  every  list  of 


INTERNATIONAL  POLICY  OF  SOVIET     115 

the  Tsarist  Oldiranniks  (secret  police)  half  the  names 
were  those  of  Bolsheviks.  And  among  them  were 
seen  such  prominent  members  as  the  deputy  Malinovski, 
Tchernomazoff,  the  editor  of  the  Pravda  (Truth), 
Schneur,  who  subsequently  went  to  conclude  peace  with 
the  Germans,  and  many  others  besides. 


CHAPTER  VI 

THE   FIRST  CONGRESS   OF   SOVIETS  AND  KERENSKY's 
ADVANCE 

Difficulties  of  the  Socialist  Centre — ^Theory  and  practice — ^The  allure- 
ments of  Bolshevism — ^The  Congress  of  Soviets  as  a  review  of  the 
forces  of  Revolutionary  Democracy. 

The  leniency  displayed  by  the  Soviet  Centre  to  the 
Bolsheviks  is  to  be  explained  by  a  great  variety  of 
reasons,  but  principally  by  the  ties  that  united  all 
Socialistic  groups,  woven  of  the  imposing  theories  they 
shared  in  common,  and  also  by  the  common  memory 
of  secret  work  and  conspiracy  together,  of  punishment 
and  exile.  But  there  was  also  a  certain  amount  of 
involuntary  subjugation  of  the  Moderates  by  the 
Bolsheviks,  for  the  latter  were  candid  and  unblushing 
demagogues,  and  were  well  skilled  in  the  art  of  swaying 
crowds. 

Bolshevist  agitators  and  propagandists  could  make 
a  far  more  telling  appeal  to  the  masses  than  could  the 
Socialist  Centre.  The  former  enunciated  the  most 
extreme  views  that  could  be  deduced  from  the  general 
doctrines  of  Socialism,  and  preached  them  without  let 
or  hindrance  in  what  was  now  the  freest  country  in  the 
world.  The  basis  of  the  Marxist  point  of  view  is 
class  warfare.  According  to  this  view  it  is  an  immutable 
law  of  society  that  secret  and  indirect  conflict  is  all  in 

116 


OH.  VI     THE  FIRST  CONGEESS  OF  SOVIETS      117 

favour  of  privilege,  and  must  give  place  to  open  and 
direct  attack.  Then  the  bourgeoisie  will  be  overthrown, 
and  the  dictatorship  of  the  proletariat,  that  first  stage 
of  victory,  will  be  established.  As  '*  proletarians  have 
no  fatherland,"  the  interests  of  this  latter  entity  have 
to  make  way  for  those  of  the  labouring  classes. 

Hence  the  war-cry,  "  Proletarians  of  the  whole  world, 
unite  !  "  The  view  in  short  is  that  proclaimed  in  1848 
by  Marx  in  his  Communistic  Manifesto. 

The  Russian  Socialists  of  the  Centre,  both  Social- 
Democrats  and  Social  -  Revolutionaries,  whose  pro- 
gramme contained  all  the  principal  points  of  the 
Marxian  Manifesto,  were  greatly  embarrassed  when  they 
suddenly  found  themselves  masters  of  the  situation, 
leaders  of  the  democracy  of  their  dreams.  All  their 
theories  must  now  be  put  into  practice,  but  how  ? 
By  overthrowing  the  bourgeoisie  ?  But  the  bourgeoisie 
itself  rejoiced  at  the  Revolution  and  the  dawn  of  political 
liberty,  and  no  logical  grounds  for  conflict  existed.  And 
even  if  the  bourgeoisie  were  hostile  they  were  helpless, 
since  under  the  old  regime  they  had  been  unable  to 
organise  openly  and  were  unwilling  to  do  so  in  secret. 
When  the  Revolution  broke  out  it  was  found  that 
there  was  no  strong  bourgeois  party  in  Russia  at  all. 
There  was  only  the  Cadet  party  which  did  not  defend 
the  interests  of  any  one  particular  class.  It  displeased 
the  landowners  by  advocating  the  obligatory  expro- 
priation of  land,  and  its  transference  to  the  actual 
tillers  of  the  soil ;  it  repelled  the  manufacturers  by 
endorsing  the  minimum  Labour  programme  of  the 
Social-Democrats,  down  to  the  eight-hours'  day  in- 
clusive. From  the  Socialists  themselves,  however,  it 
diverged  even  more  radically.  It  strove  for  a  govern- 
ment superior  to  class  distinctions,  for  the  preservation 
of  the  principle  of  property  in  national  economics,  and 


118     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

for  continuing  the  war  to  a  jSnisli.  This  was  enough  to 
raise  a  sharply  defined  barrier  between  the  Cadets 
and  the  Socialist  politicians,  who  were  suspiciously 
on  the  look-out  for  counter-revolution  around  them. 
But  still  to  the  moderate  Centre  a  rupture  with  the 
bourgeoisie  was  a  thing  to  be  avoided.  From  time 
to  time  warnings  were  heard  in  Soviet  circles  (which 
were  still  dominated  by  Socialists  of  the  Centre),  not 
to  yield  to  the  extreme  Bolshevist  demands  for  a 
social  revolution,  but  to  be  content  as  yet  with  a  political 
revolution. 

But  the  glittering  theories  of  their  Marxian  pro- 
gramme dominated  them  against  their  will,  even  if  they 
could  not  act  on  them.  Social-Revolutionaries  preached 
the  immediate  expropriation  of  land  (the  same  demand 
was  made  in  the  Marxian  Communistic  Manifesto),  and 
Social-Democratic  Ministers  like  Skobeleff  made  speeches 
which  increased  the  unrest  among  labour.  The  wildest 
demands  of  the  workmen,  who  had  themselves  raised 
their  wages  to  an  amount  which  no  industry  could 
stand,  were  instantly  acceded  to.  The  Socialist  members 
of  town  corporations  and  Zemstvos  were  ruining  public 
institutions  in  their  eagerness  to  please  the  workmen. 
As  a  specimen  of  such  demands  I  need  only  mention 
that  in  Petrograd  the  scuUery-maids  in  the  municipal 
hospitals,  who  had  hitherto  received  board  and  lodging 
and  15  roubles  a  month  wages,  now  began  to  get 
175  roubles,  while  a  boarding-school  mistress  got  120 
roubles  and  had  to  keep  herself.  Coal-heavers  received 
up  to  80  roubles  a  day.  When  a  Social-Democratic 
member  of  the  Petrograd  City  Council,  from  the  Plek- 
hanoff  group,  proposed  to  replace  them  by  soldiers,  as 
the  municipal  treasury  could  not  stand  such  expenditure, 
the  Socialist  majority  on  the  City  Council  voted  against 
his  proposal  and  only  passed  a  motion  to  the  effect  that 


THE  FIRST  CONGRESS  OF  SOVIETS      119 

the  Executive  Committee  of  the  Soviet  should  be 
informed  that  the  demands  of  the  workmen  were 
ruinous  to  the  town. 

In  the  beginning  of  May  the  manufacturers  came  to 
Prince  Lvoff  with  a  declaration  regarding  the  condition 
of  the  industries,  which  were  being  ruined  by  the  laziness 
of  the  workmen,  by  the  absence  of  all  discipline  in 
factories,  by  the  mad  increase  in  wages,  and  by  the 
fact  that  engineers,  directors,  and  all  the  educated 
managing  stafE  in  general  were  in  constant  fear  of 
coercion  on  the  part  of  the  operatives.  The  elective 
principle  had  been  introduced  in  the  works,  and  fre- 
quently some  clever  adventurer,  quite  unfitted  for  the 
task,  was  placed  at  the  head  of  afEairs.  The  declaration 
of  the  manufacturers  produced  no  impression.  The 
Government  could  do  nothing,  having  no  organised 
force  at  its  back.  And  the  Left  parties,  including 
the  Bolsheviks,  openly  declared  that  this  was  as  it 
should  be,  that  the  workmen  ought  to  expel  the  owners 
and  engineers,  and  take  everything  into  their  own 
hands.  The  Soviet  and  the  Socialists  connected  with 
it  did  not  know  what  to  do,  first  urging  the  workmen 
on,  then  calling  on  them  to  keep  themselves  in  hand. 
At  the  very  beginning  of  the  Revolution,  on  the  20th 
March,  the  Izvestia  said  that  "  If  any  owner  of  an 
imdertaking,  who  was  dissatisfied  with  the  demands 
made  by  the  workmen,  refused  to  carry  on  the  business, 
then  the  workmen  must  resolutely  insist  on  the  manage- 
ment of  the  work  being  given  over  into  their  hands, 
under  the  supervision  of  a  commissary  of  the  Soviet" 
(see  No.  8).  This  was  the  "  control  "  which  was  after- 
wards so  fully  utilised  by  the  Bolsheviks.  A  little 
latter,  frightened  at  the  anarchy  which  had  broken  out 
at  the  works,  the  Izvestia  began  to  speak  of  the  thought- 
lessness of  such  reconstruction,  of  disorganisation,  of 


120     FEOM  LIBEETY  TO  BEEST-LITOVSK       ch. 

everything  having  its  limits,  and  of  the  impossibility 
of  satisfying  all  demands  (see  No.  81). 

But  if  there  was  any  criticism,  or  any  one  pointed 
out  that  both  the  soldiers  and  workmen  were  losing 
their  heads,  that  discipline  was  as  necessary  in  the 
industrial  army  as  in  the  military,  then  the  Soviet 
orators  grew  angry.  Tsereteli,  with  his  usual  impetuosity, 
speaking  at  the  meeting  of  the  Soviets  held  on  the  11th 
April,  said :  "  They  say  that  the  workmen  are  not 
standing  at  their  lathes  and  are  not  working.  All 
the  democratic  authorities  declare  this  to  be  a  foul 
slander  and  the  first  Congress  of  Soviets  must  con- 
form this."  The  Congress  of  course  declared  it  to  be 
a  libel,  but  the  workmen  did  not  work  any  the  better 
for  that. 

When  they  entered  the  Government  the  Socialists 
found  themselves  in  a  still  more  difficult  position.  The 
principles  of  the  programime  did  not  work  out  in  practice. 
Skobeleff,  the  Minister  of  Labour,  at  first  promised  to 
put  all  capitalists  under  a  hydraulic  press.  Later, 
however,  he  issued  a  circular  addressed  to  the  workmen, 
in  which  he  said :  "  The  seizure  of  factories  makes 
workmen  without  any  experience  in  management  and 
without  working  capital  temporarily  masters  of  such 
undertakings,  but  soon  leads  to  their  being  closed  down, 
or  to  the  subjugation  of  the  workmen  to  a  still  harder 
taskmaster  "  (Izvestia,  No.  103). 

These  are  not  the  words  simply  of  a  Minister  but 
of  a  Socialist  Minister.  But  whom  were  the  workmen 
to  obey,  if  at  the  same  time  the  Bolshevist  members  of 
the  same  united  Social-Democratic  party  to  which 
Skobeleff  belonged  were  urging  them  to  make  haste 
and  seize  everything  before  the  bourgeoisie  had  time 
to  organise  a  counter-revolution  ?  Why  should  they 
not  disarm  the  bourgeoisie  by  means  of  such  seizures, 


THE  FIRST  CONGRESS  OF  SOVIETS      121 

if  the  Soviet  itself  were  constantly  dinning  it  into  their 
ears  that  the  chief  foes  were  the  **  property-owning 
classes,"  if  even  Ministers  loudly  proclaimed  that  they 
had  entered  the  Cabinet  for  the  purpose  of  exacerbating 
class  warfare  ?  Such  contradictions  were  constantly  to 
be  met  with,  and  were  clearly  seen  at  the  Congress  of 
Soviets  held  in  Petrograd  (16th  June  to  6th  July). 
The  Congress  was  composed  of  1090  delegates.  Of 
these  285  were  Social-Revolutionaries,  248  Mensheviks, 
105  Bolsheviks,  and  32  Internationalists.  The  other 
Socialistic  groups  had  very  few  representatives.  The 
Populist  Socialists  numbered  only  eleven. 

At  this  Congress  the  new  democracy  reviewed  its 
forces  and  ideals.  As  yet  the  Soviets  had  neither 
legislative  nor  executive  powers,  but  their  influence  on 
State  affairs  was  already  predominant.  The  motions 
passed  at  these  wordy  sittings  were  no  mere  verbal 
exercises,  but  practically  affected  the  life  of  Russia. 
And  yet  the  speeches  still  reflected  the  same  old  hazy 
dogmatism  of  the  irresponsible  party  Congresses,  though 
some  orators,  especially  the  Socialist  Ministers,  were 
already  making  desperate  efforts  to  find  a  more  practical 
way.  They  struggled  with  the  extreme  wing.  They 
tried  to  find  a  position  where  their  Socialistic  ideology 
would  not  be  at  variance  with  the  interests  of  the 
Russian  State.  The  boldest  opponent  of  the  Bolsheviks 
was  Kerensky,  then  Minister  of  War.  A  regular  duel 
took  place  between  him  and  Lenin.  At  that  time 
Kerensky  was  preparing  for  the  summer  advance 
against  the  Germans,  that  last  desperate  attempt  of 
Revolutionary  Democracy  to  solve  the  insoluble  problem 
— to  make  the  soldiers  fight  after  having  freed  them 
from  all  bonds  of  discipline. 

Kerensky  had  already  visited  the  front.  Clothed 
now  with  authority  he  had  got  a  nearer  view  of  what 


122     FEOM  LIBERTY  TO  BEEST-LITOVSK       ch. 

went  on  in  tlie  barracks,  at  the  rear  and  at  the  front. 
He  said,  turning  to  the  Bolsheviks :  "  The  policy  of 
fraternisation  coincides  with  that  of  the  German  General 
Staff,  which  hides  itself  behind  Zimmerwald  watch- 
words. We  must  show  more  caution  towards  Zimmer- 
wald, lest  we  play  into  the  hands  of  Germany."  ^ 

Tsereteli  exerted  all  his  southern  eloquence  in 
support  of  his  fellow-Minister.  He  even  ventured  to 
defend  the  right  of  the  Russian  Army  to  advance.  He 
put  the  question  to  the  Congress  as  to  whether  it  were 
necessary  to  advance,  and  from  various  benches  came 
the  answer,  ''  It  is  !  "  Only  the  Bolsheviks  laughed  in 
reply.  Perhaps  it  was  because  even  then  they  knew 
better  than  their  less  extreme  associates  to  what  a 
state  the  army  had  been  reduced  by  the  incoherent  and 
criminal  propaganda  of  Socialist  agitators. 

Lenin  determinedly  opposed  the  advance  which 
would  only  prolong  the  war.  Another  Bolshevik, 
Riazanoff,  demanded  that  no  punitive  measures  should 
be  taken  against  deserters,  as  that  would  be  inter- 
ference with  the  liberty  of  citizens.  And  a  member  of 
the  same  party.  Ensign  Krylenko,  a  half-insane  young 
man  later  raised  by  the  Bolsheviks  to  the  high  rank 
of  Commander-in-Chief,  reproached  Kerensky  in  his 
report  on  the  army  with  doing  nothing  for  its  demo- 
cratisation.  He  said  that  the  soldiers  were  murmuring, 
"  The  combing  out  of  Generals  has  been  done  from  below, 

^  The  day  before  this  Milyukoff  made  a  long  speech  about  Zimmerwald  in 
the  Duma  Committee.  "  Working  on  parallel  lines  with  the  ideologists  of 
Zimmerwald,  the  German  agents  attain  objects  which  please,  on  the  one  hand, 
our  extreme  parties,  and  on  the  other,  the  German  Government.  .  .  .  Lenin 
and  Trotsky,  who  advocate  perpetual  revolution,  and  their  comrades,  who 
have  sinned  against  all  the  articles  of  the  penal  code,  are  proceeding  unhindered 
to  carry  infection  into  society  and  into  the  army."  Milyukoff  demanded  that 
the  Government  should  arrest  Lenin.  But  though  his  estimate  was  practically 
the  same  as  Milyukoff's,  Kerensky  did  not  go  so  far  as  his  political  opponent 
demanded.  Trotsky  called  Milyukoff  "a  dishonourable  slanderer"  for  the 
expressions  quoted  above.  No  voice  on  the  Soviet  was  raised  to  protest 
against  this  attack,  for  Milyukoff  was  an  Imperialist,  and  Lenin — a  comrade. 


VI         THE  FIRST  CONGRESS  OF  SOVIETS      123 

while  now  we  are  being  ordered  from  above  to  obey 
unconditionally. ' ' 

The  Congress  listened  to  these  Bolshevist  speeches. 
It  did  not  approve,  neither  did  it  protest  against  their 
mad  criminality  in  fomenting  mischief  in  the  whole 
army.  The  degree  of  political  intelligence  at  the  Con- 
gress was  quite  indefinite.  First,  it  riotously  applauded 
Plekhanofi's  passionate  appeals  to  fight  the  Germans, 
and  then  immediately  passed  the  following  motion  on 
the  war : 

"  The  termination  of  the  war  by  the  defeat  of  one 
group  of  belligerents  would  be  the  source  of  new  wars, 
making  the  breach  between  nations  still  wider."  The 
idea  of  a  separate  peace  was  rejected  by  the  Congress, 
for  the  reason  that  it  would  "  increase  the  tendency  of 
the  dominant  classes  towards  annexation,  would  not 
free  Russia  from  the  grip  of  world  imperialism,  and 
would  make  the  international  imion  of  the  labouring 
classes  more  difficult."  In  short,  there  was  a  complete 
confusion  of  ideas. 

No  attempt  was  to  be  made  to  gain  a  victory  over 
Germany,  but  neither  was  a  separate  peace  to  be  con- 
cluded. This  formula,  enunciated  by  the  Soviet  State 
in  July  1917,  was  very  similar  to  Trotsky's  later  famous 
motto  :   *'  Neither  peace  nor  war." 

In  the  motion  passed  by  the  Congress  of  Soviets  on 
the  war,  there  was  not  one  word  to  encourage  the  army 
to  military  activity.  All  hopes  were  centred  on  the 
"  earthly  establishment  of  revolutionary  international- 
ism," on  an  appeal  to  democracies  to  join  in  the  cry  of 
"  peace  without  annexation  and  indemnities.  .  .  .  The 
war  can  only  be  ended  by  the  united  efforts  of  the 
democracies  of  all  countries.  .  .  .  This  is  not  a  xmity 
in  warfare,  but  solidarity  of  labour." 

Lenin  put  the  matter  more  simply.    He  demanded 


124     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

that  an  ultimatum  should  be  sent  to  the  Allies ;  did 
they  or  did  they  not  agree  to  reconsider  the  aims  of  the 
war  in  accordance  with  the  programme  of  the  Petrograd 
Soviet  ? 

The  Minister  Tsereteli  and  his  colleagues  likewise 
tried  to  get  the  Allied  Governments  to  agree  to  such  a 
revision,  but  they  did  not  see  the  possibility  of  present- 
ing such  an  ultimatum,  and  wished  to  carry  on  negotia- 
tions with  the  Allied  Democracies.  In  this,  as  in  many 
other  questions,  they  differed  from  the  Bolsheviks  not 
as  regards  objects  but  in  tactics. 

The  Congress  was  more  occupied  with  disputes 
about  the  war  and  about  government  than  with  social 
problems.  Nevertheless,  an  agrarian  resolution  was 
passed,  the  first  clause  being  :  "  The  land  with  its 
mineral  wealth,  water  and  timber  rights,  must  be 
withdrawn  from  the  market.  The  sovereign  right  to 
dispose  of  land  must  belong  to  the  whole  people,  who 
must  administer  it  through  the  democratic  institutions 
of  self-government."  Thus  the  Congress  acknowledged 
the  principle  of  the  nationalisation  of  land  and  a  complete 
rupture  of  all  existing  agrarian  relations.  They  took  no 
account  whatever  of  the  impossibility  of  carrying  out 
such  a  reform  at  a  time  when  disorganisation  of  food- 
supplies  and  national  economy  was  so  complete  that 
the  description  given  by  the  Food  Minister,  Peshekhonoff , 
and  the  Minister  of  Labour,  Skobeleff,  gave  a  sobering 
shock  to  their  listeners.  But  the  Bolsheviks,  in  Lenin's 
person,  at  once  turned  this  impression  to  advantage  by 
suggesting  a  simple  way  out  of  all  difficulties.  Let 
them  take  the  power  into  their  own  hands  by  arresting 
the  capitalists  and  all  would  be  well.  The  Congress 
could  neither  agree  to  this  nor  find  any  other  issue. 

The  majority  of  the  members  of  the  Congress 
professed   economic   materialism,   but  even   the   stern 


THE  FIRST  CONGRESS  OF  SOVIETS      125 

voice  of  economic  reality  could  not  bring  them  to 
their  senses,  and  make  them  cast  away  revolutionary 
romanticism.  For  they  could  not  be  guided  by  the 
practical  necessities  of  storm -tossed  Russia,  when, 
according  to  their  exponent  Lieber,  "  the  Russian 
Revolution  had  to  settle  social  questions  involving  the 
interests  of  every  worker  in  the  world." 

These  beginners  in  statecraft  were  far  more  con- 
cerned about  the  Stockholm  Conference,  and  the 
creation  of  a  "  coalition  of  the  Labouring  Democracies 
of  the  world,"  than  about  the  defence  and  organisation 
of  Russia. 

Now  Russian  affairs  were  very  much  on  the  decline. 
During  the  first  three  months  after  the  Revolution  both 
the  military  and  the  economic  situation  had  grown  still 
worse  than  under  the  Tsar.  The  people,  freed  from  the 
stifling  prison  of  Tsarism,  were  drimk  with  unwonted 
liberty  as  with  wine.  They  understood  liberty  as  the 
possibility  of  throwing  aside  all  forms  of  obligation,  all 
discipline,  and  with  it  all  ideas  of  duty.  This  is  a 
painful  process,  an  inevitable  fermentation  accompany- 
ing every  revolution.  In  Russia  it  was  intensified  by 
war-weariness,  the  ignorance  of  the  masses,  and  the 
dogmatic  narrowness  and  blindness  of  those  who  had 
undertaken  to  lead  them.  Little  by  little,  not  hearing 
any  words  of  real  denunciation  and  stern  rebuke,  not 
meeting  with  any  serious  rebuff  either  from  the  Govern- 
ment or  the  Soviet,  the  masses  became  unbridled  in 
their  actions,  they  grew  accustomed  only  to  demand 
and  to  give  nothing  in  return.  They  had  not  yet 
attained  either  to  an  idea  of  a  State  or  of  any  real 
feeling  of  responsibility  and  duty,  and,  nevertheless,  at 
all  the  meetings  it  was  dinned  into  them,  "  All  is  now 
yours,  take  it  and  reign."  Political  liberty,  which  to 
the  educated  classes  and  to  the  more  thoughtful  repre- 


126     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       oh. 

sentatives  of  the  people  was  in  itself  sometHng  of 
absolute  value,  did  not  bring  any  real  change  into 
the  life  of  millions  of  poorer  Russian  citizens  of 
either  sex. 

What  is  the  good  of  liberty  when  one  has,  as  hereto- 
fore, to  sit  in  the  trenches,  work  at  the  factory,  perform 
dreary,  toilsome  labour,  and  to  plough  the  land — often 
another  man's  ?  And  inevitably  a  wave  of  economic 
social  demands  arose.  These  were  the  same  demands 
which  all  the  Socialistic  programmes  promised  to 
satisfy,  and  therefore  the  majority  of  the  leaders  not 
only  lacked  the  courage  to  raise  obstacles  to  the 
imrealisable  desires  of  the  masses,  but  frequently 
prompted  and  incited  them.  In  questions  of  State 
authority,  the  Soviets,  holding  the  class  and  not  the 
democratic  point  of  view,  could  likewise  do  nothing  to 
instil  ideas  of  discipline  and  order. 

Already  in  April  1917  all  kinds  of  independent 
republics  began  to  be  formed  all  over  Russia.  Some 
country  town,  led  by  an  enterprising  Soviet,  and  some- 
times by  a  lunatic  or  a  "  black-gang  "  Tsarist,  would 
declare  itself  independent.  At  first  such  news  merely 
raised  a  laugh.  At  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution 
every  one  was  in  a  good  humour,  and  was  prepared  to 
regard  the  wildest  escapades  as  innocent  child's  play. 
But  already  in  June  it  became  clear  that  this  was  no 
chance  game  of  local  politicians,  but  a  sign  of  an  insidious 
disease  of  the  State.  Tsaritsin,  Kherson,  Kirsanov, 
Kostroma,  Ekaterinburg,  Irkutsk,  Helsingf ors,  Cronstadt 
— all  declared  themselves  autonomous,  Nevertheless, 
they  still  demanded  money  from  the  Provisional  Govern- 
ment. And  the  Government  gave  it,  partly  from 
weakness,  partly  on  the  old  theory  of  non-resistance. 
Thus  the  resources  of  the  Russian  State  Treasury 
endowed  all  these  independent  new  repubUcs. 


THE  FIRST  CONGRESS  OF  SOVIETS      127 

At  the  same  time  numerous  races  inhabiting  Russia 
attempted  to  apply  the  principle  of  self-determination 
to  their  own  case.  The  old  autocratic  regime  was  dead. 
The  new  had  not  yet  been  bom.  What  it  would  be  like, 
what  it  ought  to  be,  no  one  as  yet  knew.  Some  said 
that  Russia  must  be  a  federal  republic,  others  considered 
that  wide  powers  of  local  government  in  an  undivided 
State  would  be  sufficient.  The  Soviet  took  the  first 
point  of  view,  and  accordingly  supported  the  claims  of 
the  different  nationalities.  Lenin  went  still  further  and 
maintained  that  Finland,  Poland,  Esthonia,  Courland, 
the  Ukraine,  and  Transcaucasia  were  all  annexed 
provinces  which  had  the  right  to  secede  from  Russia. 

Finland  wanted  complete  secession  from  Russia, 
thereby  creating  a  military  menace  to  the  whole  north 
of  Russia  and  the  Baltic  Fleet.  In  the  south  a  group 
of  the  intelligentsia,  supported  from  Vienna,  had  begun 
agitating  in  favour  of  the  foimdation  first  of  an  autono- 
mous and  then  of  an  independent  Ukraine.  This  gave 
the  first  impulse  to  that  ruinous  civil  war  between  the 
south  and  the  north  of  Russia,  owing  to  which  so  much 
blood  has  been  and  is  still  being  spilt. 

But  at  that  time,  in  July  1917,  few  people  clearly 
understood  all  the  destructiveness  of  these  local 
separatist  demands.  On  the  other  hand  every  one  saw 
the  military  danger  of  the  situation  in  Finland  at  the 
two  naval  ports  of  Helsingfors  and  Cronstadt,  where 
almost  the  whole  of  the  Baltic  Fleet  was  concentrated. 
Into  these  places,  almost  from  the  very  first  days  of 
the  Revolution,  German  agents  had  wormed  their  way, 
and  a  successful  Bolshevist  propaganda  had  been 
carried  on  with  the  inevitable  accompaniment  of  a 
systematic  massacre  of  officers.  Notwithstanding  the 
enormous  strategic  importance  of  these  ports,  Prince 
Lvoff's  Cabinet  did  not  even  attempt  to  struggle  with 


128     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

the  secessionists  or  to  save  these  naval  bases  from 
criminal  agitators,  both  German  and  Russian. 

When,  on  the  1st  July,  Cronstadt  declared  itself 
an  independent  republic,  and  made  Roshal,  a  student 
twenty  years  of  age,  President,  the  Government  supinely 
carried  on  negotiations  with  this  boy,  and  let  him 
indicate  whom  they  were  to  appoint  as  Government 
Commissary.  But  when  the  naval  oflB.cers,  who  had 
been  arrested  during  the  first  few  days  of  the  Revolution, 
were  imprisoned  in  the  Cronstadt  torture  house,  even 
the  Soviet  found  it  necessary  to  interfere  and  to  issue  an 
appeal  containing  the  following  words  : 

It  depends  on  the  inhabitants  of  Cronstadt  whether  the  black 
spot  on  the  revolutionary  horizon  will  disappear  for  ever,  or  grow 
larger  and  larger,  until  it  obscures  the  rising  sun  of  Liberty. 

Fortunately,  besides  this  appeal,  they  also  sent 
delegates,  who  succeeded  in  having  the  officers  brought 
to  trial.  The  trial  disclosed  revolting  particulars  of 
mob-law  and  insults  inflicted  in  most  cases  on  totally 
innocent  men.  The  majority  of  the  persons  arrested 
were  set  free.  But  the  fleet  was  rapidly  rotting  in  the 
same  way  as  the  army. 

As  early  as  the  end  of  May,  Kirpichnikoff — the 
famous  private  of  the  Volhynsky  Regiment,  who  could 
hardly  be  accused  of  being  counter-revolutionary  since 
in  March  he  was  the  first  to  lead  the  soldiers  against  the 
old  Government — ^wrote  an  open  letter  to  Prince  Lvoff, 
in  which  he  called  upon  the  Government  to  fight  against 
anarchy,  saying,  "  The  fraternisation  with  Germans  at 
the  front  and  criminal  leniency  in  the  rear  are  crimes 
of  equal  magnitude  against  our  country.  .  .  .  The 
Revolutionary  Army  cannot  remain  inactive  before 
the  enemy,  or  the  Revolutionary  Government  before 
sedition." 


THE  FIRST  CONGRESS  OF  SOVIETS      129 

This  was  one  of  many  appeals  made  from  all  sides. 
The  officers,  insulted,  constantly  subjected  to  degrada- 
tion, given  over  to  the  control  of  the  soldiery  by  Order 
No.  1,  lived  in  an  atmosphere  of  suspicion  and  insults. 
But  nevertheless  they  tried  to  organise,  although  the 
Soviets  and  then  the  Committees  looked  very  much 
askance  at  officers'  organisations.  In  consequence  of 
perpetual  threats  there  grew  up  among  the  officers  a 
tendency  to  display  subserviency  to  their  new  masters, 
the  soldiers.  The  position  of  honest  patriots  in  the  army 
became  more  and  more  difficult.  Later,  at  the  Moscow 
Congress,  General  AlexeiefE  defined  the  position  of  the 
officers  in  the  following  bitter  words  :  "  The  best  officers 
are  perishing,  the  worst  are  becoming  thorough 
scoundrels." 

In  the  summer  of  1917  preparations  were  already 
being  made  for  the  coming  wholesale  massacre  of 
officers.  They  were  systematically  discredited  in  the 
eyes  of  the  masses ;  counter-revolutionaries  were  most 
diligently  sought  for  among  their  number,  although  it 
was  well  known  that  the  regular  officers,  who  had  more 
of  the  spirit  of  caste,  had  been  killed  off  during  the 
first  years  of  the  war,  and  that  by  the  time  the  Revolu- 
tion broke  out  the  army  was  officered  by  men  of  all 
classes— sons  of  the  clergy,  petty  employees,  peasants. 

As  has  already  been  mentioned,  the  very  first 
Officers'  Congress,  at  which  AlexeiefE  made  his  prophetic 
speech,  drew  down  upon  itself  the  acute  displeasure  of 
the  Soviet.    But  still  the  Officers'  League  was  organised. 

In  June  another  Officers'  Congress  was  held  in 
Petrograd,  with  an  attendance  of  five  hundred.  Now 
there  was  already  a  certain  rift  in  their  ranks,  part  of 
the  officers  going  with  the  Soviet,  more  anxious  to 
impregnate  the  army  with  the  political  opinions  of 
Revolutionary  Democracy  than  to  make   it   efficient. 


130     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

The  other  party  demanded  that  the  Provisional  Govern- 
ment should  be  fully  supported  and  trusted,  since  with 
divided  authority  there  could  be  no  powerful  army. 

After  a  hot  discussion,  a  motion  was  passed  demand- 
ing the  enactment  of  a  law  punishing  "  the  non-fulfilment 
of  military  orders  at  the  front."  The  following  clause 
in  the  motion  is  of  special  importance  : 

The  work  of  the  Army  Committees  shall  be  restricted,  within 
clearly  defined  limits,  to  economic,  social,  cultural,  and  educa- 
tional questions,  and  a  decided  struggle  should  be  carried  on 
against  the  tendency  to  put  into  practice  the  election  of  com- 
manders, and  the  corporate  direction  of  military  operations. 

The  question  as  to  how  far  the  principle  of  election 
might  be  carried  out  in  the  army,  and  the  limits  of  the 
jurisdiction  of  the  Committees,  was  one  of  the  sorest 
points  of  the  revolutionary  period.  Subsequently,  the 
first  serious  conflict  between  General  Korniloff,  Com- 
mander-in-Chief, and  the  Premier,  Kerensky,  arose  on 
this  very  subject. 

Already  by  the  middle  of  the  summer  of  1917  we 
see  the  melancholy  results  of  the  Committee  muddling, 
which  converted  the  army  from  a  disciplined  body, 
united  by  the  will  of  the  commanders,  into  a  mob  of 
meeting-attending  and  (alas  !)  thieving  tattlers. 

The  most  tragic  news  came  from  all  parts  of  the 
army.  During  the  first  half  of  June  there  was  a  regular 
mutiny  in  Shcherbatcheif 's  army.  Four  regiments  were 
cashiered  for  refusing  to  obey  military  orders.  The 
cavalry  surrounded  and  disarmed  them.  But  the  ring- 
leaders were  not  shot.  The  Government  merely  pub- 
lished an  appeal,  and  Kerensky  spoke  of  the  shamefulness 
of  fraternising  with  the  German  soldiers  and  selling 
them  Russian  bread. 

This  was  at  the  very  time  when  Kerensky,  as  War 


THE  FIRST  CONGRESS  OF  SOVIETS      131 

Minister,  went  to  the  front,  trying  to  arouse  the  spirit 
of  the  Russian  soldiers  by  his  eloquence. 

In  one  of  his  speeches  the  Socialist  Minister  announced 
to  the  regiments  gathered  round  him  that,  as  they  had 
managed  to  fight  so  courageously  under  the  yoke  of 
Tsardom,  they  had  even  more  cause  to  perform  miracles 
of  bravery  now,  when  fighting  for  liberty  and  land. 
One  of  the  soldiers  asked  with  a  grin  :  "  And  if  I  an^ 
killed,  what  land  shall  I  get  then  ?  " 

In  these  simple  words  we  see  the  psychology  of 
millions  of  peasants  in  soldiers'  tunics.  One  after 
another  they  left  the  front,  deserting  to  hurry  home,  for 
fear  that  the  land  would  be  re-allotted  without  them, 
and  that  they  would  get  nothing. 

Kerensky  was  a  great  success  at  the  front,  especially 
among  the  young  soldiers  of  revolutionary  but  not 
Bolshevist  tendencies.  But  his  desire  was  chiefly  for 
popularity  among  the  soldiers  ;  he  did  not  seem  to 
understand  the  importance  of  the  officers,  and  during 
his  stay  at  the  front  did  nothing  whatever  either  to 
support  their  authority  or  improve  the  discipline  of  the 
army. 

And,  indeed,  what  conception  of  discipline  could  be 
left  in  the  mind  of  a  soldier  who  for  three  years  had 
served  as  a  private  in  the  Tsar's  army,  with  its  severities 
and  brutal  subordination,  when  the  Minister  of  War 
himself  appeared  before  him,  and  in  answer  to  his 
address  of  "  General,"  he  was  answered  by  Kerensky, 
"  I  am  not  a  General,  but  a  comrade  "  ? 

At  this  time  the  Okopnaia  Pravda  (Trench  Truth) 
and  other  Bolshevist  and  non-Bolshevist  papers  were 
carrying  on  an  anti-war  propaganda,  undermining  all 
confidence  in  the  commanders  and  the  whole  Govern- 
ment. The  Bolsheviks  knew  that  the  front  was  pre- 
paring for  an  advance,  and  tried  to  prevent  it  by  making 


132     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

an  advance  in  the  rear — on  the  Government.  The 
other  Socialists  became  agitated.  Soviet  orators  went 
the  round  of  the  factories  and  works,  proving  that  the 
Bolsheviks  wanted  to  "  stab  the  Revolution  in  the 
back."  And  the  Bolsheviks  kept  declaring  that  the 
Congress  of  Soviets — ^where  their  motion  had  been 
rejected — ^was  composed  of  Imperialists  and  landed 
gentry,  and  that  the  whole  Coalition  Government  had 
sold  itself  to  the  bourgeoisie. 

The  offended  comrades  of  the  Bolsheviks  openly 
called  them  "  traitors  and  betrayers  of  the  Revolution  " 
(Workmen's  Gazette — a  Menshevist  organ).  Neverthe- 
less, the  Soviet  appointed  a  demonstration  for  the  1st 
July,  to  show  democratic  solidarity  and  to  intimidate 
counter-revolutionists,  who  were  more  and  more  feared 
in  Soviet  circles. 

On  the  day  fixed  for  thiS  demonstration,  Petrograd 
discovered  that  our  army  had  made  an  advance  near 
Brzezany,  captured  part  of  the  German  trenches,  and 
taken  10,000  prisoners.  It  would  seem  that  the  whole 
capital  ought  to  have  celebrated  this  first  victory  of 
the  revolutionary  army.^  But  only  the  intelligentsia, 
officers,  women,  and  disabled  soldiers  took  part  in 
the  demonstration  hastily  got  up  by  the  Cadets 
and  Plekhanoff.  The  soldiers  sneered.  In  Peterhof 
the  famous  machine-gunners  thrashed  the  military 
cadets  who  took  part  in  the  demonstration.  The 
workmen  in  the  town  took  no  part  whatever  in  the 
manifestations.  Kerensky  had  already  lost  his  popu- 
larity among  the  Social-Revolutionaries.  At  the  Con- 
gress of  this  party,  he  was  not  elected  to  the  Central 
Committee.    But    the    Executive    Committee    of    the 

1  Even  the  dethroned  and  imprisoned  Tsar  marked  this  as  a  day  of  gladness, 
as  may  be  seen  in  his  diary,  published  by  the  Bolsheviks  in  the  summer  of 
1918. 


THE  FIRST  CONGRESS  OF  SOVIETS      133 

Soviet  still  supported  him,  as  well  as  its  other  repre- 
sentatives in  the  Government. 

The  furious  pacifist  propaganda,  which  for  three 
months  had  been  so  madly  carried  on  by  extreme 
Socialists,  now  bore  fruit,  although  the  same  Congress, 
which  had  passed  the  motion  on  the  "  danger  of  the 
defeat  of  any  of  the  belligerents,"  was  obliged,  in  answer 
to  Kerensky's  triumphant  telegram,  to  send  a  fraternal 
greeting  "  to  the  democratic  organisation  of  soldiers 
and  officers  tempered  in  the  fire  of  the  Revolution,  who 
are  shedding  their  blood  on  the  field  of  battle."  But 
the  Soviet  added  a  rider  to  the  effect  that  "it  is  not 
our  fault  that  the  war  is  still  going  on."  They  empha- 
sised their  opinion  that  the  result  of  the  successful 
advance  did  not  lie  in  the  victory  over  the  Germans,  but 
in  the  fact  that  *'  Your  organised  strength,  as  proved 
by  this  advance,  gives  weight  to  the  voice  of  revolu- 
tionary Russia  in  speaking  to  the  belligerent.  Neutral 
and  Allied  coimtries,  and  will  help  to  end  the  war." 

Thus,  even  when  military  operations  were  resumed, 
the  Soviet  placed  both  the  Allies  and  the  Central  Powers 
on  the  same  footing,  not  once  using  the  word  "  enemy." 
But  it  was  perhaps  for  the  first  time  that  the  word 
"  Motherland  "  had  been  used  in  an  official  document. 
"  No  one  in  these  days  dare  evade  doing  his  duty  to  his 
Motherland."  Hitherto  they  had  only  spoken  of  duty 
to  the  Revolution. 

Possibly  this  divergence  from  international  phrase- 
ology may  have  been  due  to  the  influence  of  the  more 
moderate,  sober,  and  patriotic  Soviet  of  Peasants' 
Delegates,  whose  signatures  stand  at  the  bottom  of  the 
Manifesto. 

This  document  (printed  on  the  3rd  July)  is  a  typical 
example  of  the  ambiguous  position  of  the  Soviet  in 
fundamental  problems  of  State. 


134     FROM  LIBEETY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK    ch.vi 

Wlien  the  particulars  of  the  advance  began  to  arrive, 
the  joy  of  the  patriots  was  rapidly  damped.  It  turned 
out  that  the  principal  part  had  been  played  by  the 
officers.  It  was  they  who  advanced,  often  alone, 
without  their  soldiers.  Whole  units  did  not  wish  to 
obey  orders,  and  held  sittings  and  meetings,  disputing 
and  discussing  whether  to  advance  or  not.  The  same 
soldiers  who  in  the  Tsar's  time  advanced  without  a 
murmur,  and  though  almost  unarmed,  and  without  the 
support  of  artillery,  performed  the  most  difficult  opera- 
tions— ^now,  with  unheard-of  quantities  of  munitions, 
under  undreamt-of  conditions  of  liberty,  proved  they 
had  lost  the  spirit  of  an  army. 

Such  was  the  ruin  wrought  in  the  army  by  revolu- 
tionary seasoning  and  democratic  organisation,  which, 
however,  should  be  more  justly  termed  anarchistic 
disorganisation.^  And  day  by  day  its  fruits  became 
more  evident. 

*  It  must  be  pointed  out  that  when  Trotsky  (who  of  course  was  loudest  in 
his  demands  for  the  sovereign  rights  of  Soldiers'  Committees)  was  organising 
the  Red  Army,  he  abolished  the  Committees,  and  replaced  them  by  the  old 
discipline  of  sole  command. 


CHAPTER  VII 

REAR  AND  FRONT  BROKEN  THROUGH 

Independent  Ukraine  and  the  Ministerial  crisis — ^The  July  Bolshevist 
insurrection — German  advance — Front  broken  through — Disputes 
about  Capital  Punishment — State  of  the  army — The  "  Save  the 
Revolution  !  " — The  Committees  or  powerful  Government  ? 

In  July  a  series  of  very  important  events  took  place, 
which  gave  a  clear  idea  of  the  extent  of  Russia's  dis- 
solution. 

The  whole  period  from  the  entry  of  the  Socialists 
into  the  Cabinet  early  in  May,  until  the  November 
Bolshevist  revolution,  is  full  of  the  tragically  futile 
attempts  of  the  Soviet  Centre  to  effect  a  transition 
from  the  Zimmerwald  position  to  that  of  State  responsi- 
bility. Although  the  Revolutionary  Democracy  with 
all  the  sincerity  of  despair  tried  to  rally  round  Kerensky's 
Government,  and  gave  all  its  strength,  all  its  best  men, 
this  transition  proved  impossible.  There  was  no  opposi- 
tion from  the  Right.  In  spite  of  all  the  acuteness 
of  the  difference  of  opinions,  both  the  Constitutional- 
Democrats  and  the  employers'  party  in  Moscow  sent 
their  members  to  the  Cabinet,  although  after  every 
crisis  it  became  more  and  more  difi&cult  to  find  a  common 
language,  since  the  Socialists  were  obstinately  pursuing 
the  path  of  class  government  as  opposed  to  national. 
The  Left  wing,  i.e,  the  majority  of  the  Social- 
Democrats    and    part    of    the    Social-Revolutionaries, 

135 


136     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

carried  on  an  incessant  agitation,  both  secret  and  open, 
striving  to  obtain  the  immediate  introduction  of  the 
dictatorship  of  the  proletariat.  The  doctrinal  exponent 
of  this  group  was  Lenin,  while  the  practical  executor  was 
Trotsky.  In  reality,  Chernoff,  the  Social-Revolutionary, 
was  also  working  in  that  direction.  The  Socialist  Centre 
could  not  withstand  the  pressure  put  upon  it.  Trusting 
neither  the  bourgeoisie  nor  the  Radicals,  the  Centre 
gradually  went  over  to  the  Left,  lost  its  footing  and  fell, 
dragging  after  it  the  whole  of  the  Russian  population, 
in  whose  name  the  first  and  second  Soviets  had  acted. 

Bound  to  the  Bolsheviks  by  their  primary  ideas  and 
programme,  the  Socialists  of  the  Centre,  even  after  the 
July  insurrection,  could  not  break  away  from  their 
"  comrades-in-ideas."  Meanwhile,  in  July,  both  the 
Bolsheviks  and  the  Germans  almost  simultaneously 
managed  to  break  through  the  rear  and  front  re- 
spectively. 

Considering  the  vastness  of  Russia,  the  complicated 
network  of  military  operations,  the  national,  economic, 
party,  and  class  conflicts, — the  general  chaos  entailed  by 
every  revolution, — ^it  is  no  easy  matter  to  reconstruct 
the  real  history  of  the  Russian  Revolution,  or  even  of 
separate  episodes.  It  is  still  more  diflB.cult  to  fix  exactly 
where  the  casual  and  elemental  end,  and  forethought, 
intention,  and  planning  begin.  But  there  are  certain 
coincidences,  at  whose  meaning  we  may  guess. 

On  the  night  of  the  16th  July  a  Bolshevist  insur- 
rection broke  out  in  Petrograd.  It  coincided  with 
certain  other  events  which  shook  the  stability  of  the 
Russian  State,  with  the  declaration  of  the  independence 
of  the  Ukraine,  the  Government  crisis,  and  the  German 
advance. 

The  dismemberment  of  Russia,  aflame  with  revolu- 
tion, began  all  over  her  vast  area  (on  August  1,  1914, 


vn  REAR  AND  FRONT  BROKEN  THROUGH  137 

Russia  occupied  one -sixth  of  the  whole  surface  of 
the  earth). 

First  separate  towns  and  boroughs,  then  whole 
provinces,  would  declare  their  independence.  And  the 
weaker  the  Revolutionary  Government  grew,  the  more 
strongly  was  the  separatist  tendency  of  the  component 
parts  felt.  This  is  partly  explained  by  the  lawful  feeling 
of  self-preservation,  by  the  desire  to  shield  oneself  from 
infection,  anarchy,  and  political  dissolution.  But  it  was 
likewise  to  a  great  extent  due  to  political  adventure  and 
personal  ambition. 

The  history  of  the  Ukraine  secession  bears  obvious 
traces  of  both  one  and  the  other  of  the  aforesaid  causes. 
Strictly  speaking,  the  Ukraine,  as  a  definite  political 
or  even  ethnological  whole,  never  existed.  In  bygone 
days  Kiev  was  the  capital  of  ancient  Russia.  The 
inhabitants  of  a  part  of  Southern  Russia,  i.e.  the  pro- 
vinces of  Poltava,  Chernigov,  Kiev,  Volhynia,  and 
Podolia,  speak  the  South  Russian  language  or  dialect. 
Philologists  are  still  disputing  as  to  whether  this  may 
be  called  a  language.  Apparently  it  would  be  more 
correct  to  consider  that  there  are  three  dialects  of  the 
common  Russian  language,  namely,  the  Great  Russian, 
White  Russian,  and  Little  Russian.  The  last  is  likewise 
spoken  by  the  Ruthenians  in  Galicia.  For  several 
centuries  the  South  Russian  provinces  lived  the  same 
life  as  the  rest  of  the  Russian  Empire,  and  together  with 
the  rest  of  the  population  established  both  the  Russian 
State  and  Russian  culture.  But  in  addition  Little  Russia 
had  her  own  culture,  her  own  folklore,  her  own  customs, 
her  own  songs,  and  even  her  own  literature— the  latter 
very  poor  as  compared  with  that  of  Russia  as  a  whole. 
There  were  some  far  from  numerous  circles  among  the 
educated  classes  who  made  it  their  aim  to  arouse  the 
national  Ukraine  spirit.    They  were  unsuccessful.     The 


138     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

Tsar's  Government,  with  its  usual  despotic  narrowness 
and  blind  centralisation,  fought  against  these  as  yet 
purely  cultural  aspirations  of  the  Ukraine  patriots  by 
means  of  brutal  repression.  It  was  even  forbidden  to 
print  books  in  the  Little  Russian  dialect,  and  the  works 
of  their  poet  Shevchenko  could  for  a  long  time  circulate 
only  in  manuscript.  When  at  last  books  and  newspapers 
were  allowed  to  be  printed,  the  common  people  simply 
failed  to  understand  them,  since  for  the  expression  of 
the  more  complex,  more  abstract  ideas,  the  Ukrainists 
employed  the  so-called  Lvov  or  Lemberg  language, 
which  is  entirely  unfamiliar  to  the  peasantry  of  Southern 
Russia. 

The  use  of  the  Lvov  literary  language  by  the 
Ukrainians  of  Southern  Russia  to-day  has  a  more  than 
philological  significance.  Those  Ukrainians  who  under 
the  Tsar's  regime  found  it  impossible  to  work  in  Russia, 
took  refuge  among  the  kindred  population  of  Eastern 
Galicia,  where,  under  the  protection  of  the  Austrian 
Government,  who  sought  in  them  a  counterpoise  to 
Polish  influence  and  a  lever  for  weakening  Russia,  they 
established  in  Lemberg  a  Ukrainian  national  and 
literary  centre.  The  movement  was  fostered  not  only 
from  Vienna,  but  from  Berlin.  The  idea  of  enfeebling 
Russia  by  creating  an  independent  Ukraine  was  a 
favourite  theme  of  aggressive  Austrian  and  German 
politicians  before  the  war ;  and  during  the  war  a 
so-called  "  League  for  the  Liberation  of  the  Ukraine  " 
was  one  of  the  chief  instruments  of  the  propaganda  of 
the  Central  Powers  in  Eastern  Europe.  The  Russian 
Government  watched  this  movement  with  the  greatest 
suspicion,  and  shortly  after  the  war  began,  closed  down 
in  Russia  the  Ukrainian  Press,  the  long-standing  restric- 
tions on  which  had  been  relaxed  after  1905.  The 
Revolution  restored  to  the  Ukrainians  liberty  of  action. 


vn  REAR  AND  FRONT  BROKEN  THROUGH  139 

and  Kiev  became  the  centre  of  a  new  national  movement 
in  which  both  hitherto  quiescent  Russian  Ukrainians 
and  Ukrainians  from  Galicia  took  a  very  active  part. 
It  should  be  added  that  the  ardour  of  the  Galician 
Ukrainians  was  stimulated  by  the  political  oppression 
they  had  suffered  after  the  Russian  occupation  of  Galicia. 

In  May  a  Congress  assembled  in  Kiev  loosely  repre- 
senting several  parties,  chiefly  Socialists,  which  had 
adopted  the  Ukrainian  national  programme,  and  also 
a  number  of  Ukrainian  educational  and  co-operative 
organisations  in  the  south  of  Russia.  This  Congress 
was  very  demonstrative  in  its  assertion  of  Ulcrainian 
autonomy  or  home  rule,  but  it  was  not  separatist— 
indeed  the  separatists  were  at  this  stage  in  a  very  small 
minority.  The  chief  work  of  the  Congress  was  to  elect 
a  sort  of  permanent  parliament  or  Rada,  which  is  the 
Ukrainian  for  Soviet  or  Council.  At  first  this  Rada  had 
no  place  in  the  Russian  administrative  system.  It  was 
a  purely  private  institution.  The  representative  of  the 
Provisional  Government  in  Kiev,  as  in  other  parts  of 
Russia,  was  a  Commissary  (in  place  of  the '  former 
Governor-General)  who  took  coimsel  with  a  local 
Committee  representing  all  parties  and  all  sections  of 
the  population.  But  the  Ukrainian  Rada  was  a  very 
active  organising  centre,  and  made  every  effort  to 
enforce  its  views  both  on  the  local  Commissary  and  the 
military  authorities,  and  on  the  Central  Government. 
It  engaged  in  agitation  among  the  peasantry  and  among 
the  troops,  and  played,  in  fact,  in  Kiev  the  part  that  in 
Petrograd  was  played  by  the  extreme  Socialists.  Its 
nationalist  propaganda  was  reinforced  by  demagogic 
Socialist  appeals. 

The  primary  aim  of  the  Ukrainians  was  to  create  a 
force  which  would  help  them  to  attain  their  national 
objects.    They  urged  the  Government  to  form  Ukrainian 


140     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BRE8T-LIT0VSK       ch. 

regiments  out  of  the  Southern  Russian  soldiers  in  the 
army.  The  Government,  on  the  advice  of  the  military 
authorities,  refused.  Thereupon  the  Ukrainians  formed 
in  Kiev  two  regiments  of  their  own,  consisting  chiefly  of 
deserters,  and  seized  the  necessary  arms  and  ammunition 
from  the  military  stores.  This  act  of  violence  led  to 
disorders,  ending  in  concessions  and  compromise.  The 
Rada  had  strengthened  its  position  by  sheer  daring,  by 
the  exercise  of  imlimited  bluff.  As  in  Petrograd,  so  in 
Kiev  the  Provisional  Government  was  unwilling  to  use 
force  to  check  the  process  of  disintegration,  and  the 
Ukrainian  leaders.  Professor  Grushevsky,  the  literary 
leader  of  the  movement  in  Lemberg,  the  Russian 
Ukrainian  novelist  Vinichenko,  the  insurance  agent 
Petliura,  and  other  lesser  lights  were  emboldened  by 
their  unexpected  success.  Early  in  July  they  formed 
a  scheme  for  the  autonomous  administration  of  the 
indefinite  area  called  the  Ukraine,  and  flourished  it 
threateningly  in  the  face  of  the  Provisional  Government. 
The  Government,  instead  of  giving  an  immediate 
reply,  decided  to  delegate  two  of  its  members,  Tsereteli 
and  Tereshchenko,  to  Kiev  to  investigate  the  situation 
and  report,  but  not  to  take  any  decision.  It  so  happened 
that  Kerensky  and  Nekrasoff  were  in  Kiev  at  the  time, 
and  they  took  part  unofficially  in  the  negotiations  with 
the  leaders  of  the  Rada.  Somehow  the  Ukrainians 
succeeded  in  so  impressing  the  young  Russian  Ministers 
with  the  seriousness  of  the  situation  that  these  latter 
consented  to  a  ready-made  scheme  for  the  establishment 
of  a  Ukrainian  General  Secretariat  or  Autonomous 
Government  for  the  administration  of  the  Ukraine. 
The  only  important  alteration  in  the  scheme  put  forward 
by  the  Rada  was  the  limitation  of  the  territory  in 
question  from  nine  provinces  to  five.  The  Russian 
Ministers  exceeded  their  powers  by  signing  an  agree- 


vn  REAK  AND  FRONT  BROKEN  THROUGH  141 

ment,  wired  that  they  had  done  so,  and  on  July  14 
returned  to  Petrograd  to  report. 

The  Cadet  members  of  the  Government  raised  strong 
objections  to  the  whole  proceeding.  On  the  strength  of 
independent  reports  they  denied  that  the  situation  in 
the  Ukraine  was  so  serious  as  to  necessitate  such  a  far- 
reaching  concession.  Further  they  insisted  that  Tsereteli 
and  Tereshchenko  had  exceeded  their  instructions  in 
signing  an  agreement,  and  they  denied  the  right  of  the 
Government  to  predetermine  the  mutual  relations 
between  the  various  parts  of  Russia,  since  such  questions 
could  only  be  decided  by  the  Constituent  Assembly. 
NekrasoS  declared  that  the  scheme  had  the  character 
of  an  ultimatum,  and  must  be  accepted  as  it  stood. 
After  a  heated  debate  the  majority  of  the  IV'Iinisters 
present  accepted  Nekrasoff's  point  of  view.  Thereupon 
Shingareif  and  the  other  Cadet  Ministers  resigned  on 
the  ground  that  they  could  not  be  parties  in  a  grossly 
illegal  act.  That  was  in  the  evening  of  July  14.  On  the 
following  day  this  serious  Ministerial  crisis  was  over- 
shadowed by  much  graver  events. 

From  that  time  on,  the  Ukrainian  movement 
gathered  strength  and  became  more  and  more  extreme, 
until  after  the  Bolshevist  rising  in  November  the  Rada 
proclaimed  the  complete  independence  of  the  Ukraine, 
and,  after  various  misadventures,  concluded  a  few 
months  later  a  separate  peace  with  Germany.  The 
stand  made  by  the  Cadets  against  the  dismemberment 
of  Russia  was  severely  condemned  by  the  moderate 
Socialists,  who  regarded  continual  concessions  as  the 
only  possible  form  of  tranquil  and  orderly  government. 
They  lived  to  rue  their  error. 

The  Government,  after  the  retirement  of  the  Cadets, 
maintained  a  feeble  and  unhappy  existence  throughout 
the  throes  of  a  violent  crisis,  which  ended  in  the  resigna- 


142     FEOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

tion  of  Prince  Lvoff,  and  the  constitution  of  a  third 
Provisional  Government  with  Kerensky  as  Premier. 

From  that  moment  the  predominance  of  the  Socialists 
in  the  Government  was  assured,  and  therefore  they  may 
be  considered  responsible  for  all  the  acts  and  all  the 
failures  to  act  of  the  authorities. 

At  the  time  of  this  Ministerial  crisis,  and  while 
negotiations  were  being  carried  on  in  regard  to  the  new 
Ministers  and  their  programmes,  the  Germans  broke 
through  the  Russian  line,  and  the  Bolsheviks  made  an 
attempt  to  break  through  the  rear.  On  the  night  of 
the  16th-17th  of  July  they  instigated  part  of  the 
Petrograd  garrison  to  leave  their  barracks,  and  led 
them  to  the  Taurida  Palace,  in  order  to  force  the  Soviet 
to  proclaim  itself  the  Government.  The  Bolsheviks 
also  summoned  two  warships  from  Cronstadt,  manned 
by  Bolshevist  sailors.  Armoured  cars  and  motor- 
lorries  with  machine-guns  began  to  rush  up  and  down 
the  streets  of  the  astonished  capital.  On  all  sides  there 
was  a  splutter  of  random  firing.  Not  only  the  victims, 
but  even  those  who  were  shooting  had  a  very  vague 
idea  of  what  was  the  matter,  or  of  whom  they  were 
fighting  against. 

The  firing  went  on  for  two  days,  during  which  Lenin, 
Trotsky,  Lunacharsky,  and  other  Bolshevist  orators 
made  speeches  from  the  balcony  of  Kchesinska's  house, 
inciting  the  mob  to  overthrow  the  Government  and 
take  the  power  into  their  own  hands.  The  Executive 
Committee  of  the  Soviet  in  session  at  the  Taurida  Palace 
was  in  danger  and  asked  for  help,  for  the  exhorta- 
tions of  Tchernoff  and  Prince  Tsereteli,  who  tried  to 
address  the  mob,  nearly  led  to  the  arrest  of  the  orators. 
Cossacks  were  sent  to  the  assistance  of  the  Soviet, 
and  were  fired  at  by  workmen  with  machine-guns. 
The  Bolsheviks  tried  to  seize  the  Intelligence  Depart- 


vu    REAR  AND  FRONT  BROKEN  THROUGH  143 

ment  where  the  information  concerning  German  spies 
was  concentrated.  But  they  were  driven  off  by  the 
disabled  soldiers,  who  in  general  showed  no  little 
steadiness  and  shrewdness  in  those  days  of  general 
confusion  and  dismay.  The  other  regiments,  i.e.  the 
notorious  Petrograd  garrison,  who  were  now  transformed 
into  a  well-fed,  lazy,  revolutionary  Pretorian  guard, 
looked  on  indifferently  at  the  Bolshevist  insurrection. 
Even  then  some  one  found  a  vindication  of  the  indiffer- 
ence: "We  don't  want  to  spill  the  blood  of  our 
brothers,"  that  is,  to  interfere  in  civil  war. 

The  Government  was  at  a  complete  loss.  It  was 
only  the  day  before,  on  Sunday  evening,  that  the  Cadet 
Ministers  had  left  the  Cabinet.  Kerensky  had  gone  off 
to  the  front.  The  insurrection  of  the  Bolsheviks  took 
place  on  Monday  night.  All  Tuesday,  Prince  Lvoff  was 
practically  the  sole  representative  of  the  Government, 
and  his  only  guard  were  the  disabled  soldiers. 

So  little  did  the  Revolutionary  Democracy  realise 
what  was  happening,  so  little  was  it  inclined  to  regard 
the  Bolsheviks  as  enemies  of  the  people,  that  at  the 
time  when  the.  Bolshevist  machine-guns  were  shooting 
down  the  peaceful  crowds  in  the  streets,  the  Social- 
Revolutionary  Gr.  Schreider,  Mayor  of  the  Petrograd 
City  Council,  which  had  been  already  re-elected 
under  the  new  universal  suffrage  law,  announced  that 
he  had  opened  soup-kitchens  for  the  Cronstadt  sailors. 
And  the  Socialist  majority  of  the  Council  were  indignant 
when  the  Cadet  members  announced  that  they  saw  no 
necessity  to  feed  the  sailors  who  had  come  to  Petro- 
grad to  shoot  peaceful  citizens  and  overthrow  the 
Government. 

But  however  weak  Prince  Lvoff's  Government 
might  be,  it  still  was  firm  enough  to  crush  the  insur- 
rection by  armed  force.     It  still  had  at  its  disposal 


144     FROM  LIBEETY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       oh. 

some  disciplined  troops,  capable  of  carr3ring  out  orders. 
Troops  were  called  out,  and  surrounded  Kchesinska's 
house  and  the  barracks  of  the  machine-gun  regiment, 
the  principal  stronghold  of  Bolshevism.  Seetug  that 
matters  were  taking  an  unpleasant  turn,  the  sailors 
made  haste  to  go  back  to  Cronstadt.  Three  days  after 
the  insurrection  was  put  down,  almost  without  blood- 
shed. Public  opinion  expressed  its  indignation.  On 
all  sides  were  heard  demands  that  decisive  measures 
should  be  taken  against  the  insurgents,  who  had  tried 
to  bring  about  a  civil  war.  The  Central  Committee  of 
the  Cadet  party  passed  a  resolution  demanding  the 
immediate  arrest  of  Lenin  and  his  accomplices,  and  the 
protection  of  the  freedom  of  Russia  from  any  fresh 
attempts  of  this  kind.  The  Government  ordered  the 
ringleaders  to  be  tried.  Measures  were  taken  to  disarm 
the  principal  supporters  of  Bolshevism— the  machine- 
gun  regiments  and  the  Red  Army  (the  formation  of 
which  had  at  one  time  been  advocated  by  the  Izvestia). 
Searches  and  arrests  were  ordered.  It  seemed  as  if 
at  last  the  Government  were  going  to  fight  for  the 
establishment  of  a  firm  authority.  The  Soviet  seemed 
as  though  it  were  ready  to  support  the  Government. 
In  one  of  its  appeals  it  said  that  these  street  mani- 
festations "  amounted  to  treachery.  Whoever  makes  an 
attempt  in  the  rear  to  coerce  the  will  of  the  plenipo- 
tentiaries of  Democracy,  is  plunging  a  dagger  into  the 
back  of  the  Revolutionary  Army  now  fighting  against 
the  Kaiser's  troops,  and  is  stirring  up  civil  war  in  its 
ranks." 

But  here  again  the  Revolutionary  Democracy 
stopped  half-way,  and  could  not  muster  enough  courage 
or  good  sense  to  draw  the  logical  conclusions  from  the 
behaviour  of  its  Left  wing.  On  the  20th  July,  three 
days  after  the  insurrection,  Alexinsky,  a  Social-Democrat 


vn  REAR  AND  FRONT  BROKEN  THROUGH  145 

of  the  PlekhanofE  group,  and  the  Social-Revolutionary 
Pankratieff  (an  old  revolutionary)  wrote  to  the  papers 
saying  that  they  had  documentary  proofs  that  the 
Bolsheviks  had  received  money  from  Berlin,  through 
Stockholm.  Even  the  banks  were  named  :  the  Disconto 
Gesellschaft,  Nya  Bank,  the  Siberian  Bank.  The  names 
of  the  intermediaries  were  also  given :  Parvus,  Ganetsky, 
Simienson,  and  Kozlovsky.  The  first  result  of  this 
disclosure  was  that  Alexinsky  was  not  admitted  to  the 
Soviet.  The  papers  raised  a  cry  that  the  Bolsheviks 
had  received  money  from  the  Germans,  and  the  Soviet 
promised  to  make  a  strict  inquiry  into  the  matter,  but 
begged  that  there  might  be  **  no  expression  of  opinion 
with  regard  to  the  events  or  to  comrade  Lenin."  One 
must  contrast  this  careful  attitude  towards  the  Bolshe- 
viks who,  according  to  the  words  of  the  Soviet  itself, 
had  plunged  a  dagger  into  the  back  of  the  army,  with 
the  ease  with  which  the  Soviet  discredited  and  insulted 
the  Russian  officers,  generals,  and  statesmen  of  the 
defencist  camp,  in  order  to  understand  what  were  the 
hopes,  and  where  lay  the  sympathies,  of  the  Revolu- 
tionary Democracy. 

Kerensky,  Minister  of  War,  reported  to  the  Govern- 
ment on  the  ruinous  effect  the  events  of  Petrograd  and 
Bolshevist  propaganda  were  having  on  the  troops  at 
the  front.  After  some  debate,  orders  were  given  for 
the  arrest  of  Lenin,  Zinovieff,  Kameniefi,  Trotsky,  and 
others.  In  the  wireless  message  sent  by  Kerensky  to 
various  places  it  was  declared  :  "It  has  been  proved 
without  any  doubt  that  the  disorders  in  Petrograd  were 
organised  with  the  help  of  the  agents  of  the  German 
Government.  At  the  present  time  the  disorders  have 
been  completely  suppressed.  The  ringleaders  and 
persons  who  have  been  stained  by  fraternal  blood  and 
by  crimes  against  the  Motherland  and  the  Revolution 

L 


1 1 


146     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       oh. 

are  to  be  arrested."  The  telegram  ended  with  an  appeal 
to  rally  round  the  Government  and  the  organs  of 
Democracy,  for  the  sake  of  security  "  against  the 
foreign  foe  and  his  allies  in  our  own  camps  "   (21st 

July). 

This  sounded  all  the  more  impressive  as  it  came 
from  the  head  of  the  Government.  Kerensky  undertook 
to  form  a  new  Cabinet,  and  the  Soviet  Executive  Com- 
mittee promised  him  its  unlimited  support.  A  some- 
what complicated  and  verbose  appeal,  issued  in  regard 
to  this,  ended  as  follows  :  "  Revolutionary  discipline 
must  encase  the  country  like  strong  armour.  The 
Government  will,  as  one  man,  begin  the  struggle  against 
the  counter-revolution,  and  for  the  organisation  of 
revolutionary  order." 

Another  appeal  made  by  the  Soviet  declared  :  ''  The 
insane  attempt  (of  the  Bolsheviks)  has  caused  a  great 
reaction  among  the  masses,  causing  a  tendency  to  panic 
which  may  issue  in  a  counter-revolution." 

The  anxieties  in  connection  with  the  struggle  against 
this  counter-revolution  (which  was  indeed  threatening 
not  from  the  Right,  but  the  Left)  quite  hid  from  the 
members  of  the  Soviet  even  the  possibility  of  any 
military  danger. 

In  the  meantime,  Petrograd  had  learnt  of  the 
shameful  behaviour  of  the  troops  at  the  front,  resulting 
in  the  Germans  breaking  the  Russian  line.  An  official 
communique  of  the  21st  July  even  stated  the  reasons 
of  this  disaster,  saying  that  "  the  607th  Regiment  left 
the  trenches  of  its  own  accord  and  retired,  in  consequence 
of  which  neighbouring  troops  likewise  retreated,  thereby 
enabling  the  enemy  to  develop  his  successes.  Our 
defeat  was  due  to  the  now  inveterate  habit  of  dis- 
cussion by  the  troops  in  place  of  obedience,  so  that 
elements  who  did  advance  were  left  unsupported,  and 


vn  REAR  AND  FRONT  BROKEN  THROUGH  147 

in  some  cases  positions  were  abandoned  when  no  enemy 
pressure  was  felt." 

Every  day  the  newspapers  gave  further  particulars. 
It  was  clear  that  the  ruin  of  the  army  was  an  accom- 
plished fact,  the  ruin  which  had  been  feared  by  patriots 
from  the  first  days  of  the  Revolution,  and  against  which 
the  public  had  been  warned  by  every  military  authority. 

On  the  23rd  July  the  telegram  of  the  Commissaries 
of  the  XI.  Army  was  received.  This  was  the  first  terrible, 
public  acknowledgement  of  the  state  of  dissolution  in 
the  army.  It  was  issued,  not  by  the  Cadets,  not  by 
any  Generals,  but  by  representatives  of  the  Revolu- 
tionary Democracy,  and  the  impression  was  therefore 
all  the  greater. 

The  German  advance  against  the  XI.  Army,  which  began 
on  the  6th  July,  is  becoming  calamitous,  and  is  even  threaten- 
ing to  ruin  Revolutionary  Russia.  There  is  an  abrupt  and 
perilous  change  in  the  spirit  of  the  troops,  lately  advancing  by 
the  heroic  efforts  of  the  thoughtful  minority.  The  will  to  advance 
has  rapidly  evaporated,  the  majority  of  the  regiments  are  in  a 
state  of  increasing  dissolution,  there  is  no  authority  or  subordina- 
tion whatever,  persuasion  and  protests  have  lost  their  force,  and 
those  who  make  them  are  threatened  and  sometimes  shot. 
There  have  been  cases  when  the  order  to  advance  at  once  to  the 
rescue  has  been  discussed  for  hours  at  meetings,  with  the  result 
that  the  reserves  have  been  twenty-four  hours  late  in  arriving. 
Not  infrequently  the  troops  abandoned  their  trenches  after  the 
first  shots  of  the  enemy.  Hundreds  of  versts  to  the  rear  streams 
of  fugitives  may  be  seen,  with  rifles  or  without,  healthy,  fit, 
lost  to  all  shame,  feehng  themselves  quite  immune  from  all 
punishment.  Sometimes  whole  regiments  retreat  in  this  manner. 
The  members  of  the  Army  and  Front  Committees  and  Commis- 
saries are  unanimous  in  acknowledging  the  necessity  for  extreme 
measures.  .  .  .  To-day  the  Commander-in-Chief  of  the  XI. 
Army,  with  the  consent  of  the  Commissaries  and  Committees, 
has  given  orders  to  fire  on  the  fugitives.  Let  the  whole  country 
know  the  truth  about  what  has  taken  place,  let  it  shudder  and 


148     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       oh. 

find  the  courage  to  fall  rutMessly  on  alL  those  who  are  ruining 
Kussia  by  their  f  aint-heartedness,  and  are  betraying  their  country 
and  the  Revolution." 

The  Germans  were  driving  back  the  Eussian  Army. 
It  became  necessary  to  evacuate  Galicia  in  haste,  to 
leave  districts  once  taken  at  a  great  cost.  The  retreat 
was  accompanied  by  rioting  and  crime.  And  on  all 
sides  demands  were  heard  for  the  re-introduction  of 
capital  punishment  in  the  army,  as  the  only  means  of 
restoring  weakened  discipline,  of  stopping  the  final 
decay  of  the  army.  The  Com m  ander-in-Chief  of  the 
south-western  front.  General  Korniloff ,  wired  demanding 
the  restoration  of  discipline  and  of  capital  punishment : 

I,  General  Komiloff,  who  have  given  all  my  hfe  for  my 
country,  declare  that  our  Motherland  is  perishing.  An  army  of 
ignorant  men  who  have  lost  their  senses,  unprotected  by 
authority  from  systematic  corruption  and  dissolution,  lost  to  all 
f eeUngs  of  manly  dignity,  is  in  full  flight.  On  fields  which  cannot 
even  be  called  fields  of  battle  there  is  a  reign  of  horror,  disgrace, 
and  shame,  such  as  the  Russian  Army  has  not  known  since  its 
formation.  .  .  .  The  mild  measures  of  the  Government  have 
weakened  all  discipHne.  .  .  .  Death  from  the  hands  of  our  own 
brethren  is  always  hovering  over  the  army.  .  .  .  Capital  punish- 
ment will  save  many  innocent  lives  at  the  cost  of  those  of  a  few 
traitors,  betrayers,  and  cowards. 

Even  then  General  Komiloff  was  accused  of  counter- 
revolutionary tendencies,  but  his  views  were  shared  by 
the  Commissary  of  the  south-western  front,  the  well- 
known  revolutionary,  Boris  Savinkoff. 

An  able  writer,  who  for  many  years  was  the  chief 
leader  of  the  militant  Social  -  Eevolutionaries,  the 
terrorist  who  in  Tsarist  times  had  organised  the 
assassination  of  Ministers  and  of  the  Grand  Duke 
Sergei  Alexandrovitch,  Savinkoif  was  clothed  in  all  the 
panoply   of  revolutionary  authority,   and  the  Soviet 


VII    REAR  AND  FRONT  BROKEN  THROUGH    149 

found  it  more  difficult  to  dispose  of  him  than  of  General 
Komiloff.  Two  days  after  the  first  telegram  telling  of 
the  dissolution  of  the  XI.  Army,  SavinkofE  telegraphed 
that  the  VII.  Army,  which  had  been  prepared  to  take 
the  offensive,  was  also  running  away. 

The  heroes  that  have  fallen  in  battle  inspired  the  army  to 
fight  vaHantly,  but  now  that  they  are  dead,  the  army  is  running 
away.  How  shall  I  answer  for  the  bloodshed  if  I  do  not  insist 
that  with  an  iron  resolution  such  order  and  discipUne  shall  be 
inmiediately  introduced  into  the  army  as  will  prevent  the 
cowardly  and  faint-hearted  making  a  breach  in  the  front.  Men 
who  of  their  own  accord  abandon  their  trenches  bring  ruin  on 
whole  regiments  and  on  their  comrades  who  are  faithfully 
doing  their  duty,  and  these  deserters  cover  both  the  Revolution 
and  Russia  with  eternal  disgrace.  There  is  no  choice  :  the 
death  penalty  for  those  who  refuse  to  risk  their  Uves  for  their 
country,  for  land  and  liberty. 

But  the  reality  was  even  more  terrible.  The 
Russian  soldiers,  who  had  lately  been  so  self-sacrificing 
and  heroic  in  doing  their  duty,  now  seemed  to  be 
possessed  by  devils,  and  turned  into  a  mob  of  cowards 
and  criminals.  Even  SavinkojS  had  not  the  courage  to 
tell  all  that  took  place  during  the  retreat.  Only  about 
a  month  after,  when  fresh  news  was  daily  brought  of 
the  shameful  behaviour  of  the  soldiers,  and  when  the 
Revolutionary  Democracy  listened,  sighed,  and  carried 
on  endless  discussions  about  the  advisability  of  intro- 
ducing capital  punishment,  Savinkoif 's  mother  published 
an  account  of  a  conversation  she  had  had  with  her  son. 
She  had  trembled  so  often  for  his  life  during  the  Tsar's 
reign  ;  she  herself  had  sjnnpathised  with  and  assisted 
her  son's  revolutionary  activity,  and  she  was  always 
against  capital  punishment,  and  was  convinced  that 
her  son  shared  her  views.  But  he  told  her  the  fright- 
ful story  of  a  small  town  called  Kalush,  where  the 


150     FROM  LIBEETY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       oh. 

retreating  Russian  Army  yielded  to  its  most  brutal 
instincts. 

My  heart  sank  with  horror  at  the  tale,  when  I  heard  how 
publicly,  in  the  sight  of  everybody,  in  the  very  street,  a  savage 
horde  amused  itself  by  violating  young  and  old  ;  when,  one  after 
another,  in  an  uninterrupted  stream,  these  savages  gratified  their 
brutal  instincts  on  what  was  already  the  corpse  of  a  child,  and 
with  laughter  and  yells  pointed  to  the  mother,  lying  in  hysterical 
convulsions  near  the  spot ;  .  .  .  when  at  one  blow  they  struck 
off  the  head  of  every  one  who  dared  to  protest ;  when  they  sent 
treacherous  bullets  into  the  backs  not  of  their  enemies,  but  of 
their  own  heroes ;  when,  wildly  hooting,  whistling  shrilly,  they 
lifted  up  on  their  bayonets  the  commander  who  had  attempted 
to  stop  their  shameful  flight  .  .  .  then  I  understood  ...  I 
understood !  And  how  easy  it  seemed  to  me,  after  all  these 
refined  executions,  was  death  by  shooting.  (See  the  Rech, 
August  9,  1917.) 

This  nightmare  then  seemed  incredible.  Since  then 
every  day  of  Russian  life  has  accustomed  us  to  the 
terrible,  has  shown  what  a  mob  may  turn  into  when 
deprived  of  discipline  and  drunk  with  unlimited  liberty. 
In  the  summer  of  1917  the  papers  began  to  be  filled 
with  stories  of  robberies,  oppression,  murders,  crimes, 
both  wholesale  and  individual.  Not  infrequently  they 
were  committed  under  the  pretext  of  land  confiscation, 
the  struggle  against  capitalism,  settlement  of  accounts 
with  the  bourgeoisie  and  the  counter-revolutionaries. 
But,  by  whatever  name  it  went,  it  was  wicked  oppression. 
These  were  all  forerunners  of  that  bloody  whirlwind 
which  was  to  break  over  Russia,  when  the  triumphant 
Bolsheviks  began  to  inaugurate  the  reign  of  Marxism 
and  Communism. 

Of  course,  neither  Prince  LvofE's  nor  Kerensky's 
Government  encouraged  oppression,  by  whomsoever 
committed.  They  tried  to  bring  the  masses  to  their 
senses.     But  only  by  words,  and 'not  by  deeds.     The 


VII    BEAR  AND  FEONT  BROKEN  THROUGH    151 

most  terrible  occurrences,  the  most  disgraceful  corrup- 
tion of  the  army,  and  the  most  shameless  dissolution  of 
the  Russian  State  could  not  tear  away  these  peculiar 
rulers  from  academic  dogmatism,  nor  bring  them  into 
the  path  of  an  actual  fight  for  the  right,  for  order,  for 
the  safety  of  Russia. 

During  the  first  eight  months,  individuals,  the 
crowd,  and  whole  organisations  grew  accustomed  to 
conmiit  those  pogroms,  insults,  oppression,  and  crimes, 
which  would  subsequently  be  signed  by  the  Soviet 
authorities  in  the  form  of  decrees. 

Sometimes  it  seemed  as  if  that  cry  of  "  I  understand ! 
I  understand  1 "  which  burst  from  Mme.  Savinkoff 
would  burst  likewise  from  the  Government — from  the 
Soviet. 

When  Kerensky  was  informed  that  the  committee  of 
the  south-western  front  had  decided  to  shoot  those  who 
ran  away,  he  approved  of  that  "  truly  revolutionary 
decision."  But  later  on,  in  the  heat  of  the  dispute 
about  capital  punishment,  when  all  the  conmianders, 
all  sensible  people,  cried  out  that  capital  punishment 
was  necessary,  that  without  it  the  army  could  not  be 
saved,  the  same  Kerensky  solemnly  declared  that  he 
had  never  as  yet  signed  a  single  death  sentence. 

The  hesitation  and  indecision  of  the  Government 
only  increased  the  ferment  in  the  army.  The  best 
soldiers  and  officers  paid  for  this  weakness.  KomilofE 
was  right  when,  in  the  summer  of  1917,  he  said  that  it 
was  necessary  to  execute  the  few  in  order  to  save  the 
rest  who  had  not  lost  all  conception  of  honour.  The 
sense  of  duty,  not  infrequently  attaining  the  heights  of 
heroism,  was  at  that  time  still  alive  in  the  Russian 
Army.  In  battle  officers  went  ahead,  but  often  soldiers 
followed  them.  And  among  them,  mingling  with  the 
heroes,  the  traitors  carried  on  their  base  traffic,  un- 


152     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       oh. 

punished  and  unashamed,  overwhelming  the  simple- 
minded  soldiers  with  a  hail  of  incomprehensible  words, 
thereby  unloosing  the  hands  of  scoundrels  and  cowards. 
Truly  terrible  was  the  position  of  honest  soldiers  of  all 
ranks,  from  General  to  private,  when  they  saw  how  the 
orderly  military  organisation,  in  which  every  one  knew 
his  place,  was  turning  into  a  disorderly  mob,  no  longer 
bound  together  by  the  old  discipline,  and  as  yet  not 
united  by  any  new  moral  demands. 

In  private  letters  from  the  front  (which  are  always 
characteristic  of  the  mood  of  the  army),  a  real  cry  of 
despair  is  becoming  more  and  more  insistent.  Here, 
for  instance,  is  a  letter  written  before  the  July  (1917) 
Bolshevist  mutiny,  by  a  twenty-four-year-old  officer 
who  had  thrown  up  the  university  at  the  outbreak 
of  the  war  and  volunteered  as  a  private  to  fight  the 
Germans,  had  taken  part  in  many  a  hard  battle,  and 
had  received  several  military  decorations.    He  writes  : 

In  spite  of  all  the  difficulty  of  creating  anything  at  present, 
I  still  think  that  we  shall  be  able  to  establish  some  sort  of  order. 
It  is  very  hard  at  present.  At  times  it  seems  as  if  we  could 
manage  it,  but  then  again  despair  overcomes  us.  The  cause  of 
all  the  trouble  is  the  awful  ignorance  of  the  soldiers  ;  they  are 
rough  and  unusually  tactful  by  turns.  Everything  must  be 
looked  on  as  an  excess.  .  .  .  But  it  is  awfully  hard  to  lead  these 
men  to  battle,  intoxicated  as  they  are  with  some  kind  of  liberty, 
and  thinking  so  Httle  of  fighting. 

Still  more  disheartening  is  the  letter  of  another 
officer  who,  before  the  war,  had  been  a  schoolmaster 
at  a  factory  and  in  close  touch  with  the  workmen. 
During  the  first  days  of  the  Revolution  he  enjoyed  the 
happiness  of  freedom,  together  with  the  soldiers.  Then 
irresponsible  agitators  descended  upon  them,  and  began 
to  egg  on  the  soldiers  to  undermine  their  confidence  in 
their  officers. 


vn  REAR  AND  FRONT  BROKEN  THROUGH  153 

The  only  comfort  now  is  that  they  look  upon  even  Kerensky 
as  a  venal  bourgeois,  a  reactionary  and  imperialist.  Now  I  can 
feel  no  uplifting  of  spirit.  I  go  forward  with  clenched  teeth, 
with  all  my  might  trying  to  stifle  the  feeling  of  hopelessness 
which  has  overwhelmed  me.  But  don't  be  anxious  about  me. 
Lacking  faith  and  an  uplifting  of  spirit,  there  is  yet  a  feeling  of 
duty,  and  I  shall  have  strength  enough  to  do  it. 

The  same  pessimism  in  regard  to  the  events  at  the 
front  is  seen  in  letters  of  doctors  and  nurses  who  were 
living  the  same  life  as  the  army  and  saw  all  that  was 
going  on. 

Their  position  was  as  difficult  as  that  of  all  educated 
people.  The  committees,  elected  by  an  absurd  suffrage 
system,  encouraged  by  a  blind  and  irresponsible  dema- 
gogic revolutionary  democracy,  were  completely  up- 
setting the  work  of  the  medical  and  sanitary  organisa- 
tions. Illiterate  orderlies  conducted  the  elections,  dis- 
tributed the  duties  among  the  doctors,  insulted  the 
nurses,  discharged  them,  upset  the  patients,  who, 
before  consenting  to  be  operated  upon,  would  call  a 
meeting  of  the  committee  of  lower  employees  and  ask 
for  their  competent  opinion  as  to  whether  it  was  neces- 
sary to  amputate  a  gangrened  leg  or  not. 

The  doctors  and  nurses  bore  all  this.  They  could 
not  throw  up  their  work,  nor  leave  the  sick  and  woimded 
entrusted  to  their  care.  With  clenched  teeth,  imder  a 
hail  of  insult  and  humiliation,  like  the  Russian  officers 
they  went  on  doing  their  duty.  Their  bitterness  was 
increased  by  seeing  the  soldiers  turning  into  a  mob 
of  ''  revolted  slaves  "  (one  of  Kerensky 's  most  apt 
expressions). 

In  my  ward  I  have  some  wounded  of  the  mutinied  regiments. 
They  have  already  managed  to  fraternise  with  our  orderlies,  on 
the  basis  of  common  ideals,  namely,  to  take  care  of  their  own 
skins,  and  not  to  bother  about  either  their  comrades  or  their 


164     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

country.     One  feels  quite  powerless  before  such  an  obstinate 
and  stupid  gang,  deaf  to  all  ideas  of  duty  and  truth. 

The  above  was  written  in  the  middle  of  July  by  a 
young  nurse,  who  had  worked  at  the  front  since  the 
beginning  of  the  war.  I  had  seen  her  at  work,  I  had 
seen  how  cheerfully  and  devotedly  she  worked  for  the 
Russian  Army,  bringing  brightness  and  cheerfulness 
into  the  hard  conditions  of  life  at  the  front  by  her 
generous  and  superabundant  youth.  But  now  this 
energetic,  self-sacrificing,  merry  girl  was  absolutely 
disheartened. 

And  how  could  she  help  losing  heart  ?  The  nurses 
of  the  Northern  front  who  had  come  to  the  Congress 
at  Minsk  asked  the  soldiers  : 

"  Our  faith  is  shattered,  and  a  bitter  question  arises  : 
Whom  are  we  serving  ?  Those  who  are  going  forth  to 
die  for  their  country,  or  those  who  are  sowing  anarchy 
and  killing  the  champions  of  a  brighter  future  ?  " 

Many  others  asked  themselves  similar  bitter 
questions.  Later  on,  in  consequence  of  the  Bolshevist 
couj[>  d'etat,  Eussia  was  fated  to  drink  the  cup  to  the 
dregs,  to  know  what  a  destructive  force  the  army  of 
many  millions  might  become  after  throwing  off  the  last 
vestiges  of  authority. 

Military  men  had  already  foreseen  this,  and  had 
made  every  effort  to  stop  the  process  of  decay.  The 
Commander-in-Chief,  Korniloff,  prohibited  meetings 
within  the  zone  of  military  operations,  but  could  not 
prevent  whole  car-loads  of  the  Pravda  and  other  Bol- 
shevist literature  arriving  at  the  front.  The  civilians  at 
the  head  of  the  Soviet  and  the  Government  did  not 
believe  the  Generals.  The  secession  of  the  Ukraine, 
the  evacuation  of  Galicia,  and  the  gangrene  in  the  army, 
the  insurrection  of  the  Bolsheviks,  which  had  revealed 


VII    REAR  AND  FRONT  BROKEN  THROUGH    155 

their  connection  with  Germany — all  this  was  not  enough 
to  remove  the  scales  from  the  eyes  of  the  Revolutionary 
Democracy,  to  make  it  understand  where  the  storm 
came  from.  Its  relations  with  the  Bolsheviks  were  as 
friendly  as  heretofore.  After  the  first  few  days  of 
panic,  when  the  Socialistic  Press  reproached  the  followers 
of  Lenin  for  having  "  plunged  a  dagger  into  the  back  of 
the  Revolution,"  it  again  turned  all  its  attention  to  the 
foes  on  the  Right. 

"  After  having  skimmed  the  cream  from  the  pseudo- 
revolutionary  movement  let  loose  by  the  Bolsheviks, 
the  counter-revolutionaries  are  hastening  to  take  the 
necessary  repressive  measures  for  their  own  purposes  " 
says  the  Izvestia  for  26th  July. 

We  find  the  same  note  in  the  Novaia  Zhizn,  the  paper 
of  the  influential  Russian  writer,  Maxim  Gorky,  which, 
under  the  guidance  of  a  group  of  Social-Democratic 
Internationalists,  was  very  persistent  in  trying  to  prove 
that  salvation  lay  only  in  the  creation  of  *'  strong 
revolutionary  power."  "  No  one  except  the  Soviets 
was  able  to  exert  such  power."  And  this  power  was 
required — to  fight  the  counter-revolutionaries. 

After  this,  Lenin  and  Zinovieff  of  course  had  the 
right  to  publish  an  "  open  letter  "  in  order  to  explain 
that  they  had  merely  disappeared  in  the  name  of  liberty, 
and  did  not  wish  to  give  themselves  up  into  the  hands 
of  the  counter-revolutionaries. 

"  Only  the  Constituent  Assembly,  if  it  be  convened, 
and  convened  not  by  the  bourgeoisie,  will  have  the  right 
of  expressing  its  views  on  the  order  of  the  Provisional 
Government  for  our  arrest."  These  words  regarding 
the  jurisdiction  of  the  Constituent  Assembly  have  a 
peculiar  flavour  at  the  present  time,  when  the  Bol- 
sheviks have  shown  what  they  understand  by  its  rights. 
Of  course,  even  before  this  they  did  not  hide  their 


156     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

theoretical  contempt  for  Right  and  Liberty,  and,  ever 
since  they  existed  as  a  party,  have  given  sufficient 
practical  proofs  of  the  perfect  shamelessness  of  their 
tactics.  But  so  strong  were  the  ties  which  bound  the 
other  Socialists  to  the  Bolsheviks  that  it  was  beyond 
the  power  of  the  Socialist  Centre  to  break  them.  This 
was  done  later  by  the  Bolsheviks  themselves.  But  in 
the  summer  of  1917  they  did  not  want  an  open  rupture. 
Their  object  was  to  detach  the  Soviets  from  non- 
Socialistic  Russia,  so  as  to  be  able  to  carry  out  the 
Marxist  programme  more  rapidly,  and  establish  the 
dictatorship  of  the  proletariat. 

But  still  Revolutionary  Democracy  was  not  prepared 
to  attack  the  bourgeoisie.  It  did  not  want  to  drive  it 
away,  but  merely  to  force  it  to  adopt  the  Soviet  pro- 
gramme. In  regard  to  this  a  struggle  took  place  which 
made  it  very  difficult  for  Kerensky  to  form  a  new 
Cabinet.  Prince  Lvoff  resigned  on  the  20th  July, 
explaining  in  a  letter  in  the  papers  the  reasons  for  his 
resignation.  He  could  not  accept  the  programme 
proposed  by  the  Socialist  Ministers  and  accepted  by  the 
Provisional  Government.  "  I  cannot  agree  to  it,  in 
view  of  its  being  an  obvious  departure  from  the  non- 
party idea  to  that  of  seeking  to  attain  purely  Socialistic, 
party  aims."  He  saw  this,  first  of  all,  in  the  intention 
of  the  Government  to  declare  for  a  republic  without 
waiting  for  the  Constituent  Assembly,  which  ought  to 
determine  the  form  of  Government.  But  the  chief 
difference  of  opinion  between  the  first  Premier  of  the 
Provisional  Government  and  the  other  Ministers  was  in 
regard  to  the  land  question. 

"  Though  I  am  an  advocate  for  the  transference  of 
the  land  to  the  labouring  peasantry,"  says  Prince  Lvoff, 
"  nevertheless,  I  think  that  the  Land  Bills  introduced 
by  the  Minister  of  Agriculture  are  unacceptable." 


VII  REAR  AND  FRONT  BROKEN  THROUGH  167 

At  that  time  the  Minister  of  Agriculture  was  Victor 
Chernoff ,  who  was  supported  by  the  Social  Revolutionary- 
party.  His  Bill  was  a  true  reflection  of  the  programme 
and  ideology  of  that  party  in  the  solution  of  the  land 
problem.  They  considered  that  all  the  land  ought  to 
be  taken  away  from  the  landowners,  without  any 
compensation.  Every  toiler  had  a  right  to  the  land, 
but  as  soon  as  he  ceased  to  till  it  with  his  own  hands, 
the  land  was  to  be  taken  away.  Land  must  not  be 
either  bought  or  sold,  and  could  not  be  private  property, 
as  the  land  belonged  to  God.  This  was  the  only  time 
the  Social  Revolutionaries  used  the  name  of  God.  In 
less  poetical  language  this  meant  that  the  land  ought 
to  belong  to  the  Government. 

These  general  ideas  of  agrarian  socialism  began, 
with  the  assistance  of  V.  Chernoff  and  his  comrades,  to 
assume  the  form  of  legislative  projects.  On  resigning^ 
Prince  Lvoff  thus  characterised  them  :  "  The  Ministry 
of  Agriculture  is  passing  laws  which  undermine  the 
national  ideas  of  right.  Not  only  do  these  laws  fail 
to  combat  the  tendency  to  seize  property,  not  only  do 
they  fail  to  bring  agricultural  relationships  into  their 
normal  channel,  but  they  justify,  as  it  were,  the  ruinous 
arbitrary  seizures  of  land  that  are  going  on  all  over 
Russia,  they  confirm  the  seizures  already  accomplished, 
and  strive  to  place  before  the  Constituent  Assembly  an 
already  determined  agrarian  question. 

"  I  consider  the  Land  programme  of  the  Minister  of 
Agriculture  ruinous  to  Russia,  because  it  will  leave 
Russia  bankrupt,  ruined  both  morally  and  materially." 

The  ensuing  anarchy  in  the  villages  to  a  considerable 
extent  confirmed  his  opinion,  but  at  the  same  time  any 
attempts  to  restrict  the  peasantry  in  their  seizures  of 
land  were  considered  to  be  manifestations  of  the  coimter- 
revolutipnary  tendency,  so  much  feared  by  Socialists. 


158     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

When,  after  the  resignation  of  Prince  Lvofi  and  the 
Cadets,  Kerensky  and  the  Revolutionary  Democrats  who 
supported  him  began  to  seek  for  new  men  and  a  new 
platform,  at  the  united  meeting  of  the  central  democratic 
organisations  on  the  29th  July,  a  voluminous  motion  was 
passed.^  "  The  country  and  the  Revolution  are  in  the 
greatest  danger,  owing  both  to  the  impending  military 
disaster  and  to  the  anarchistic  and  counter-revolutionary 
attempts."  In  putting  on  the  same  level  the  far  from 
equal  dangers,  the  meeting  declared  that  it  was  necessary 
to  create  a  firm  Government,  in  which  the  bourgeoisie 
was  to  take  part.  But  any  agreement  between  the 
Revolutionary  Democracy  and  the  bourgeoisie  was  only 
possible  if  the  bourgeoisie  would  "  acknowledge  all  the 
conquests  made  by  the  Revolution,"  and,  above  all, 
would  stand  up  to  the  end  for  the  formula  of  "  Peace 
without  annexation  and  indemnities,  on  the  basis  of 
self-determination."  The  Soviet  politicians  knew  that 
this  formula,  drawn  up  by  the  Socialistic  minority  at 
Zinmierwald,  was  objected  to,  not  only  by  the  Cadets, 
but  also  by  their  own  fellow-Socialists  of  the  type  of 
Plekhanofi.  Men  of  such  different  opinions  as  the 
Cadet  Milyukoff ,  the  Social-Democrat  Plekhanoff ,  and  the 
Anarchist  Kjropotkin,  unanimously  asserted  that  peace 
could  only  be  obtained  by  victory  over  the  enemy,  and 
not  by  Soviet  negotiations  with  the  international  pro- 
letariat. Knowing  this,  and  likewise  publicly  declaring 
that  authority  and  power  should  be  founded  on  an 
agreement  with  the  bourgeoisie,  the  representatives  of 
the  Soviet  inserted  into  their  resolution  the  following 
threat :  "  The  passive  opposition  shown  by  certain 
groups   of    the   bourgeoisie   to   all   the    revolutionary 

^  As  was  often  the  case  in  Soviet  organisations,  this  meeting  was  somewhat 
undefined  in  character.  Besides  the  Executive  Committee  of  the  Soviet  of 
Workmen's  and  Soldiers'  Delegates,  and  the  Soviet  of  Peasants'  Delegates, 
Provincial  Delegates  of  some  sort  were  present. 


vn  RE AE  AND  FRONT  BROKEN  THROUGH  159 

measures  of  the  Provisional  Government,  the  boycotting 
of  authority,  the  desire  to  retard  agrarian,  political, 
financial,  and  economic  reforms,  and  to  put  off  the 
Constituent  Assembly — all  this  is  nothing  but  an 
attempt  to  seize  power,  by  taking  advantage  of  the 
embarrassed  state  of  the  country.  Such  opposition  is 
equivalent  to  direct  assistance  to  the  darkest  forces  of 
counter-revolution,  and  tends  to  prepare  the  way  for 
the  complete  destruction  of  the  country."  Later  on 
the  same  accusations,  couched  in  a  cruder  form  and 
leading  to  more  sanguinary  results,  were  brought  by 
the  Bolsheviks  against  all  their  opponents,  including 
the  Revolutionary  Democracy  whom  they  had  defeated. 
It  is  one  of  the  strange  features  of  the  Revolution  that 
the  accusations  of  imperialism,  bourgeois,  and  counter- 
revolutionary tendencies  were  gradually  shifted  from 
the  Right  to  the  Left  parties.  First  they  were  brought 
against  Milyukoff  and  Lvoff ,  then  against  Kerensky  and 
Tsereteli,  and  finally  against  the  Social-Revolutionaries. 
Counter-revolution  was  likewise  spoken  of  by 
members  of  the  Government  in  July  1917.  The  new 
Minister  of  the  Interior,  Prince  Tsereteli,  sent  circulars 
all  over  Russia,  saying  :  '*  No  arbitrary  seizures  of  land 
and  property,  no  oppression,  no  incitement  to  civil 
war  and  breaches  of  military  duty  are  permissible." 
This  would  have  been  all  very  well,  had  it  not  been 
followed  by  an  explanation  regarding  the  source  of  all 
these  destructive  factors.  "  The  treacherous  blow 
dealt  by  Anarchy  has  caused  confusion  in  the  country. 
Hoping  to  snatch  away  all  that  has  been  obtained  by 
the  Revolution,  Counter-Revolution  has  lifted  its  head. 
The  dissolution  and  anarchy  at  the  rear  have  found 
their  way  into  the  army  at  the  front."  Prince  Tsereteli's 
words  seemed  to  imply  that  counter-revolution  (which 
by  the  way  had  as  yet  shown  no  signs  of  its  existence) 


160     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

had  rotted  the  army.  He  does  not  say  a  single  word 
about  the  Bolsheviks.  For  they  were  an  influential 
Left  group  of  the  Social  -  Democratic  party,  whose 
unity  he  had  lauded  and  defended. 

The  Committee  of  the  Duma,  with  M.  Rodzianko  at 
the  head,  was  considered  to  be  the  chief  hot-bed  of 
counter-revolution.  Rodzianko  had  no  influence  over 
the  masses,  but  certain  tendencies  of  State  policy  found 
their  expression  in  him.  Thus,  on  the  31st  July,  when 
there  were  endless  discussions  about  the  programme  of 
the  new  Government,  the  Provisional  Committee  of  the 
Duma  passed  a  definite  motion  which  began  with  a 
quotation  from  Korniloff's  telegram  :  "An  army  of 
ignorant  men  who  have  lost  their  senses,  and  are  not 
boimd  by  any  authority."  The  national  representatives 
pointed  out  that  "  the  cause  of  the  general  calamity  lies 
in  the  seizure  of  Government  power  by  irresponsible 
organisations,  and  the  creation  by  them  of  a  divided 
central  authority,  accompanied  by  a  subversion  of  local 
authority." 

In  order  to  save  both  the  army  and  Russia,  it  was 
necessary  that  authority  should  be  strong.  "  The 
Government  must  not  be  guided  by  the  orders  of  party 
organisations  and  separate  classes  of  society." 

Milyukoff,  who  spoke  at  this  sitting,  pointed  out 
still  more  clearly  that  the  Government  ought  not  to 
be  dependent  on  the  Soviets,  that  its  policy  should  be 
united  and  national,  and  not  the  class  policy  of  Zimmer- 
wald.  "  We  demand,"  said  he,  "  that  measures  should 
be  taken  to  create  a  strong  army  by  the  restoration  of 
strict  military  discipline,  and  the  resolute  prevention  of 
any  interference  on  the  part  of  Army  Committees  in 
questions  of  military  tactics  and  strategy." 

This  was  a  programme  directly  contrary  to  that  of 
Revolutionary  Democracy,  who  wanted  both  to  establish 


Yii  REAR  AND  FRONT  BROKEN  THROUGH  161 

civil  government  and  to  organise  the  army  exclusively 
on  the  basis  of  elected  committees  and  organisations. 

Given  such  a  difference  of  opinion,  it  was  no  easy 
task  for  Kerensky,  while  seeking  support  from  the 
Revolutionary  Democracy,  to  form  a  Coalition  Govern- 
ment. For  three  weeks  Russia  was  practically  without 
any  properly  organised  central  authority.  However, 
the  force  of  its  former  state  inertia  was  sufficiently 
great  to  keep  the  whole  machinery  still  at  work.  Not- 
withstanding the  weakness  and  contradictions  which 
brought  discord  into  the  governing  parties,  the  people 
as  a  whole  were  ready  to  obey  and  waited  patiently, 
even  longed  for  new  laws  to  be  passed,  just  as  the  army 
longed  for  strict,  uniform,  and  sensible  orders.  The 
expectations  of  the  people  were  not  justified.  The 
new  Government,  finally  formed  on  the  6th  August, 
turned  out  to  be  as  helpless  as  its  predecessor. 

It  included  the  Social-Revolutionaries  Kerensky, 
Savinkoff,  Lebedeff,  Arksentieff,  ChemofE;  the  Social- 
Democrats  Skobelefi,  Nikitin,  and  Prokopovich  ;  the 
Socialist-Populist  Peshekhonoff ;  the  Cadets  Kokoshkin, 
Oldenburg,  Yurieneff ,  Kartashofi ;  the  Radical  Efremoff , 
and  three  Independents,  Zarudny,  Tereshchenko,  and 
Nekrasoff.  This  was  the  so-called  "  Save  the  Revolu- 
tion "  Government. 

As  in  all  Cabinets,  among  the  new  Ministers  there 
were  both  strong  and  weak  men,  able  men  and  those 
whose  capacity  was  limited.  But  not  one  was  strong 
enough  to  guide  the  Russian  vessel  of  State  from 
anarchy  to  order,  nor  able  enough  to  pull  the  Govern- 
ment out  of  the  mire  of  dogmatism  and  inaction. 

Partly  owing  to  pressure  brought  to  bear  by  the 
Soviet  circles,  who  still  regarded  the  Bolsheviks  as 
their  comrades,  and  partly  owing  to  its  own  inner 
weakness    and    heterogeneous    composition,    the    new 

M 


162     FROM  LIBEETY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

Cabinet  was  not  even  able  to  wage  serious  warfare  with 
that  part  of  the  Social-Democratic  party  whom  the 
Public  Prosecutor  had  accused  of  high  treason.  Some 
of  the  minor  Bolsheviks  who  had  received  money  from 
the  Germans  were  indeed  arrested.  But  Trotsky  and 
Lenin  remained  at  large,  drove  about  to  the  various 
barracks  and  meetings,  and  made  incendiary  speeches 
against  the  Allies,  against  the  War,  against  the 
bourgeoisie.  Finally,  on  the  5th  August,  they  were 
arrested.  And  at  once  in  the  Petrograd  City  Council, 
where  all  political  perturbations  and  passions  were 
reflected,  the  Internationalists,  the  closest  friends  of 
the  Bolsheviks,  put  a  question  as  to  the  causes  of 
the  arrests.  The  City  Council,  two-thirds  of  whom 
were  Socialists  and  one-third  Cadets,  supported  the 
question,  or  rather  the  protest  against  the  arrest  of 
men  who  had  opposed  the  Provisional  Government  with 
arms  in  their  hands. 

At  a  Congress  of  Bolsheviks  (8th  August)  it  was 
announced  that  Lenin  and  Zinovieff,  for  whose  arrest 
orders  had  been  given,  were  hiding  somewhere  in  Russia, 
and  were  in  constant  touch  with  their  party.  Although 
the  Public  Prosecutor  had  accused  them  of  high  treason, 
no  measures  whatever  were  taken  for  their  arrest. 
Another  Bolshevik,  Kameneff-Rosenfeldt,  came  straight 
from  prison  to  a  meeting  of  the  Central  Executive 
Committee,  where  he  met  with  an  ovation.  Several 
days  after  the  Izvestia  published  a  statement  that  this 
revolutionary  hero  used  to  receive  100  roubles  a  month 
from  the  Tsar's  police  for  his  work  as  an  "  agent 
provocateur."  But  even  after  this  he  still  remained  a 
member  of  the  Executive  Committee.  At  the  same 
meeting  where  the  Revolutionary  Democracy  greeted 
the  Bolshevist  secret  police  agent  so  enthusiastically, 
members  of  the  Government  rose  to  make  speeches. 


^11  REAR  AND  FRONT  BROKEN  THROUGH  163 

But  in  their  speeches  there  was  no  bold  condemnation 
of  the  Left  traitors.  On  the  contrary,  the  Ministers 
hastened  to  point  out  to  the  Soviet  that  the  principal 
foes  were  of  course  among  the  Right  parties.  Prince 
Tsereteli  spoke  of  the  bourgeoisie  having  gone  over  to 
the  counter-revolutionaries,  while  Kerensky  declared 
pathetically  that  he  would  allow  no  Restoration.  These 
words  were  already  an  echo  of  the  conflict  which  had 
taken  place  between  the  head  of  the  Government  and 
experienced  army  leaders. 


CHAPTER  VIII 

THE  MOSCOW   STATE   CONFERENCE 

Attempts  of  the  Grovernment  find  supporters  outside  the  Soviets — ^The 
Generals  and  the  Committees  at  the  front — ^Rodzianko's  declaration 
and  Chheidze's  declaration — ^Two  Russias — ^Kerensky's  ambiguous 
position — ^Difficulty  of  amalgamation  —  The  Bolsheviks  and  the 
Moscow  workmen. 

The  position  of  the  Premier  of  the  "  Save  the  Revolu- 
tion "  Government  was  exceedingly  difficult,  first  of  all 
because  in  the  Russian  Revolution,  as  probably  in 
all  others,  the  revolutionaries  themselves  turned  out 
to  be  the  worst  friends  of  liberty  and  order. 

Their  watchword  was :  "  Save  what  the  Revolution 
has  won ! "  But  besides  the  Revolution  there  was  Russia 
also  expecting  a  deliverer.  In  a  country  with  a  popula- 
tion of  175  millions,  anarchy  and  famine  reigned  far 
and  wide ;  the  war  had  taken  a  firmer  grip  than  ever.  The 
Government  had  to  fight  against  these  three  calamities. 
But  how  was  that  to  be  done,  when  the  Government 
instead  of  being  supported  by  powerful  political 
organisations  with  a  proper  conception  of  State  affairs 
was  merely  trying  to  find  supporters  among  masses  as 
unstable  as  molten  lava  ? 

Any  other  supporters  were  considered  by  Kerensky 
and  his  colleagues  to  be  not  democratic  enough. 
Kerensky's  popularity  was  very  great  both  in  the  army 
and  at  the  rear.     When  the  municipal  elections  were 

164 


oH.v,ii    THE  MOSCOW  STATE  CONFERENCE     165 

taking  place  under  the  new  universal  suffrage  law,  the 
success  of  the  Social-Revolutionaries  was  increased  by 
the  fact  that  Kerensky  belonged  to  that  party.  In 
almost  every  town  his  comrades  were  in  the  majority. 
But  the  voters  did  not  really  know  for  whom  they  were 
voting,  as  the  Social-Revolutionary  party  consisted  of 
many  sections  sharply  distinct  from  one  another. 
The  Left  were  nearer  to  the  Bolsheviks,  and  after- 
wards supported  them.  The  Right  were  nearer  to  the 
Socialist-Populists  of  the  PlekhanofT  and  Potressoff  type. 
The  Right  Social-Revolutionaries  supported  Kerensky. 
Among  them  there  were  able  and  honest  individuals  like 
LebedefE,  Mme.  Breshko-Breshkovskaia,  SavinkofE,  and 
others.  The  numerous  Social  -  Revolutionary  Centre, 
where  Chernoff  was  especially  influential,  were  all 
against  Kerensky. 

Chernofi,  a  writer  of  influence  in  Socialistic  circles, 
an  ideologist  of  the  so-called  "  Revolutionary  Populist 
group,"  had  been  a  political  refugee  for  ten  years.  In 
October  1915,  together  with  other  Social-Revolution- 
aries, he  founded  (in  Geneva)  the  "  Committee  of 
Intellectual  Assistance  to  Russian  Prisoners  of  War  in 
Germany,"  which  published  a  pacificist  journal  called 
Away  from  Home.  The  Germans  and  Austrians  assidu- 
ously disseminated  this  periodical  among  Russian 
prisoners  in  the  camps.  In  many  ways  the  general 
ideas  voiced  by  this  journal  coincided  with  those  of  the 
Bolsheviks. 

This  man,  who  had  taken  part  in  the  Zimmerwald 
Congress,  was  appointed  by  the  Social-Revolutionaries 
to  the  post  of  Minister  of  Agriculture.  In  the  Cabinet, 
as  in  the  party,  Chernoi!  carried  on  a  struggle  against 
Kerensky.  This  also  was  not  conducive  to  the  establish- 
ment of  the  firm  Government  which  was  so  much 
spoken  of  both  on  the  Right  and  on  the  Left.     But 


166     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOtSK       oh. 

the  Left  considered  it  should  be  based  on  the  will 
of  the  people,  as  expressed  by  the  spontaneously 
established  Soviets  and  democratic  organisations, 
whereas  the  Right  wanted  to  retain  the  uninterrupted 
succession  of  authority  in  the  form  of  an  independent 
Provisional  Government,  which  could  hand  over  its 
powers  only  to  a  Constituent  Assembly  properly 
elected  by  universal  suffrage.  This  Right  tendency 
had  the  support  of  the  Fourth  Duma.  But  the  Duma 
was  attacked  furiously  on  all  sides  by  the  Revolu- 
tionary Democracy,  beginning  with  Chheidze,  President 
of  the  Soviet,  who,  like  Kerensky,  was  afsaid  to  avail 
himself  of  its  support  because  he  did  not  wish  to  risk 
his  popularity  among  the  Democracy. 

The  suffrage  law  under  which  the  Duma  had  been 
elected  was  exceedingly  incomplete,  and  even  imder  the 
old  regime  was  often  severely  criticised  by  the  members 
of  the  Duma  themselves,  especially  those  of  the  Cadet 
party.  But  still  it  was  a  lawful  assembly  of  national 
representatives,  a  parliament  which  all  through  the 
war  had  taken  the  national  and  patriotic  point  of 
view  and  had  established  a  party  truce  for  the  sake  of 
saving  the  country.  It  was  only  the  extreme  Left, 
led  by  Chheidze  and  Kerensky,  that  spoke  against  such 
a  policy  of  union  for  the  defence  of  the  country.  From 
the  very  first  days  of  the  war  these  men  spoke  in  the 
Duma — ^not  of  victory  over  the  Germans  but  of  the 
liquidation  of  the  war.  It  is  therefore  easy  to  under- 
stand that  the  Soviet,  where  Chheidze  was  President, 
persistently  discredited  the  Duma  Committee,  insisted 
on  its  being  closed,  and  tried  to  assume  the  role  of  a 
parliament.  But  the  method  of  recruiting  the  Soviet 
was  too  haphazard  and  illegal,  and  its  activity  was 
purely  that  of  a  political  meeting.  Practically  even  in 
the  first  Soviet  the  influence  of  the  mob  was  of  enormous 


J 


vin       THE  MOSCOW  STATE  CONFERENCE      167 

importance.  Even  the  Socialist  Ministers  began  to 
understand  the  lack  of  statesmanship  in  their  Soviet 
colleagues,  and  pending  the  election  of  the  Constituent 
Assembly  tried  to  find  some  substitute  for  representation. 
Notwithstanding  solemn  promises  of  support,  they — 
and  especially  Kerensky — were  met  with  increasing 
coolness  in  the  Soviet. 

For  three  months,  from  August  to  November, 
Kerensky  made  various  attempts  to  establish  a  consulta- 
tive institution  of  more  authority  than  the  Soviet.  On 
the  3rd  August,  before  the  final  formation  of  the  Cabinet, 
Kerensky  hastily  convened,  in  the  Winter  Palace, 
representatives  of  the  executive  committees  of  all  the 
parties.  After  an  excited  and  feverish  all-night  sitting, 
the  meeting  entrusted  the  formation  of  a  Cabinet  to 
Kerensky.  A  more  serious  representative  State  Confer- 
ence was  convened  in  Moscow  on  the  25th  August.  A 
month  later,  on  29th  September,  a  democratic  Congress 
met  in  Petrograd,  only  Socialists  being  admitted. 
Finally,  on  the  20th  October  a  fourth  and  last  attempt 
was  made,  and  a  Council  of  the  Republic  was  convened, 
but  was  dispersed  by  the  Bolsheviks.  After  that  the 
latter  were  masters  of  the  position. 

Invitations  to  the  State  Conference  in  Moscow  ^  were 
sent  to  the  representatives  of  all  classes,  of  all  parties, 
organisations,  and  corporations.  About  2500  repre- 
sentatives came  to  the  Conference.  There  is  no  exaggera- 
tion in  saying  that  the  flower  of  the  Russian  population 
were  gathered  together  in  the  enormous  hall  of  the 
Great  Theatre  on  the  25th  of  August.  Professors  and 
workmen,  military  men  and  members  of  co-operative 

1  The  shorthand  reports  and  other  materials  of  the  CJonference  apparently 
perished  during  the  bombardment  of  the  Moscow  Town  Hall  by  the  Bolsheviks 
in  November  1917.  I  am  writing  about  the  Conference  partly  from  newspaper 
reports,  and  partly  from  personal  notes  and  impressions.  I  was  a  member  of 
the  Conference,  as  a  delegate  of  the  Petrograd  City  Council. 


168     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

societies,  of  Zemstvos  and  municipal  corporations, 
scientists,  writers,  peasants  from  the  Peasants'  Union, 
generals  and  privates,  monarchists  and  republicans — all 
had  responded  to  the  call  of  the  Government.  It  was  a 
review  of  the  living  forces  of  the  country,  where  the 
two  Russias  were  to  be  reconciled.  What  was  then 
termed  the  Right  wing,  which  included  all  non- 
Socialists,  was  called  "  property  -  qualified  Russia," 
although  there  were  not  a  few  proletarians  of  the 
educated  classes  among  them.  The  Left  wing,  which 
styled  itself  democratic  Russia,  included  not  only  work- 
men but  even  titled  persons  and  rich  men. 

This  arbitrarily  given  nickname  even  then  included 
two  distinctly  divergent  groups.  The  Right  group 
was  composed  of  people  who  acknowledged  political 
liberty  and  a  democratic  state  as  essential  to  a  new 
Russia.  But  they  considered  that  it  could  be  founded 
only  on  personal  initiative  and  private  property.  The 
Left  group  were  Socialists,  who  considered  property 
to  be  an  institution  of  the  bourgeoisie  and  one  to  be 
abolished  as  soon  as  possible. 

By  this  time  so  great  was  the  divergence  of  views 
on  the  methods  to  be  followed  and  the  objects  to  be 
attained  that,  although  the  invitations  had  been  issued 
by  Kerensky,  to  whom  the  Soviet  had  promised  full 
support,  yet  the  Executive  Committee  had  a  long 
discussion  as  to  whether  it  could  with  any  propriety 
take  part  in  the  State  Conference.  The  Bolsheviks 
argued  hotly  against  it,  considering  the  whole  affair  to 
be  counter-revolutionary.  And  even  the  Soviet  was 
afraid  of  compromising  itself,  as  from  information 
received  by  the  Soviet  "  dark  forces  wanted  to  use  the 
Conference  for  the  purpose  of  striking  a  decisive  blow  at 
the  Revolution."  By  this  time  the  fear  of  a  counter- 
revolution had  become  a  sort  of  mental  epidemic  among 


vni       THE  MOSCOW  STATE  CONFERENCE      169 

Socialists.  It  had  existed  before,  but  now  their  alarm 
was  more  concrete  in  character,  for  they  were  frightened 
by  the  more  and  more  persistent  demands  of  the  military 
commanders,  who  proposed  a  series  of  measures  for  the 
purpose  of  arresting  the  ruin  of  the  army  by  the  restora- 
tion of  discipline.  Like  the  civilians  the  soldiers 
divided  into  two  groups.  The  masses  were  drawn  to 
the  Soviets,  while  the  officers  and  the  better  educated 
private  soldiers  grouped  themselves  around  the  Generals 
headed  by  Komiloff,  who  had  already  in  a  report  to 
Kerensky  expressed  his  views  on  the  commissaries  and 
the  committees. 

But  both  of  the  latter  institutions  were  considered 
by  Soviet  politicians  as  "  triumphs  of  the  Revolution," 
and  any  attempt  on  them — coimter-re volution. 

Part  of  Korniloff's  report  to  the  Government  got  into 
the  newspapers.  In  it  the  Supreme  Commander-in-Chief 
pointed  out  that  the  drafts  sent  out  to  him  were  not 
only  quite  worthless  for  fighting  purposes,  but  were 
corrupting  the  troops  already  at  the  front.  "It  is 
therefore  necessary,  in  cases  when  soldiers  commit 
crimes  in  the  rear,  to  have  recourse  to  the  same  severe 
measures  up  to  capital  punishment,  as  are  in  force  in 
the  army  at  the  front."  This  proposal  was  furiously 
criticised  by  the  press. 

The  fears  of  the  Soviet  circles  unfortunately  infected 
the  Government. 

Nevertheless,  after  prolonged  debates,  the  Executive 
Committee  decided  to  take  part  in  the  State  Conference, 
and  at  this  time  showed  great  independence  of  the 
Bolsheviks,  depriving  them  of  the  right  to  take  part 
in  the  Conference  because  of  their  refusal  to  submit  to 
the  resolutions  of  the  Soviet  majority. 

But  even  the  absence  of  the  Bolsheviks  could  not 
close  the  rift  in  the  Conference.    Only  one  watchword  at 


170     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       oh. 

times  brought  unity  into  all  ranks,  and  that  was  when 
some  orator  would  say :  "  Russia  will  not  permit  the 
conclusion  of  a  shameful  peace."  Then  equally  vigorous 
and  united  applause  came  from  Right  and  Left.  But 
no  sooner  did  the  speakers  touch  on  more  concrete 
matters,  on  the  question  of  how  to  preserve  Russia 
from  a  disgraceful  peace,  or  what  order  was  to  be  intro- 
duced in  the  rear  and  at  the  front  for  this  purpose,  than 
the  Conference  would  again  divide  into  two  camps. 

The  Conference  was  especially  sensitive  on  the 
question  of  army  organisation.  During  the  debates  on 
this  question  not  only  were  the  words  significant  but  there 
was  significance  in  the  applause,  for  whom,  what  reason, 
and  from  whom  it  came.  And  more  than  once,  either 
when  the  Generals  were  speaking,  or  when  the  repre- 
sentatives of  the  Army  Committees  were  addressing 
the  meeting,  the  terrible  presentiment  of  civil  war  surged 
up  threateningly,  and  all  words  of  conciliation  sounded 
weak  and  unconvincing. 

When  Kerensky  proposed  to  greet  Korniloff  "  as  the 
leader  of  the  perishing  Russian  Army,"  an  enormous 
majority  of  those  present  gave  this  courageous  and 
honest  patriot  a  hearty  ovation. 

Only  the  soldiers  smiled  carelessly  and  retained 
their  seats,  when  the  others  rose  to  applaud  their 
leader  and  chief.  And  what  else  could  be  expected  of 
these  imeducated  or  half-educated  men,  when  those 
whom  they  looked  upon  as  their  spiritual  teachers — the 
civilian  members  of  the  Soviet — also  remained  sitting  ? 

On  the  stage,  not  far  from  the  long  table  at  which 
the  Ministers  sat,  with  Kerensky  at  their  head,  stood 
General  Kornilo:ff.  With  an  air  calm  but  careworn,  he 
looked  at  the  Left  section,  on  whose  conscientiousness 
and  good  sense  depended  that  which  was  dearer  to  him 
than  life  itself — the  fate  of  Russia.     And  in  the  front 


vni       THE  MOSCOW  STATE  CONFERENCE      171 

row  of  the  stalls  below  him  sat  the  Georgian  Chheidze, 
who,  turning  his  back  on  the  Supreme  Commander-in- 
Chief,  deliberately  applauded  the  representatives  of  the 
Front  Committees  in  the  boxes  on  the  Left.  His  example 
was  followed  by  the  other  members  of  the  Executive  Com- 
mittee. It  was  only  bourgeois  Russia  that  applauded 
the  Supreme  Commander-in-Chief  of  the  Russian  Army. 

The  Soviet  showed  plainly  and  significantly  its  total 
inability  to  understand  the  meaning  of  any  army,  and 
of  what  its  efficiency  and  discipline  must  be  based  on. 
After  such  a  demonstration  all  appeals  for  imity  sounded 
dead  and  hopeless,  and  it  was  in  vain  that  Prince 
Tsereteli  spoke  of  an  honest,  democratic  coalition.  It 
could  not  be  formed  imtil  Democracy  had  adopted  an 
honest  attitude  towards  the  principal  problem  of  the 
State — the  war  and  the  army.  The  form  of  government 
and  the  establishment  of  authority,  economics,  and  class 
warfare — all  this  did  not  give  rise  to  such  outbreaks  of 
political  passion  as  the  army  did.  Kaledin,  Alexeieff, 
and  Korniloff  spoke  of  this  decay  of  the  army  courage- 
ously, not  fearing  the  truth.  They  demanded  the 
immediate  introduction  of  decisive  measures,  and  not 
of  half-measures. 

Kaledin,  the  Cossack  General,  thus  formulated  these 
necessary  measures : 

The  Army  is  to  keep  outside  politics.  Meetings  must  be 
prohibited  at  the  front.  All  committees  and  Soviets  must  be 
abolished,  both  in  the  Army  and  in  the  rear.  Only  the  economic 
committees  may  be  left  in  the  regimental  units.  The  Soldiers' 
Declaration  of  Rights  must  be  amended  and  supplemented  by 
an  indication  of  his  duties.    Strict  discipUne  must  be  restored. 

A  similar  view  of  the  need  for  efficiency  of  the  army 
was  taken  in  the  declaration  made  by  the  members  of  the 
Fourth  Duma,  read  by  Rodzianko.  This  declaration 
was  the  best  exposition  of  the  political  ideas  and  desires 


172     FEOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

of  the  so-called  bourgeois  Russia,  as  represented  at  the 
Congress.     These  were  as  follows  : 

At  the  present  moment  the  chief  object  is  to  save  Russia 
from  defeat,  dismemberment,  and  disgrace,  and  so  to  carry  on 
the  World  War  to  a  victorious  end,  in  complete  accord  with  our 
Allies,  as  to  guarantee  mankind  against  a  repetition  of  such  a 
war  in  the  future. 

The  declaration  begins  with  this.  History  has 
already  shown  that  the  Russian  politicians  who  grouped 
themselves  round  the  Duma  were  quite  correct  in  their 
statement  of  what  was  required  at  that  time.  But 
power  was  not  on  their  side  and  their  exhortations  fell 
on  heedless  ears. 

Of  course  such  aims  demanded  order  and  discipline 
in  the  army,  as  was  pointed  out  in  the  above  declaration. 
But  in  carrying  on  the  war  "  the  Grovernment,  in 
defining  the  aims  of  the  war  waged  by  Russia  and  the 
Allies,  must  not  introduce  any  tendencies  of  inter- 
national Socialism,  but  must  be  guided  exclusively  by 
the  national  interests  of  Russia.  The  Government 
must  preserve  a  complete  independence  as  regards 
motions  passed  by  the  international  Socialistic  confer- 
ence. It  must  likewise  keep  itself  completely  inde- 
pendent of  the  Soviets  of  Workmen's,  Soldiers'  and 
Peasants'  Delegates  organisations  which  do  not  repre- 
sent the  opinions  and  will  of  the  entire  nation." 

The  Fourth  Duma  in  its  declaration  urged  that  the 
Russian  Government  should  be  independent  of  any  party. 
The  Government  must  be  one  and  undivided,  and  no 
organisations  have  any  right  to  interfere  in  its  orders. 
But  neither  must  the  Government  anticipate  in  any 
fundamental  measures  the  decisions  of  the  Constituent 
Assembly,  especially  such  measures  as  would  affect  the 
unity  of  the  Russian  State.  The  declaration  especially 
emphasised    the    necessity    for    the    Government    to 


vm       THE  MOSCOW  STATE  CONFERENCE      173 

"prevent  all  the  attempts  to  aggravate  Social  conditions, 
and  foment  class  warfare  now  encouraged  by  certain 
Socialistic  parties.  The  Government  must  likewise 
prohibit  any  arbitrary  solution  of  Social  questions  by 
interested  parties."  This  refers  to  the  seizure  of  land 
by  the  peasants  and  of  factories  by  the  workmen. 

The  Right  half  of  the  State  Conference  did  not  come 
to  any  formal  agreement,  though  individual  speakers 
expressed  full  concurrence  with  this  declaration  of  the 
Fourth  Duma.  The  majority  of  the  Right  orators 
merely  developed  its  fimdamental  principles.  Shulgin 
(Nationalist)  and  Maklakoi!  (Cadet)  were  especially 
clear  in  their  exposition.  The  Cadets  had  taken  an 
active  part  in  drawing  up  the  declaration,  and,  if  I  am 
not  mistaken,  it  was  written  by  Milyukoff ,  who,  in  his 
speech,  again  emphasised  still  more  clearly  all  the 
danger  of  capitulating  to  the  Utopian  claims  of  the 
working  classes,  and  to  the  extreme  demands  of  the 
nationalities  composing  the  Empire. 

Maklakoff,  while  welcoming  that  part  of  the  Govern- 
ment programme  which  promised  to  carry  on  the  war 
until  the  conclusion  of  an  honourable  peace,  said  :  "  But 
I  cannot  help  drawing  attention  to  the  alarm  felt  by 
the  public  conscience,  when  it  sees  among  the  *  Save 
the  Revolution '  Government  some  of  yesterday's 
'  defeatists.' " 

These  words  caused  the  Left  wing  to  cheer  ChemofE 
lustily,  as  if  for  the  purpose  of  letting  every  one  know 
which  of  the  Ministers  was  "  yesterday's  defeatist," 
and  there  were  cries  from  the  Left :  ''  Long  live  the 
Muzhik  Minister  Chernoff !  " 

But  MaklakofE  was  listened  to  in  gloomy,  inimical 
silence  when  he  spoke  of  the  necessity  of  saving  Russia, 
and  not  the  Revolution,  when  he  said  that  the  way  to 
salvation  lay  through  the  army,  and  that  therefore  "  it 


174     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch- 

is  our  revolutionary  duty  to  restore  discipline  in  the 
army."  Now  Chlieidze  in  his  speech  had  explained  that 
the  aim  of  commissaries  and  committees  was  "  to  be 
conductors  of  revolutionary  policy.  Therefore,"  said 
Maklakof!,  "  it  was  not  considerations  of  discipline,  not 
military  necessity,  but  the  desire  to  have  their  own 
agents  in  the  army  that  made  the  Revolutionary 
Democracy  stand  up  for  these  institutions.  Those 
who  introduced  them  into  the  army  hoped  that  they 
would  manage  to  do  without  battles,  that  Zimmerwald 
would  lead  them  to  an  honourable  peace.  And  the 
war  still  went  on.  Zimmerwald  proved  a  poor  defence 
against  the  advancing  foe.  A  choice  must  be  made. 
The  army  must  either  take  to  politics  or  else  obey 
its  leaders.  But  to  restore  discipline  in  the  army 
would  mean  giving  it  into  the  power  of  the  officers  to 
whom  at  present  the  Government  shows  no  trust." 
Maklakoff  prophetically  warned  the  Government  that 
in  choosing  the  middle  way  it  was  creating  such  a  state 
of  affairs  that  "  the  army  will  not  be  a  fighting  army, 
and  will  not  belong  to  the  Government." 

In  November  Kerensky  himself  experienced  all  the 
hard  truth  of  this  prophecy.  What  was  said  by  Rodzi- 
anko,  Guchkoff,  Alexeieff,  Korniloff,  Milyukoff,  Ria- 
bushinsky,  Kutler,  Shulgin,  and  many  others  who  stood 
out  for  a  strong  Government  and  a  strong  army,  in 
many  points  coincided  with  the  task  the  Government 
had  before  it :  "To  save  the  State,  to  protect  the 
honour  and  dignity  of  the  Russian  people,"  as  Kerensky 
put  it.  In  his  speeches  too  there  was  a  ring  of  patriotism, 
far  nearer  to  the  feelings  of  the  Right  wing  than  to 
those  of  the  Left.  Nevertheless  the  Socialist  majority 
in  the  Cabinet  more  than  counteracted  this  tendency 
of  their  chief.  They  spoke  of  the  salvation  of  Russia, 
of  the  necessity  of  saving  it  from  defeat  by  the  Germans, 


viii       THE  MOSCOW  STATE  CONFERENCE      175 

and  yet  put  their  trust,  not  in  the  patriots  Alexeieff  and 
Korniloff,  but  in  the  "  defeatists  '*  Chheidze  and  Chemoff . 
It  was  obvious  what  the  result  would  be. 

Radzianko  could  not  even  read  his  Duma  declaration. 
It  was  only  printed  in  the  newspapers.  When  his  turn 
to  speak  came  the  time  allowed  each  speaker  had 
already  been  curtailed,  and  Kerensky  either  was  not 
able  or  did  not  wish  to  let  the  most  prominent  repre- 
sentative of  property-owning  Russia  have  his  say — the 
most  prominent  representative  if  not  by  his  personal 
qualities  at  least  by  the  position  he  occupied.  It  was 
one  of  those  chance  occurrences  to  which  history  likes 
to  give  a  symbolic  meaning.  Non-Socialistic  Russia, 
defending  the  interests  not  of  a  class  but  of  the  State, 
was  left  unheard  all  through  the  State  Conference.  And 
Chheidze,  speaking  for  Socialistic  Russia,  was  able  not 
only  to  finish  his  speech,  but  even  to  read  the  whole  of 
a  long  manifesto  of  the  Revolutionary  Democracy. 
This  declaration  was  signed  not  only  by  the  Central 
Conmiittee  of  the  Workmen's,  Soldiers'  and  Peasants' 
Delegates,  but  also  by  the  Railway,  Post  and  Telegraph, 
and  Teachers'  tJnions,  by  the  Front  organisations,  by 
part  of  the  representatives  of  the  Zemstvo  and  municipal 
institutions,  the  Food  Committees,  etc.  As  there  was  no 
voting  at  the  Conference  it  is  very  difficult  to  determine 
the  numerical  ratio  between  the  non  -  Socialist  and 
Socialist  parties.  But  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  number 
of  people  on  the  side  of  the  democratic  organisations,  in 
whose  name  Chheidze  spoke,  was  enormously  greater 
than  that  of  the  people  who,  speaking  generally,  sup- 
ported Rodzianko.  The  Left  were  correct  in  saying 
that  they  had  the  masses  with  them.  Numerically 
they  were  stronger.  But  the  bulk  of  the  intellectual 
forces  was  not  on  their  side.  The  Left  had  to  acknow- 
ledge this.    Mme.  Breshko-Breshkovskaia,  justly  named 


176     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       oh. 

the  "  Grandmother  of  the  Revolution,"  said,  turning 
to  the  benches  occupied  by  the  present  or  former 
members  of  the  Duma  :  "  You  who,  more  than  others, 
are  rich  in  talent,  knowledge,  and  experience  in  states- 
manship— ^go  to  the  people,  use  your  spiritual  wealth  in 
their  service." 

But  the  Left  would  not  or  could  not  understand  that 
intellectual  power  used  to  carry  out  alien  ideas  ceases 
to  be  a  power.  And  the  ideas  of  the  Right  and  the  Left 
wing  of  the  Conference  in  regard  to  State  matters  were 
almost  diametrically  opposed. 

It  is  true  Chheidze's  declaration  (subsequently 
known  as  the  Declaration  of  the  27th  of  August)  con- 
stituted a  withdrawal  from  the  old  position  held  by  the 
Revolutionary  Democracy.  In  the  spring  of  1917  the 
Socialist  Ministers  promised  on  entering  the  Cabinet  to 
intensify  class  warfare.  The  Declaration  announced : 
"  The  Revolutionary  Democracy,  as  represented  by  its 
Soviet  of  Workmen's,  Soldiers'  and  Peasants'  Delegates, 
is  striving  in  everything  to  place  the  interests  of  the 
whole  of  the  country  and  the  Revolution  above  those  of 
separate  classes  and  groups  of  the  population."  This 
was  already  a  great  advance.  But  it  could  be  of  no 
significance  unless  the  Soviets  drew  practical  conclusions 
from  it  in  fundamental  questions  of  government  and  the 
war  and  in  social  and  national  problems.  On  none  of 
these  points,  however,  could  they  leave  their  former 
positions.  The  word  "  victory "  was  still  not  to  be 
found  in  their  vocabulary,  the  spirit  of  Zimmerwald 
still  determined  their  relations  to  the  war. 

"  The  Government  must  bear  in  mind  that  the 
energetic  continuation  of  a  foreign  policy  embracing  a 
refusal  of  all  imperialistic  aims  (at  that  time  the  Germans 
had  occupied  an  enormous  tract  of  Western  Russia)  and 
the  desire  for  the  speedy  conclusion  of  universal  peace  on 


vin       THE  MOSCOW  STATE  CONFERENCE      177 

democratic  principles,  will  be  a  mighty  weapon  for 
increasing  the  efficiency  of  the  army.^  The  Govern- 
ment must  act  with  the  support  of  democratic  organisa- 
tions in  the  rear  and  at  the  front.  It  must  demand 
that  the  military  authorities  shall  be  imconditionally 
obedient  to  it,  as  the  representative  of  the  supreme 
power  of  the  State."  But  there  was  not  a  word  about 
democratic  organisations  also  being  obliged  to  obey 
this  authority.  Thus  double  authority  was,  so  to 
speak,  decreed  by  this  declaration.  The  declaration 
very  justly  points  out  that  the  proprietary  and  privileged 
classes  must  sacrifice  their  interests  for  the  good  of  the 
country.  But  it  most  inaccurately  asserts  that  "demo- 
cracy is  prepared  to  make  any  sacrifices  to  save  the 
country  and  the  Revolution."  The  misfortunes  of  the 
country  and  the  Revolution  arose  from  the  fact  that  no 
one  knew  how  to  inspire  the  masses  with  a  readiness  to 
make  sacrifices  or  even  to  submit  to  discipline. 

The  declaration  proceeded  to  set  forth  a  long 
economic,  agrarian,  and  financial  programme.  Perhaps 
the  most  important  points  in  it  were  the  demand  that 
agricultural  land  should  be  handed  over  to  land  com- 
mittees "  without  any  infringement  of  the  present  form 
of  land  tenure."  How  land  can  be  taken  away  from 
private  owners  without  infringing  these  forms  of  land 
tenure  does  not  appear  ?  The  Soviet  lawyers  themselves 
would  perhaps  not  be  able  to  answer  this. 

As  regards  commerce  and  industry,  there  are  clauses 
in  the  declaration  which  actually  clear  the  way  for  the 
subsequent  work  of  the  Bolsheviks,  such  as  :  "In  order 
to  increase  productivity  it  is  first  of  all  necessary  to 
establish  control  over  production  and  an  active  share 

^  This  was  well  answered  by  a  Socialist,  a  representative  of  the  Officers' 
Union,  Lieutenant-Colonel  Wrzosiek  :  "  Try  to  grasp  the  psychology  of  a 
soldier.  You  tell  him  to  fight,  and  point  to  Stockholm,  and  promise  him  that 
peace  will  come  from  there.    How  can  a  soldier  fight  with  his  soul  so  divided  ?  " 

N 


178     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       oh. 

in  the  management  of  undertakings,  even  going  so  far  as 
the  formation  of  syndicates  and  trusts  by  the  State, 
and  the  introduction  of  monopolies." 

The  food  trade  must  also  be  "  under  the  especially- 
strict  supervision  of  food  control  institutions."  ^ 

No  less  dangerous  was  the  war  programme  of  the 
Revolutionary  Democracy  based  on  the  support  of  the 
committees,  who  were  to  be  the  leaders  of  the  social  and 
political  life  of  the  soldiery,  while  the  Commissaries 
were  to  "  carry  on  a  propaganda  of  the  revolutionary 
policy  of  the  Government."  The  commanders  were  to 
be  "  completely  independent  in  all  military  operations," 
but  they  were  not  to  undertake  extraordinary  measures 
of  "  revolutionary  action  "  without  the  Commissaries. 
"  The  extravagant  use  or  abuse  of  the  system  of  coercion 
and  repression  ruins  the  fighting  spirit  and  efliciency  of 
the  army.  Therefore  discipline  must  not  be  restored 
by  the  sole  authority  of  the  commanding  officers." 

Even  after  flight  en  masse,  crimes,  and  desertions, 
which  had  become  so  common  in  the  army,  the  demo- 
cracy was  afraid  of  repression  as  ruinous  to  the  fighting 
spirit.  It  was  clear  that  neither  patriots  nor  Generals 
could  take  this  point  of  view,  that  no  compromise  was 
possible,  and  that,  sooner  or  later,  the  Government 
would  have  to  make  a  definite  choice  between  two 
divergent  courses.  Unfortunately  for  Russia,  when  the 
fateful  hour  arrived,  the  Government,  in  the  person  of 
Kerensky,  made  the  choice  that  was  ruinous  to  Russia. 
But  in  August  at  the  Moscow  State  Conference 
Kerensky  was  still  seeking  for  what  he  thought  was  a 
central  position  uniting  both  camps.    He  was  neither 

1  Even  then  this  control  had  reached  such  a  stage  that  private  initiative 
was  almost  killed.  But  the  new  institutions  were  hastily  formed,  and  staffed 
by  persons  who  were  more  noted  for  their  revolutionary  tendencies  than  for 
their  experience — ^young  men  who  were  quite  incapable  of  managing  their 
work,  the  more  so  as  there  was  no  strong  (Jovemment. 


vtii       THE  MOSCOW  STATE  CONFERENCE      179 

able  nor  steadfast  enough  for  this  hard  task.  In  his 
speeches,  especially  in  liis  perorations,  with  hysterical 
nervousness  he  would  threaten  Right  and  Left,  call  for 
sacrifices  and  talk  of  the  perilous  position  of  Russia. 
Yet  when  dealing  with  concrete  problems,  with  the 
organisation  of  Government  and  of  the  army  in  the 
struggle  against  anarchy  and  economic  ruin,  he  hesitated, 
made  many  a  slip,  and  could  not  see  his  way.  That 
part  of  Kerensky's  speech  which  dealt  with  the  army 
was  positively  dangerous.  ''  The  old  army  was,  un- 
fortunately, bound  by  the  hateful  fetters  of  mechanical 
coercion  and  the  senseless  subordination  of  man  to  iron, 
and  often  to  a  brainless  will  placed  above  him." 

Thus  spoke  the  Premier,  who  had  retained  the  post 
of  Minister  of  War,  in  the  presence  of  the  representatives 
of  those  very  Army  Committees  which  for  five  months 
had  done  nothing  but  throw  off  the  chains  of  all  coercion 
and  all  subordination. 

But  what  was  still  more  dangerous  was  that  in  his 
speech  Kerensky  divided  the  officers  into  two  classes. 
To  one  he  took  off  his  hat :  "  The  ordinary  fighting 
officers  who  were  not  trying  to  make  a  career."  These 
had  on  their  side  the  whole  intelligent  portion  of  the 
army,  including  those  new  Army  Committees  and  repre- 
sentatives of  the  central  revolutionary  authorities  who 
formed  such  a  necessary  and  integral  part  of  the  army, 
i.e.  the  Commissaries  !  In  the  other  class,  disapproved 
of  by  the  Premier,  were  those  officers  who  considered 
the  committees  and  Commissaries  harmful  (i.e.  practic- 
ally all  the  independent  officers  who  were  not  seeking 
for  cheap  demagogic  popularity),  with  the  Supreme 
Commander-in-Chief,  General  Korniloff,  at  their  head. 

The  disapproval  hinted  at  by  Kerensky  was  at  once 
understood  by  the  soldiers  present  and  by  their  civilian 
leaders.    It  widened  the  rift  between  the  officers  and 


180     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       oh. 

soldiers,  and  made  the  desperate  position  of  the  officers 
still  worse. 

One  thing  can  be  placed  to  the  credit  of  Kerensky 
and  his  colleagues  in  the  Cabinet,  in  connection  with  the 
Moscow  Conference,  and  that  is  that  they  were  not  afraid 
of  the  truth,  and  used  the  Conference  to  show  Russia  the 
dangerous  position  she  was  in.  Disorder,  ruin,  anarchy, 
which  later,  under  the  Bolshevist  regime,  acquired  a 
complete  and  obvious  character,  existed  practically  even 
then.  *'  I  should  like  to  find  new,  not  human  words, 
in  order  to  describe  to  you  all  the  horror  which  over- 
whelms us,  when  we  see  this  danger.  .  .  .  The  State  is 
in  mortal  danger.  .  .  .  All  of  us  are  in  mortal  fear," — 
Kerensky  kept  repeating  in  his  speech.  The  Ministers 
of  the  Interior,  of  Finance,  of  Commerce,  and  especially 
the  Supreme  Commander-in-Chief,  who  all  spoke  after 
him,  brought  a  series  of  ruthless  and  terrible  proofs 
that  Russia  was  on  the  brink  of  utter  ruin. 

"  The  sole  task  that  the  Government  has  before  it 
is  to  save  the  country,  to  protect  the  honour  and  dignity 
of  the  whole  Russian  people  and  the  Russian  State,"  said 
the  Prime  Minister  of  the  Provisional  Government.  It 
would  seem  as  if  all  who  were  present,  without  distinction 
of  party  or  class,  must  unite  in  one  common  impulse, 
and  come  to  the  aid  of  the  Government.  There  is  no 
doubt  that  sincere  pain  and  alarm  for  their  perishing 
country  were  heard  in  the  speeches  of  even  the  Socialist 
orators,  who  had  lately  considered  patriotism  as 
treachery  to  the  Workmen's  International.  They  like- 
wise felt  the  sobering  influence,  but  the  process  was  too 
slow,  far  slower  than  was  required  by  the  complex  and 
perturbed  condition  of  an  enormous  nation.  For  it  was 
not  only  the  workmen,  peasants,  and  soldiers  whose 
minds  were  disturbed  by  the  struggle  between  excited 
class  appetites  and  the  gnawing  of  their  civic  conscience. 


VIII       THE  MOSCOW  STATE  CONFEEENCE      181 

The  minds  of  the  leaders  were  likewise  divided  between 
the  ingrained  dogmas  of  their  international  and  class 
catechism  and  the  anxiety  for  what  was,  after  all,  their 
own  native  Russia.  And  perhaps,  in  his  weakness  of 
will  and  logic,  the  most  tragic  incarnation  of  this  duality 
was  Kerensky,  the  chief  and  the  nominee  of  the  Demo- 
cracy. First  he  would  call  for  sacrifices,  for  a  non-party 
spirit,  for  unity,  then  he  would  threaten  :  "I  will  put 
a  limit  to  the  tendency  to  use  the  great  calamity  of 
Russia  as  a  weapon  against  the  interests  of  the  nation 
as  a  whole,  and  whatever  ultimatums  may  be  presented 
to  me,  I  will  manage  to  subdue  them  to  the  supreme 
authority,  and  to  myself,  its  supreme  head.*' 

As  the  majority  of  the  members  of  the  State  Confer- 
ence knew  that  Komiloff  was  becoming  more  and  more 
persistent  in  his  demands  for  the  reorganisation  of  the 
army,  every  one  understood  these  hints,  and  knew  that  the 
Premier's  threats  were  directed  against  the  Supreme 
Commander-in-Chief,  and  so  the  hearers,  instead  of  uniting 
in  one  general  burst  of  patriotism,  as  Kerensky  himself 
demanded,  were  divided  between  him  and  Komiloff. 

Hesitating  between  the  bitter  consciousness  of  the 
perilous  situation  and  the  obstinate  prejudices  of  the 
Revolutionary  Democracy,  Kerensky  could  not  bring 
the  various  tendencies  of  Russian  public  forces  to 
anything  like  a  united  effort.  The  theatrical  hand- 
shake which  the  representative  of  large  industries 
gave  in  answer  to  Tsereteli's  appeal  to  the  bourgeoisie 
to  make  the  same  sacrifices  as  labouring  democracy 
hardly  deceived  any  one.  All  knew  that  industry  was 
ruined  owing  to  the  complete  loss  of  discipline  among 
the  workmen,  and  that  if  industry  could  indeed  be 
re-established,  it  was  not  by  fine  speeches,  but  by  strong 
and  wise  measures.  And,  however  strange  it  may  be, 
yet  in  spite  of  the  Socialistic  character  of  the  noisy 


182     FEOM  LIBERTY  TO  BEEST-LITOVSK       oh. 

Left  wing,  political  passions  were  aggravated  not  so 
mucli  by  social  disputes,  as  by  differences  in  the 
conceptions  of  victory,  discipline,  and  liberty. 

It  was  in  vain  that  the  veterans  of  the  Eevolu- 
tion,  Plekhanoff,  Mme.  Breshko-Breshkovskaia,  and 
Krapotkin,  called  for  good  sense  and  unity. 

Plekhanoff ,  the  founder  of  Russian  Social-Democracy, 
protested  against  the  isolation  of  the  bourgeoisie,  and 
tried  to  convince  the  proletariat  that  they  should  come 
to  an  agreement  with  the  other  classes,  and  not  fight 
against  them,  "  as  otherwise  nothing  wiU  be  left  of 
Russia,  to  the  great  delight  of  German  capitalists." 

Krapotkin,  the  philosopher  of  Anarchism,  at  once 
displeased  the  Soviet  leaders  by  beginning  his  speech 
as  follows  :  *'  I  join  with  those  who  have  called  upon 
the  Russian  people  to  cast  loose  from  Zimmerwaldism 
once  for  all,  and  as  one  man,  to  stand  up  in  defence  of 
their  country  and  the  Revolution.  In  my  opinion 
Russia  and  the  Revolution  are  inseparable.  If  the 
Germans  defeat  us,  the  consequences  of  their  victory 
will  be  so  terrible,  that  even  to  mention  it  fills  the  mind 
with  horror.''' 

In  the  speeches  of  the  Socialists  of  such  groups  Social- 
istic ideology  was  united  to  sober  statesmanship  and  warm 
patriotism.  Their  words  met  with  no  sympathy  in  that 
Left  wing  which  had  practically  already  taken  the  power 
into  its  own  hands.  For  appearance'  sake,  both  speakers 
were  applauded,  as  former  revolutionary  workers.  Kra- 
potkin was  furiously  applauded  only  when  he  proposed 
the  immediate  establishment  of  a  republic. 

In  spite  of  the  general  tension  and  excitement,  the 
undoubted  general  desire  not  only  to  elucidate  the 
position,  but  also  to  find  some  outlet,  in  spite  of  the 
readiness  of  many  ''  to  lose  their  own  souls,  but  at  least 
to  save  their  country  "  (Kerensky's  words),  the  State 


vm       THE  MOSCOW  STATE  CONFERENCE      183 

Conference,  which  sat  three  days  (26th-28th  August),  was 
to  all  thoughtful  people  an  additional  proof  that  the 
Provisional  Government,  and  with  it  the  whole  of  Russia, 
was  at  an  "  impasse."  It  was  time,  not  to  "  deepen  " 
the  Revolution,  but  to  check  with  a  firm  hand,  to 
demand  from  the  Revolutionary  Democracy  and  the 
masses  excited  by  it  sacrifices  in  deeds,  and  not  merely 
in  words,  to  cast  loose  from  Socialistic  romanticism,  or 
else  to  drink  the  bitter  cup  of  revolutionary  experiment 
to  the  dregs. 

At  this  Conference  it  became  clear  that  it  was  the 
Soviet,  i.e.  the  Socialist  Centre,  that  was  driving  Russia 
to  choose  the  second  alternative.  The  Bolsheviks,  who 
were  already  preparing  the  draught  of  hemlock  for 
Russia,  were  not  present  at  the  Conference. 

The  Socialist  Centre  was  acting  independently  of 
the  Bolsheviks,  even  were  in  conflict  with  them.  But 
the  Bolsheviks,  though  absent  from  the  Conference,  were 
carrying  on  a  widespread  agitation  against  it  among 
the  Moscow  proletariat,  especially  among  the  town 
workmen,  who  threatened  to  stop  the  trams  and  cut  off 
the  electric  light.  The  waiters  in  the  refreshment 
bar  of  the  Opera  House  where  the  Conference  was  held 
struck  on  the  third  day,  and  it  was  some  other  organisa- 
tion (if  I  mistake  not,  the  Zemstvo  Union)  which  hastily 
established  a  sort  of  soup  kitchen  in  the  theatre. 

This  ferment  in  the  town  among  the  masses,  to 
whose  support  the  Soviet  politicians  were  always 
referring,  naturally  not  only  kept  up  their  nervousness, 
but  their  aggressive  attitude  towards  the  proprietary 
elements  of  the  Conference.  Striving  to  retain  their 
waning  popularity,  they  emphasised  their  differences 
both  with  the  bourgeoisie  and  with  the  extremists.  But 
this  did  not  save  their  authority,  nor  did  it  save  the 
masses  from  subsequent  suffering. 


184    FEOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK    oh.™ 

Nevertheless,  a  small  group  of  Bolsheviks  did  come 
forward  at  the  Moscow  Conference  with  a  separate 
declaration,  in  which  it  was  stated  that  the  Provisional 
Government ''  convened  the  Moscow  Conference  in  order 
to  get  new  strength  for  a  new  campaign  against  all 
that  had  been  won  by  the  Revolution.  The  Moscow 
Conference  is  a  convenient  opportunity  for  the  counter- 
revolutionary executioners  to  come  to  an  xmderstanding 
about  the  organisation  of  an  All-Russian  counter- 
revolutionary conspiracy.  The  proletariat  will  not 
allow  the  bourgeois  oppressors  to  triumph.  The  pro- 
letariat will  carry  on  the  Revolution  to  the  end,  will 
secure  land  for  the  peasants,  and  peace,  bread,  and 
liberty  for  the  people." 

History  has  shown  the  real  meaning  of  such  promises, 
as  it  has  shown  how  many  real  executioners,  savage  and 
ruthless,  were  hidden  among  the  ranks  of  the  Bolsheviks 
themselves,  only  waiting  for  the  moment  when  the 
people's  want  of  organisation  and  its  trustfulness  would 
enable  them  to  wreak  their  fury  on  the  unfortunate 
population  of  Russia, 


CHAPTER  IX 

THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  THE  MASSES 

Industrial  anarchy  ^ — A.  KonovaloflE's  resignation — ^An  appeal  to  the 
jjeople's  sense  of  duty — Disira  and  demands — Intelligentsia  and 
workmen — Class-war  propaganda — Municipal  elections  and  the  new 
rulers — The  leaders  and  the  crowd. 

The  Moscow  State  Conference  brought  no  relief  to 
Russia.  It  only  laid  bare  the  conflict  between  the  High 
Command  of  the  Army  and  the  Government,  and  the 
awful  state  of  the  country  whose  destiny  was  linked 
with  that  of  Kerensky's  weak  and  ambiguous  Cabinet. 

Of  course  these  were  only  partial  ties,  for  by  that 
time  the  domination  of  the  masses,  dreamed  of  and 
proclaimed  by  the  Socialists,  became  ever  more  apparent. 
From  the  very  first  days  of  the  Revolution  agitators  and 
propagandists  of  the  Left  invaded  villages,  factories, 
and  the  army,  disseminating  the  abstract  arguments 
of  programmes  ratified  at  Socialistic  congresses  whose 
members  stood  more  often  than  not  remote  from  real 
life.  This  propaganda  was  founded  upon  two  prin- 
ciples :  class-war  and  the  transfer  of  power  to  the 
labouring  masses,  i.e.  the  proletariat,  to  whom  were 
often  added  the  peasants — a  class  who  in  Russia  are 
landowners  with  a  variety  of  forms  of  tenure. 

'  A  more  detailed  account  of  the  economic  consequences  of  the  Revolu- 
tion may  be  found  in  the  book,  Ptace  Conference  and  Economic  Rustia,  by 
N.  Nordman  (London). 

186 


186     FKOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       oh. 

Russia  being  essentially  an  agricultural  country, 
the  principal  motto  became — all  land  to  the  people. 
All  liberty  to  the  people  was  added,  but  the  second  part 
of  the  sacred  formula  had  far  less  effect  upon  the  masses. 

Even  factory  workers  in  Russia  had  not  completely 
severed  their  ties  with  their  native  village,  and  now 
they  dreamed  of  a  return  to  the  land  promised  to  them 
by  the  new  authorities.  There  was,  however,  no  need 
for  them  to  hasten  back  to  the  country.  They  were 
prospering  in  town.  Shortly  after  the  March  Revolution 
an  eight-hours'  day  was  summarily  introduced  in  all 
industries,  the  workmen  refusing  to  admit  either  piece- 
work or  a  minimum  of  output.  Factories  engaged  in 
war-work,  municipal  works,  railway  workshops,  trans- 
port— the  whole  apparatus  of  national  economics  seemed 
paralysed.  The  workmen's  demands  rose  to  fabulous 
proportions,  while  the  eflS.ciency  of  labour  steadily 
declined. 

At  the  same  time  the  latent  mistrust  of  workmen 
towards  their  employers  and  the  entire  skilled  staff, 
from  managers  down  to  engineers  and  even  doctors, 
was  being  artificially  fostered.  The  industrial  command- 
ing staff  was  passing  through  the  same  humiliations  and 
even  the  same  dangers  as  the  commanding  staff  of  the 
army. 

It  could  not  now  be  afl&rmed  that  all  talk  of  the 
inefficiency  of  labour  at  munition  factories,  of  a  terrible 
decline  in  the  productivity  of  national  labour,  were  but 
the  "  calumnious  "  attacks  of  the  bourgeoisie  accord- 
ing to  Tsereteli's  oft-repeated  assertions  in  the  Soviet. 
When  called  to  the  Ministry  the  Socialists  realised  the 
stem  truth  of  the  "  bourgeois  "  warnings.  How  could 
it  be  otherwise,  when  the  industrial  centres  of  Moscow 
and  Petrograd,  as  well  as  the  Donetz  coal  region — the 
sole  purveyor  of  fuel  for  factories,  railways,  and  cities — 


THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  THE  MASSES      187 

were  becoming  a  prey  to  anarchy,  furious,  at  times 
bloody,  slaying  all  industrial  output  ? 

Long  before  the  enthronement  of  the  Bolsheviks  the 
productivity  of  mines  and  factories  had  been  impaired, 
transport  disorganised,  the  food  -  supply  dislocated. 
Workmen,  unaccustomed  to  intelligent  discipline  and 
lacking  strong  moral  or  professional  traditions,  destroyed 
all  industry  with  childish  blindness. 

In  vain  did  the  bourgeois  and  the  Right-Socialistic 
press  warn  the  worker  that  by  ruining  industry  they  in 
the  long  run  ruined  themselves.  The  Moscow  factory 
owners,  members  of  the  Union  of  Conamerce  and  In- 
dustry, presented  reports  to  the  Government,  pointing 
out  Russia's  rapid  economic  ruin.  The  same  was  more 
than  once  repeated  by  engineering  and  technical  imions. 
The  Minister  of  Commerce  and  Industry,  A.  Konovaloff, 
in  his  speech  at  a  meeting  of  factory  owners  in  Moscow, 
pointed  out  the  dangerous  forms  assumed  by  class-war  : 
"  If  the  leaders  of  the  Soviet  fail  to  control  the  movement 
and  direct  it  into  the  channel  of  legal  class  struggle,  we 
shall  witness  a  complete  paralysis  of  the  country's 
economic  life,  and  scores  of  years  must  elapse  before 
these  ruins  can  be  rebuilt."  Moscow  labour  organisa- 
tions responded  to  his  speech  with  angry  protests  and 
the  customary  epithet  of  "  bourgeois."  A.  KonovalofE 
was  indeed  a  big  owner  of  cotton  mills.  Able  and 
ambitious,  he  was  alert  to  realise  the  claims  of  the 
present  moment,  and  not  only  met  the  demands  of  his 
employees,  but  often  forestalled  them.  As  member 
of  the  Duma,  he  was  a  leader  of  the  Progressive 
Party.  He  entered  the  Government  as  a  member  of 
the  Left,  and  at  first  was  in  close  friendship  with 
Kerensky.  Much  later,  towards  the  autumn  of  1917, 
A.  KonovalofE  joined  the  Cadet  party.  But  his  leanings 
to  the  Left  did  not  protect  him  from  furious  attacks  on  the 


188     FEjOM  liberty  TO  BEEST-LITOVSK       oh. 

part  of  the  Socialistic  press,  which  explained  his  activity 
by  his  "  bourgeois  origin,"  although  the  Minister  of 
Labour,  M.  Skobeleif ,  against  whom  A.  Konovaloff  was 
obliged  to  struggle,  was,  like  the  latter,  also  a  millionaire. 

All  this  ended  in  A.  Konovaloff 's  resigning  his  post  on 
2nd  June,  in  spite  of  all  Prince  Lvoff's  and  the  other 
Ministers'  attempts  to  retain  him.  He  was  the  third 
Minister  to  resign  from  the  first  Government  created  by 
the  Revolution.  According  to  the  papers,  A.  Konovaloff 
proffered  very  definite  motives  for  his  resignation.  He 
did  not  consider  it  possible  to  remain  at  the  post  of 
Minister  of  Commerce  and  Industry  when  industry  was 
being  destroyed.  A.  Konovalofi  completely  approved  of 
the  Government's  financial  measures,  the  raising  of  the 
income-tax,  and  the  direct  taxation  of  excess  profits, 
etc.  He  also  supported  arbitration,  collective  tariffs, 
and  a  whole  series  of  the  measures  that  constituted  the 
minimum  programme  of  the  Social-Democratic  party. 
But  he  disapproved  of  the  proposed  system  of  Govern- 
ment control  and  regulation  of  production,  considering 
this  a  device  for  getting  rid  of  experienced  men  and 
disorganising  industry. 

According  to  A.  Konovaloff  the  Government  was 
powerless  to  re-establish  broken  discipline  owing  to  its 
lack  of  authority.  Therefore,  he  had  lost  all  faith  in  the 
Government's  work  and  held  that  he  no  longer  had  any 
right  to  participate  in  it.  His  step  was  severely  criticised 
by  the  Left  and  by  the  centre  of  the  Revolutionary 
Democracy,  the  Soviet.  They  considered  it  an  indica- 
tion of  mere  bourgeois  unwillingness  to  "  deepen  the 
Revolution,"  a  favourite  catchword  which  expressed  the 
ever-growing  craving  for  a  general  upheaval. 

But  economics  cannot  be  built  upon  phraseology, 
however  revolutionary.  They  take  their  own  implacable 
course.    A  month  after  Konovaloff's  resignation  the 


THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  THE  MASSES      189 

Minister  of  Labour,  M.  Skobeleff ,  he  who  at  the  beginning 
of  his  career  as  a  statesman  had  sent  a  wireless  declara- 
tion to  the  world  at  large  announcing  the  intention  of 
the  Socialist  Ministers  to  deepen  class-war,  who  in  one 
of  his  first  ministerial  speeches  had  promised  to  place 
factory  owners  under  a  press,  now  spoke  a  language 
entirely  different.  Using  other  words,  and  seasoning 
his  remarks  with  flattering  addresses  to  the  comrades, 
he  was  actually  compelled  to  endorse  the  opinion  of  his 
antagonist,  the  "  bourgeois  "  A.  Konovaloff. 

In  July  Skobeleff  found  himself  obliged  to  issue  an 
appeal  to  all  Russian  workmen,  beginning  with  the  stem 
warning  :  "  Workmen,  comrades,  I  appeal  to  you  at  a 
critical  period  of  the  Revolution.  Industrial  output  is 
rapidly  declining,  the  quantity  of  necessary  manu- 
factured articles  is  diminishing,  the  peasants  are  deprived 
of  industrial  supplies,  we  are  threatened  with  fresh  food 
complications  and  increasing  national  destitution."  He 
points  out  further  that  the  revolutionary  authority  of 
the  Provisional  Government  ''  submits  national  eco- 
nomics to  State  regulation  and  control."  It  has  created 
the  Chief  Economic  Conamittee,  "  which  must  resolutely 
direct  all  branches  of  national  economics."  However, 
this  Conmiittee  can  only  accomplish  its  task  with  the 
assistance  of  the  workmen  themselves.  "  The  success 
of  the  struggle  against  economic  devastation  depends 
upon  the  productivity  of  labour."  During  the  Tsarist 
regime  the  workmen's  situation  was  one  of  intolerable 
oppression.  The  new  Government  had  issued  laws 
providing  for  stem  taxation  of  large  incomes  and  war- 
profits.  Still  the  people's  money  thus  garnered  ought 
to  be  carefully  spent. 

"  The  Revolution  has  swept  away  the  oppression  of 
the  police  regime,  which  stifled  the  labour  movement, 
and  the  liberated  working  class  is  enabled  to  defend  its 


190     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       oh. 

economic  interests  by  the  mere  force  of  its  class  solidarity 
and  unity.  They  possess  the  freedom  of  strikes,  they 
have  professional  unions,  which  can  adapt  the  tactics 
of  a  mass  economic  movement,  according  to  the 
conditions  of  the  present  economic  crisis. 

"  However,  at  present  purely  elemental  tendencies 
are  gaining  the  upper  hand  over  organised  movement, 
and  without  regard  to  the  limited  resources  of  the  State, 
and  without  any  reckoning  as  to  the  state  of  the  industry 
in  which  you  are  employed,  and  to  the  detriment  of  the 
proletarian  class  movement,  you  sometimes  obtain  an 
increase  of  wages  which  disorganises  the  enterprise  and 
drains  the  exchequer. 

"  Frequently  the  workmen  refuse  all  negotiations 
and  by  menace  of  violence  force  the  gratification  of 
their  demands.  They  use  violence  against  officials  and 
managers,  dismiss  them  of  their  own  accord,  interfere 
arbitrarily  with  the  technical  management  and  even 
attempt  to  take  the  whole  enterprise  into  their  own 
hands." 

The  Ministry  of  Labour  insisted  that  all  conflicts 
should  be  solved  not  arbitrarily,  but  in  Arbitration 
Courts  and  Conciliation  Councils.  "  Workmen,  com- 
rades, our  Socialistic  ideals  shall  be  attained  not  by  the 
seizure  of  separate  factories,  but  by  a  high  standard  of 
economic  organisation,  by  the  intelligence  of  the  masses, 
and  the  wide  development  of  the  country's  productive 
forces."  The  appeal  ends :  "  Workmen,  comrades, 
remember  not  only  your  rights,  but  also  your  duties, 
think  not  only  of  your  wishes,  but  of  the  possibilities  of 
granting  them,  not  only  of  your  own  good,  but  of  the 
sacrifices  necessary  for  the  consolidation  of  the  Revolution 
and  the  triumph  of  our  ideals  "  (10th  July). 

Thus,  having  at  last  reaUsed  at  what  a  pace  Uberated 
Russia  was  sliding  down  a  dangerous  incline  of  hcentious 


THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  THE  MASSES      191 

appetites  and  utter  negation  of  all  discipline,  the 
Socialists,  now  become  Ministers,  began  to  remind  the 
masses  of  their  duties,  if  not  to  their  country,  then  at 
least  to  the  Revolution.  But,  like  the  soldier  who 
openly  declared  to  Kerensky  that  he  would  rather  be  a 
living  deserter  than  a  dead  hero,  the  workmen  remained 
deaf  to  this  new  and  disagreeable  exigency  of  their 
leaders.  The  transition  from  limitless  praise  of  the 
labouring  masses,  of  their  intelligence,  maturity,  and 
so  on,  to  any  kind  of  criticism  proved  extremely  difficult. 
Moreover,  here,  as  in  the  task  of  organising  defence  or 
creating  the  new  Government,  the  policy  of  the  Soviet 
was  full  of  contradictions,  reflecting  both  a  variety  of 
sectional  vacillations  and  the  struggle  between  a  dog- 
matic application  of  Socialism  and  the  more  opportunist 
tendencies  of  the  Right.  For  instance,  on  3rd  August, 
at  the  very  climax  of  the  military  and  Government  crisis, 
the  Economic  Section  of  the  Soviet  found  it  necessary 
to  present  an  inquiry  concerning  the  Government's 
economic  policy  and  demanding  "  the  granting  of  the 
rights  of  State  authority  to  local  organisations,  formed 
according  to  the  principles  of  revolutionary  democracy." 
Replying  to  this  demand,  Skobeleff  acknowledged  that 
local  organising  power  was  in  advance  of  the  central 
authorities,  but  he  insisted  that  regional  organs,  whether 
elected  or  imelected,  should  be  subordinated  to  the 
central  authorities. 

Economic  conditions  proved  themselves  to  be  the 
sensitive  apparatus  which  most  exactly  marked  the 
general  dislocation  of  the  State  organism.  How  true 
were  the  words  of  those  who  had  said  that  transport 
and  the  entire  national  economy  were  a  prey  to  a 
"  diseased  spirit  "  !  Russia  possessed  grain,  possessed 
food-supplies,  raw  material,  even  labour  was  sufficient. 
But  that  inner  organising  link,  which  joins  separate 


192     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

human  lives  into  a  strong  and  well-ordained  human 
society,  had  snapped.  The  old  compulsory  forms  of 
a  community  which  had  created  the  Great  Russian 
Empire  had  disappeared,  having  outlived  themselves  and 
being  incapable  of  adapting  themselves  to  the  new 
demands  of  the  times,  or  of  resisting  the  enemy's  blows. 
The  ideologists  of  democracy  thought  that  old  forms 
might  at  a  moment's  notice  be  replaced  by  new  ones, 
boundlessly  free,  erected  apart  from  any  ties  of  succes- 
sion with  old  forms  of  life  and  custom,  upon  a  bare 
abstract  framework.  In  their  haste  to  imbue  the 
masses  with  Socialistic  doctrines,  the  orators  spoke  to 
them  of  rights  and  claims,  but  forgot  to  tell  them 
of  their  duties.  Soldiers  and  soldiers'  wives,  street- 
sweepers  and  engine-drivers,  medical  assistants  and 
porters — all  presented  nothing  but  demands,  demands, 
and  demands.  The  Revolutionary  Democracy  encouraged 
such  exigency,  viewing  it  as  the  expression  of  human 
personality  freed  from  oppression,  and  absolutely  for- 
getting that  human  dignity  consists  not  so  much  in 
receiving  life's  bounties  as  in  giving  one's  best  to  life. 
Innumerable  trade  unions,  organised  in  haste  and 
falling  at  once  under  Bolshevist  influence,  also  presented 
the  most  devastating  claims  to  the  State,  to  munici- 
palities, and  to  private  business.  At  first  they  scarcely 
ever  met  with  any  refusal.  As  early  as  April  the 
Minister  of  Ways  and  Communications,  Nekrasoff, 
sanctioned  such  claims  of  the  railwaymen  as  played  an 
important  part  in  the  deterioration  of  the  railways,  for 
they  ruined  the  finances  without  demanding  a  fixed 
output  of  work,  and  gave  up  the  management  to  the 
mercy  of  committees.  A  month  after  the  Revolution 
foremen  in  various  workshops  began  to  receive  wages 
of  700-800  roubles  a  month,  while  professional  engineers 
were  left  with  their  former  salaries  of  300-400  roubles. 


IX        THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  THE  MASSES      193 

Only  the  Russian  intelligentsia  remained  silent  in 
the  midst  of  this  bacchanalia  of  demands.  School- 
teachers, who  received  pittances,  passed  resolutions 
that  new  advances  of  salaries  should  be  extremely 
moderate  in  order  "  not  to  overburden  the  revolutionary 
treasury/'  Officers  and  Government  officials  were  also 
silent,  although  the  frightful  increase  in  the  cost  of 
living  placed  them  in  a  most  precarious  material  situa- 
tion. There  is  no  exaggeration  in  saying  that  not  a 
single  union  of  intellectual  workers  ever  presented 
material  demands. 

Later,  when  this  insane  lust  had  borne  its  bitter 
fruit,  when  the  Socialist  Ministers  had  come  into  touch 
with  the  State  mechanism  and  realised  that  the  State 
and  people  are  inseparable,  they  attempted  to  disabuse 
the  masses.  But  it  was  too  late.  The  more  so,  as 
Socialistic  programmes  do  not  provide  for  the  value  of 
brain-work,  and  everything  in  them  is  based  upon  the 
priority  of  manual  workers  over  the  rest  of  the  population. 
Marx  spoke  only  of  the  rights  of  proletarian  dictatorship, 
while  the  rest  of  humanity  was  placed  in  interdict  under 
the  prejudicial  title  of  bourgeoisie. 

Faithful  followers  of  Marx's  doctrine  considered  it 
their  duty  to  discredit  all  the  intelligentsia  in  the 
eyes  of  the  Russian  masses  by  confusing  it.  with  the 
bourgeoisie.  Tremendous  discontent  had  accumulated 
amidst  the  people  during  the  old  rdgime.  The  implac- 
able Marxist  gospel  preached  by  the  revolutionaries 
transformed  this  legitimate  and  natural  discontent  into 
a  veritable  exasperation,  directed  against  the  propertied 
and  educated  classes,  which  had  themselves  suffered 
from  absolutism  and  were  now  condemned  by  a  new 
ruling  class  to  pay  for  the  sins  of  its  predecessors. 

Strictly  speaking,  the  Russian  Revolution,  i.e,  the 
revolutionary  struggle  against  autocracy  for  the  freedom 


194     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

and  rights  of  the  people,  had  lasted  scores  of  years,  and 
had  created  thousands  of  heroes  and  martyrs,  who  had 
given  their  energy  and  life  for  the  realisation  of  their 
ardently  desired  ideals.  A  vast  majority  of  the  revolu- 
tionaries belonged  to  the  nobility  and  the  bourgeoisie 
merely  because  there  were  more  educated  people  among 
those  classes. 

But  when  the  longed-for  days  of  freedom  came  at 
last  all  this  was  forgotten  and  the  entire  superior  strata 
of  society  were  placed  under  suspicion.  At  first,  indeed, 
the  masses  and  their  soldiers  were  extremely  good- 
natured.  The  wave  of  hatred  did  not  sweep  over 
Russia  all  at  once,  but  burst  out  sporadically,  here  and 
there  directed  by  some  evil  hand.  In  any  case  the 
Revolution  was  not  the  outcome  of  class  antagonism. 
It  was  born  of  the  war,  the  famine  and  the  debility  of 
the  old  political  regime.  This  is  a  fact  which  ought 
always  to  be  borne  in  mind  in  order  to  comprehend  the 
influence  of  the  subsequent  class- war  propaganda. 

A  wonderful  solidarity  among  all  classes  of  the 
community  marked  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution. 
Every  one  sided  with  Freedom  against  Tsarism.  Only 
the  police  endeavoured  to  defend  the  old  regime.  And 
the  policemen  were  indeed  cruelly  dealt  with.  But  they 
were  usually  seized  fully  armed,  while  handling  machine- 
guns,  and  firing  at  the  crowd  by  order  of  Protopopoff. 
This  shooting  lasted  in  Petrograd  for  four  days.  When 
the  last  machine-gun  policemen  were  removed  from  the 
belfry  of  St.  Isaac's  Cathedral,  a  new  and  highly  original 
order  prevailed  in  the  city.  There  were  no  police. 
Only  the  somewhat  comical  figures  of  a  hastily  organised 
mihtia  appeared  here  and  there.  There  were  no  authori- 
ties whatever.  Day  and  night  the  streets  were  seething 
with  soldiers.  Whole  units  rolled  into  the  Taurida 
Palace   "  to   save   the   Revolution."    External   forces 


IX        THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  THE  MASSES      195 

which  might  hold  back  these  crowds  no  longer  existed. 
And  yet,  not  only  during  the  revolutionary  honeymoon, 
but  actually  for  several  months,  life  in  the  large  cities 
was  almost  perfectly  safe,  in  spite  of  the  fierce  propa- 
ganda of  class-war  and  the  shameless  incitement  of  the 
masses  against  the  bourgeoisie,  which  embraced  all 
persons  with  white  hands.  This  Marxist  moulding  of 
the  masses  emanated  from  the  Soviet. 

The  masses  seemed  to  feel  that  they  were  being 
driven  to  a  dangerous  course  and  did  not  give  way  at 
once.  Even  in  the  country,  where,  as  in  the  towns,  all 
the  police  were  immediately  arrested  and  sent  to  the 
front,  where  no  new  authorities  were  established  to 
replace  the  old,  the  peasants  at  first  assumed  an  ex- 
pectant attitude.  The  expression,  "  We'll  just  wait  for 
the  new  Law,"  was  a  current  phrase,  which  reflected  the 
peasants'  habitual  wariness.  And  they  actually  did 
wait.  They  cast  longing  glances  at  the  landowners' 
land,  cattle  and  other  goods,  but  abstained  from  plunder, 
awaiting  the  order  from  the  Centre. 

Then  appeared  agitators,  sometimes  Bolsheviks,  but 
more  often  Social-Kevolutionaries  with  mandates  from 
the  Petrograd  or  local  Soviet,  and  explained  to  the 
peasants  that  they  had  nothing  to  wait  for,  but  must 
hasten  to  execute  the  will  of  the  people  and  "  expropriate 
the  expropriators,"  that  is,  take  everything  from  the 
landowners. 

It  was  just  as  difl&cult  for  peasants  to  withstand 
such  arguments  as  it  had  been  for  soldiers  to  maintain 
discipline  after  the  Order  No.  1.  Gradually  the  Eussian 
country-side  was  turned  into  a  veritable  hell.  Land- 
owners' houses,  corn-stacks,  stables,  cattle-sheds — all 
were  set  ablaze.  Their  owners  were  turned  out,  some- 
times murdered.  Already,  before  the  November  Revolu- 
tion, some  districts  had  not  a  single  landowner  left. 


196     FROM  LIBEETY  TO  BEEST-LITOVSK       oh. 

Large  landowners  who  exploited  their  land  by  hired 
labour  were  not  the  only  ones  to  suffer ;  millions  of 
peasant  small-holders  and  merely  well-to-do  peasants 
shared  the  same  fate.  The  deepening  of  class-con- 
sciousness, or  rather  of  class -antagonism,  went  full 
swing. 

But  the  creation  of  a  new  life  upon  such  basis  proved 
no  easy  matter ;  instead  of  a  new,  perfect,  free  order 
there  was  a  return  to  the  old  primitive  forms  of  cave- 
dwellers,  when  homini  hominus  lupus  est,  when  each 
strove  to  snatch  the  utmost  he  could  get  for  himself, 
sacrificing  nothing  for  the  community.  All  the  moral 
foundations  erected  at  such  hard  cost  by  generations 
were  smashed  like  brittle  glass  beneath  the  blows  of  the 
soulless  theory  of  economic  materialism.  Liberty,  un- 
fettered either  by  law  or  by  a  habit  of  self-discipline, 
unbridled  the  masses,  while  the  socialistic  intelligentsia 
seemed  to  sanction  the  increasijig  immorality  by  decking 
it  out  in  the  attire  of  class-struggle. 

Whatever  were  the  errors  and  even  crimes  of  the 
masses,  the  responsibility  for  them  rests  primarily  with 
their  leaders.  With  passionate  conscientiousness  the 
masses  endeavoured  to  unravel  the  chaos  of  novel 
ideas  which  had  flooded  their  obscure  brains.  For 
even  the  words  were  utterly  incomprehensible  and 
im-Russian,  "republic,"  "contribution,"  "annexation," 
"  internationalism,"  "  socialism."  To  what  curious  mis- 
interpretation were  those  strange  words  subjected, 
which  were  destined  to  upset  the  entire  Russian  life. 
But  even  Russian  words  expressing  general  notions,  not 
only  political,  but  even  geographical,  held  absolutely 
no  meaning  for  the  illiterate  peasants,  workmen,  and 
soldiers  gathered  at  meetings  or  in  the  Soviets.  They 
were  so  willing  to  repudiate  Constantinople  and  the 
Straits  without  the  slightest  notion  of  their  whereabotrts. 


THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  THE  MASSES     197 

They  adopted  the  resolution  in  favour  of  the  self-deter- 
mination of  peoples,  with  no  inkling  as  to  what  nation- 
alities inhabited  the  Russian  Empire,  and  so  on.  The 
chaotic  mentality  of  the  crowd  made  itself  particularly 
evident  during  the  elections.  Universal  suffrage  had 
been  adopted  both  by  the  Cadets  and  the  Socialists  as 
an  essential  basis  of  democracy,  but  there  existed  very 
important  divergencies.  Shall  the  army  vote  ?  What 
is  to  be  the  qualification  of  age  and  residence  ?  The 
Cadets  insisted  that  the  age  limit  should  be  fixed  at 
twenty-five,  and  that  the  vote  should  be  granted  to 
any  one  who  had  lived  a  year  in  a  given  locality.  The 
Revolutionary  Democracy  demanded  that  the  vote 
should  be  granted  to  all  citizens  of  both  sexes  from  the 
age  of  eighteen  without  any  qualification  as  to  term  of 
residence,  and  that  full  rights  should  be  given  to  soldiers 
both  at  the  front  and  in  the  rear.  In  the  end  the 
Government  accepted  the  Socialist  formula,  only  raising 
the  age  limit.  All  citizens  of  both  sexes  over  twenty 
years  obtained  the  right  of  voting  in  municipal  and 
Zemstvo  elections,  and  subsequently  for  the  Constituent 
Assembly.  During  the  summer  new  municipal  councils 
were  elected  in  almost  every  town  upon  the  principle 
of  universal  sufirage.  The  Government  cherished  naive 
hopes  of  obtaining  in  this  way  legally  elected  local  organs, 
which  would  relegate  the  Soviets  to  the  background. 
The  election  results  were  highly  instructive.  In  the 
towns,  where  reserve  regiments  were  quartered,  the 
soldiers'  vote  decided  the  elections.  Whole  military 
units,  influenced  by  this  or  the  other  socialistic  group, 
voted  for  it  en  bloc.  The  soldier  masses,  more  and  more 
transformed  through  loss  of  discipline  into  a  soldier 
rabble,  developed  a  somewhat  original  understanding 
of  their  new  civic  rights.  Liberty  of  election  was 
encroached   upon   at   every  turn.      Acts  of  violence, 


198     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

degenerating  ever  more  frequently  into  crime,  were  con- 
stantly performed.  For  instance,  at  the  beginning  of 
August,  in  the  small  district  town  of  Egorievsk,  after  a 
meeting  addressed  by  a  Bolshevik,  Kohan,  a  crowd  of 
soldiers  severely  handled  the  mayor  and  a  member 
of  the  municipal  council  for  their  refusal  to  give  out 
election  forms  to  1000  soldiers  who  had  arrived  in  town 
after  the  publication  of  the  electors'  register. 

Side  by  side  with  cases  of  direct  violence,  the  electors 
were  being  systematically  terrorised,  particularly  in  the 
factories,  where  the  committees  acted  despotically  and 
the  workmen  were  compelled  to  join  certain  parties  for 
fear  of  remaining  out  of  work.  The  profusion  of  pro- 
mises, which  always  forms  the  negative  side  of  every 
election  campaign,  reached  its  climax  in  the  face  of  the 
inexperienced  and  over-confident  Russian  electors.  The 
magic  words — ^peace,  bread,  and  land — were  bandied 
about  by  all  Socialist  sections.  They  promised — and 
possibly  many  believed  in  it  themselves — a  speedy 
millennium.  Their  speeches,  though  frequently  exceed- 
ingly abstract,  were  very  realistically  interpreted.  When 
the  Revolutionary  Socialists  carried  at  the  Moscow 
municipal  elections  a  victory  at  which  they  themselves 
were  alarmed,  many  people  jokingly  said  that  it 
happened  owing  to  the  list  of  Social-Revolutionary 
candidates  being  labelled  No.  3.  In  Russian  the  figure 
''  3  "  and  the  letter  ''  Z  "  are  written  the  same  way, 
and  the  magic  word  "  Zemlia  "  (land)  begins  with  the 
letter  Z.  The  more  simple-minded  electors  used  to 
come  to  the  town-hall  to  inquire  when  the  land  would 
be  distributed  to  them,  as  they  had  voted  for  the 
Social-Revolutionaries,  who  promised  land  to  all  toilers. 
On  the  whole,  the  almost  illiterate  mass  of  Russian 
electors,  both  men  and  women  devoid  of  any  poUtical 
experience,  exhibited  such  a  gregarious  state  of  mind, 


THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  THE  MASSES      199 

such  a  lack  of  comprehension,  and  such  a  childish 
desire  to  obtain  the  utmost  advantage  for  themselves, 
that  bitter  doubt  as  to  whether  universal  suffrage  could 
benefit  a  country  at  Russia's  stage  of  political  develop- 
ment, crept  into  many  minds.  Under  such  wholesale 
infatuation  the  Socialists  everywhere  obtained  the 
majority,  and  the  Social-Revolutionaries  headed  the 
list.  Still,  the  Cadets  scored  an  average  of  one-third  of 
the  total  votes,  and  in  some  places  had  an  absolute 
majority. 

The  first  result  of  the  Socialist  control  of  the  muni- 
cipal and  Zemstvo  councils  was  a  complete  financial  dis- 
organisation of  these  institutions,  already  impoverished 
by  the  war.  Of  course  there  could  be  no  question  of 
abuse.  On  the  contrary,  the  Socialists  were  influenced 
by  a  sincere  desire  to  conduct  business  in  the  best 
possible  way.  Contrary  to  the  Bolsheviks,  the  Revolu- 
tionary Democracy  undoubtedly  possessed  practical 
honesty.  (I  say  practical  because,  bound  by  doctrine, 
they  could  not  afford  the  luxury  of  intellectual  honesty.) 
But  municipal  economy  is,  primarily,  a  huge  business 
enterprise.  Its  stability  is  based  upon  a  wise  distribu- 
tion and  payment  of  labour,  and  the  discipline  of  the 
workers.  The  Socialists,  accustomed  to  consider  the 
State  as  a  principle  opposed  to  their  ideals,  entered  the 
Government  and  local  institutions,  not  so  much  as  citi- 
zens entrusted  with  the  guarding  of  the  entire  popula- 
tion's interests,  but  as  conquerors  occupying  a  fallen 
citadel.  They  forgot  that  they  represented  the  popu- 
lation as  a  whole,  and  not  only  met  all  the  workmen's 
demands  half-way,  but  often  prompted  their  exigencies. 
In  their  haste  to  redress  the  social  injustices  of  the  old 
regime,  they  upset  all  existing  relations  at  one  stroke, 
and  overwhelmed  the  workmen  with  bounties  at  the 
expense  of  a  Treasury  already  ruined  by  war.     Just  as 


200     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       oh. 

in  the  army  the  soldier  was  put  to  the  top,  while  the 
commanding  staff  was  not  only  set  aside  but  humiliated, 
so  in  the  industrial  army  manual  workmen  enjoyed  all 
the  privileges  and  became  the  objects  of  coarse  flattery, 
whereas  brain  workers  were  set  aside  and  placed  under 
suspicion. 

The  economic  Ufe  of  large  cities  like  Petrograd, 
Moscow,  Kiev,  Kharkov,  and  others  became  disorgan- 
ised. Trams  barely  crawled  along,  because  the  work- 
men, while  receiving  wages  for  an  eight  hours'  day  in 
the  repair  shops,  had  nevertheless  almost  ceased  to 
repair  the  cars.  It  is  curious  to  note  that  the  electric- 
power  stations,  whose  staff  is  by  far  the  most  highly 
trained,  remained  in  perfect  order. 

The  municipal  councils  also  adopted  an  extremely 
unreasonable  food  policy.  Instead  of  being  ameliorated, 
the  food  supply  grew  worse.  This  may  be  primarily 
explained  by  the  fact  that  the  supply  was  influenced  by 
the  general  disorganisation  of  transport  and  labour  out- 
put. Loaders  at  wharves  and  stations,  pointsmen,  train- 
linkers,  packers — ^in  a  word,  millions  of  men  working  at 
the  food  supply — ceased  day  by  day  to  perform  their 
duties.  The  cost  of  their  collective  idleness  to  the  State 
and  nation  probably  never  entered  their  heads.  Yet 
owing  to  their  slackness  the  arrival  of  food  supplies  to 
the  towns  and  the  northern  timber  regions  daily  dimin- 
ished. But  neither  individual  workers  nor  collective 
labour  organisations  took  heed  of  the  nation's  interests, 
and  merely  supported  their  own  professional  advantages. 
At  one  of  the  largest  Volga  ports,  Tsaritsin,  where  corn 
was  shipped  for  the  whole  of  northern  Russia,  enormous 
supplies  of  grain  lay  rotting,  because  Russian  loaders 
had  struck,  continually  raising  prices.  Fifty  roubles 
a  day  were  already  insufficient.  In  the  meantime 
they  opposed  by  armed  force  a  company  of  Persian 


THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  THE  MASSES     201 

loaders,  who  were  willing  to  work  at  more  moderate 
terms. 

At  the  same  time,  the  new  food-supply  conmiittees, 
organised  throughout  the  country,  followed  a  policy  of 
arbitrary  interference  in  the  industrial  and  economic  life 
of  the  country,  placing  fatal  obstacles  in  the  way  of 
private  initiative  and  private  commerce.  The  Tsar's 
Government  had  also  acted  in  the  same  manner  in  some 
branches,  such  as  the  purchase  and  distribution  of  grain. 
Such  measures  were  called  for  by  war  circumstances, 
but  they  demanded  strong  Government  authority  and 
national  discipline. 

The  Provisional  Government,  apparently  expecting 
such  self-discipline  from  a  people  liberated  from  an 
autocratic  regime,  augmented  State  intervention  in  all 
sections  of  the  supply  of  primary  necessities.  The 
Socialists,  who  always  advocated  the  centralisation  of 
all  economic  functions  in  Government  hands,  particu- 
larly insisted  upon  such  measures.  But  the  Cadet 
jMinisters  also  followed  the  same  course  in  spite  of 
protests  from  a  section  of  the  party.  Already  towards 
midsummer  of  1917,  bread,  sugar,  meat,  eggs,  and  butter 
were  controlled  by  the  Government,  although,  strictly 
speaking,  it  did  not  even  possess  the  proper  apparatus 
for  effecting  such  a  monopoly.  Both  producers  and 
consumers  suffered  equally,  particularly  in  the  large 
towns.  Petrograd  and  Moscow  were  even  then  short  of 
food.  The  privations  endured  by  the  population  at  the 
present  moment  are  but  a  painful  protraction  of  a  long 
agony.  In  1917  the  advanced  section  of  the  Kussian 
intelligentsia,  which  foimd  itself  playing  the  part  of 
mimicipal  rulers,  was  firmly  convinced  that  the  organi- 
sation of  food  supply  would  be  impossible  without 
replacing  private  commercial  interchange  by  that  of 
State  monopoly.    The  results  were  deplorable.     Ironical 


202     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       oh. 

tongues  said  that  it  was  an  organisation  of  famine,  not 
of  food  supply.  But  here,  as  elsewhere,  the  power  of 
doctrine  proved  stronger  than  the  voice  of  reality. 

The  Russian  Revolution  will  provide  the  social 
psychologist  with  extremely  interesting  studies  of  the 
psychology  of  the  masses  and  their  leaders,  while  it  must 
serve  as  a  clear  warning  to  the  politician.  It  is  a  cruel 
object-lesson,  demonstrating  that  a  life  of  complete 
liberty,  unfettered  by  any  compulsory  system,  may  only 
be  possible  to  man  after  he  attains  the  highest  degree  of 
culture.  Does  there  exist  anywhere  in  the  world  a 
nation  which  as  a  whole  has  attained  such  a  standard  ? 
When  this  compulsion  does  not  exist,  then  the  evil 
charms  of  the  dark  instincts  of  hatred,  lust,  and  cruelty 
arise  from  the  depths.  Yet  at  the  same  time  the  very 
state  of  impunity  creates  a  kind  of  oppressive  irritation 
among  the  masses,  as  though  the  consciousness  of  wrong 
lay  hidden  in  the  people's  soul  and  begat  exasperation. 
And  in  Russia  this  exasperation  did  not  diminish,  but 
grew  in  proportion  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  demands 
of  the  masses.  Evidently  their  inner  equilibrium  was 
broken  by  degrees,  as  the  habits  of  effort,  compulsion, 
and  obedience  to  duty  gave  way.  Like  children,  they 
longed  for  some  one,  wiser  and  stronger  than  they,  to 
say,  "  This  cannot  be,  you  dare  not  do  it."  But  no 
authoritative  voice  spoke  out  to  them,  and,  lilce  children, 
they  fell  a  prey  to  blind  rage. 

Two  principles  seemed  to  be  at  war  with  each  other 
in  the  soul  of  the  Russian  people,  as  they  listened  to 
the  voices  of  their  new  leaders — the  lust  of  usurpa- 
tion and  the  consciousness  that  there  is  no  truth  in 
violence. 

One  may  boldly  assert  that,  despite  all  the  crimes 
committed  by  the  mob,  the  masses  were  more  innocent 
and  better  than  their  leaders.     Particularly  the  peasant 


THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  THE  MASSES      203 

masses,  in  whose  midst  the  deep,  partly  religious,  partly- 
moral  conceptions  of  good  and  evil  were  still  alive,  whose 
balance  had  not  been  over-strained  by  the  deadening 
roar  of  the  factory  wheel,  nor  their  conscience  stimned 
by  the  still  more  deadening  Marxist  doctrine.  In  the 
midst  of  the  working  classes  themselves,  the  voices  of 
separate  individuals  or  organised  groups  sometimes  made 
themselves  heard,  reminding  men  of  the  interests  of  the 
whole,  of  the  existence  of  Russia,  whom  every  one  was 
bound  to  serve.  But  the  Revolutionary  Democracy  was 
incapable  either  of  hearkening  to  these  voices  or,  still 
less,  of  uniting  all  such  patriots  in  common  service  for 
the  country.  For  the  Soviet  leaders  had  so  long  con- 
sidered themselves  as  the  servants,  not  of  Russia,  but 
of  the  Revolution  and  the  proletariat. 

A  resolution  passed  by  the  staff  of  one  of  the  railway 
workshops  in  the  province  of  Saratoff  may  be  pointed 
out  as  an  example  of  workmen's  honest  adherence  to 
their  duty.  Early  in  September  Moscow  Bolsheviks 
endeavoured  to  provoke  a  strike.  The  workmen  passed 
a  resolution  to  the  effect  that  "  they  considered  a  strike 
of  the  engine  staff  as  inadmissible,  criminal,  treasonable, 
and  contradictory  to  civic  duty.  Officials  and  workmen 
adjure  their  comrades  to  refuse  to  strike  and  summon 
them  to  self-restraint."  This  was  not  the  only  case, 
but  those  who  preached  self-restraint  were  by  no  means 
popular. 

Not  even  the  unembellished  picture,  honestly  drawn 
by  the  Government  at  the  Moscow  Conference,  could 
change  the  mentality  of  the  leaders  or  the  representa- 
tives of  the  popular  masses  present  at  the  Conference 
as  delegates  of  the  Soviet.  They  were  simply  incapable 
of  realising  how  far  their  behaviour,  their  immature  ideas, 
their  support  of  this  or  the  other  group,  reacted  upon 
the  destiny  of  the  State.     And  this,  although  all  that  the 


204     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

members  of  the  Government  said  was  ruthless  in  its 
absolute  clearness. 

The  new  Minister  of  Commerce  and  Industry,  a  well- 
known  economist  of  the  Marxist  school,  S.  Prokopovish, 
in  a  warning  speech  delivered  at  the  State  Conference, 
spoke  of  the  disorganisation  of  transport  and  trade.  He 
said  that  the  Donetz  coal-mines  were  producing  only  50 
per  cent  of  their  normal  output,  that  the  disorderly 
seizure  of  land  was  ruining  agriculture  and  threatening 
the  towns  and  northern  provinces  with  famine.  He 
reminded  the  workmen  that  "  all  classes  of  the  popula- 
tion were  interested  in  industrial  development — con- 
sumers and  producers,  business-men  and  workmen,"  and 
therefore  it  behoved  them  to  safeguard  industry,  not 
to  ruin  it. 

He  was  applauded  both  from  Right  and  Left,  per- 
chance by  the  very  same  men  who  drove  out  engineers 
in  wheel-barrows  or  threw  them  into  blazing  furnaces. 
In  the  same  way  they  applauded  the  Minister  of 
Finance,  Nekrasoff,  although  the  picture  drawn  by 
him  of  the  state  of  Russian  finances  was  of  the 
gloomiest.  "  The  new  revolutionary  regime  costs  the 
State  far  more  than  did  the  old,"  was  the  minister's 
frank  statement. 

Nekrasofi  started  his  career  as  an  Octobrist,  then 
remained  for  a  long  time  in  the  Cadet  party,  which  he 
left  in  connection  with  the  Ukraine  problem,  as  he  sup- 
ported the  policy  of  Ukraine  independence.  Already 
before  the  Revolution  he  had  entered  into  close  relations 
with  circles  of  the  Left.  In  the  Provisional  Government 
he  sided  with  Kerensky  and  had  great  influence  with 
him.  Combined  with  Nekrasoff's  skill  and  inclina- 
tion for  upholding  good  relations  with  sections  of  the 
Left,  his  statement  concerning  the  cost  of  the  democratic 
regime  carried  especial  weight.     Using  the  language 


IX        THE  PSYCHOLOGY  OF  THE  MASSES      206 

of  figures,  the  Minister  of  Finance  proved  that  the 
cost  of  democracy  to  the  people  was  beyond  comparison 
heavier  than  that  of  autocracy.  "  The  new  food-supply 
committees  alone,  organised  after  the  Revolution,  will 
demand  from  the  Treasury  500  millions  a  year." 
Whereas  during  the  Tsarist  regime  the  upkeep  of  all 
the  ministries  cost  48  millions. 

In  some  regions  the  payment  of  State  revenues  had 
decreased  by  60  to  70  per  cent.  Meantime  the  Soviet 
Commission  dealing  with  separation  allowances  for 
soldiers'  wives  had  drawn  up  a  scheme  for  such  a 
liberal  increase  of  allowances  that  instead  of  the  former 
700  millions  a  year,  the  expenditure  would  reach  11 
milliards. 

And  yet  when  after  such  a  speech  Kerensky  sum- 
moned every  one  to  make  sacrifices  for  the  motherland, 
disdainful  smiles  of  mistrust  flitted  over  the  counten- 
ances of  the  members  of  the  Soviet,  the  workmen  and 
the  soldiers,  who  filled  the  Left  sector  of  the  theatre. 
The  Right — the  bourgeoisie  section — applauded  far  more 
lustily.  Certainly  not  because  the  Russian  bourgeoisie 
as  such  proved  more  altruistic,  and  the  Russian  de- 
mocracy more  selfish,  but  simply  because  proprietary 
Russia  had  accumulated  far  more  knowledge  and  under- 
standing of  statesmanship  than  the  masses  of  the  people. 
Men  who  have  passed  through  a  imiversity  or  secondary 
school  training  can  more  easily  realise  the  necessity  of 
a  strict  State  system  and  general  submission  to  laws, 
however  irksome,  than  those  who  have  never  learned  to 
lift  their  eyes  from  the  narrow  groove  into  which  they 
were  bom.  Instead  of  adopting  a  firm  statesmanlike 
standing  and  endeavouring  to  explain  to  the  people  the 
active  possibilities  and  claims  of  real  life,  those  who 
assumed  the  part  of  inspirers  and  spiritual  leaders  of 
these  illiterate  masses,  imused  to  thinking,  were  them- 


206    FEOM  LIBEETY  TO  BEEST-LITOVSK    ch.  ix 

selves  tossed  between  Marxism  and  flashes  of  common 
sense. 

The  State  Conference  exhibited  the  results  of  such 
duality.  The  question  of  the  formation  in  one  way  or 
another  of  a  strong  power,  a  power  which  not  only 
gives  but  claims,  and  if  necessary  chastises,  arose  in 
all  its  tragic  inevitableness.  This  was  realised  by  both 
sides.  The  main  point  of  the  divergency  lay  in  the 
question  as  to  who  should  be  the  mainstay  of  this 
power— the  Soviets  or  a  disciplined  military  force.  The 
dispute  was  settled,  settled  irrevocably,  by  the  sharp 
rupture  between  Korniloif  and  Kerensky. 


CHAPTER  X 

kerensky's  swan  song 

Soviets  trend  towards  Bolshevism — ^The  fall  of  Riga — ^Lavr  Komiloff 
and  the  Komiloff  affair — Arrest  of  Generals  and  chaos  in  the  army 
— ^Trotsky's  appearance — The  Democratic  Conference — ^The  Soviets 
opposed  to  the  Coalition  Government — ^The  Council  of  the  Republic — 
The  Bolsheviks  organise  an  insurrection. 

Beginning  from  March  and  ending  with  November, 
the  Revolutionary  Democracy  grouped  in  the  Soviet 
was  all  the  time  sliding  towards  the  Left,  like  a  sandhill 
washed  away  by  the  waves. 

Already  in  Moscow  the  motion  passed  by  the  Left 
majority,  and  their  persecution  of  proprietary  Russia 
and  the  army  commanders,  their  cowardly  disinclina- 
tion to  acknowledge  the  real  requirements  of  life,  especi- 
ally in  questions  of  food  supply  and  labour,  their  friend- 
ship with  their  brethren  in  ideas — ^the  Bolsheviks — all 
this  showed  that  the  Soviet  circles  were  prepared  to 
make  concessions  only  to  the  Left.  They  were  likewise 
driven  in  the  same  direction  by  their  former  trend  of 
thought,  and  especially  by  the  success  of  Bolshevist 
propaganda  among  the  masses,  the  ground  for  which 
had  been  prepared  by  the  Socialistic  Centre  itself. 

During  the  Moscow  Conference  the  Bolsheviks  stirred 
up  disorders  in  that  city,  taking  the  form  of  a  series  of 
strikes,  which  were  partly  successfiJ,  though  some  were 
quickly  suppressed.     The  influence  of  the  Bolsheviks 

207 


208     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

over  the  Soviets  was  likewise  growing,  as  the  bulk  of 
the  latter  consisted  of  persons  of  indefinite  and  unstable 
political  opinions.  In  the  Petrograd  Soviet  and  the 
Executive  Committee  the  former  leaders — Skobeleff, 
Tsereteli,  Chheidze — ^no  longer  exercised  their  former 
influence.  On  the  11th  of  September  Prince  Tsereteli 
had  a  battle  royal  with  the  Petrograd  Soviet  before 
he  succeeded  in  securing  the  adoption  of  the  resolution 
on  the  necessity  for  the  introduction  of  capital  punish- 
ment in  the  army,  his  opponents  stigmatising  this  as 
a  counter-revolutionary  measure.  The  furious  debate 
showed  the  acute  divergence  of  opinions  in  the  Soviet. 
Prince  Tsereteli  bitterly  emphasised  the  fact  that  the 
Bolsheviks,  who  were  chiefly  to  blame  for  the  decay  of 
the  army,  listened  to  communications  concerning  mili- 
tary disorders  with  the  proud  air  of  victors. 

The  resolution  concerning  capital  punishment  was 
passed  with  great  difficulty.  But,  as  if  to  conciliate  the 
Bolsheviks,  at  the  next  meeting  of  the  Soviet  a  motion 
was  passed  by  a  great  majority,  protesting  against  the 
Bolshevist  comrades  who  had  been  arrested  for  the  July 
revolt  or  their  German  associations  being  still  detained 
in  prison.  Plekhanoff,  in  drawing  attention  to  the  in- 
creasing influence  of  the  Bolsheviks  in  the  Soviet,  wrote  : 
"  TsereteK  has  come  to  such  measures  as  are  an  abjura- 
tion of  Zimerwald.  Therefore  his  admirers  are  turning 
against  him,  are  voting  against  his  motion,  and  are 
ready  to  follow  another  leader"  {Yedinstvo^  8th  Sep- 
tember). This  was  written  a  few  days  before  the 
Komiloff  affair.  Independently  of  this,  after  the  Mos- 
cow Conference,  the  Soviet  policy  took  a  decided  turn 
to  the  Left.  And  this  in  spite  of  the  fact — or  perhaps 
because  of  it — ^that  the  anarchistic  ferment  in  the  masses 
stirred  up  by  the  Bolsheviks  began  to  assume  such  a 
dangerous   character  that    Kerensky  was   obliged    to 


X  KERENSKY'S  SWAN  SONG  200 

concert  with  Korniloff  decided  measures  against  the 
expected  insurrection. 

But  when  Korniloff  began  to  make  preparations  for 
carrying  out  this  plan,  the  Government  had  not  the 
courage  to  steer  the  ship  of  State  in  the  right  course,  or 
to  strengthen  their  position  with  the  help  of  the  troops 
who  were  still  loyal.  The  actual  Bolshevist  danger, 
which  was  already  in  sight,  seemed  less  terrible  to  the 
Government  than  the  imagined  danger  of  Korniloif's 
military  dictatorship.  Fears  of  the  same  imaginary 
danger  left  the  Socialists  of  the  Centre  quite  oblivious 
of  the  fact  that  German  troops  were  occupying  the 
whole  of  the  Western  borderland  of  Russia,  and  were 
threatening  at  any  time  to  strike  at  its  heart. 

"  Surely  it  is  not  necessary  that  Riga  should  fall  in 
order  that  the  need  for  discipline  in  the  army  should  be 
understood  ?  "  This  was  said  by  Korniloff,  five  days 
before  the  fall  of  Riga,  when  the  Commander-in-Chief 
already  knew  that  he  was  not  able  to  hold  the  town, 
the  capture  of  which,  greatly  increasing  the  difficulty  of 
defending  the  Gulf  of  Finland,  opened  for  the  Germans 
the  way  to  Petrograd  both  by  land  and  sea.  But  it 
turned  out  that  even  the  capture  of  Riga  did  not  knock 
any  wholesome  sense  of  the  necessity  of  national  self- 
defence  into  Revolutionary  Democracy.  The  official  com- 
munique mentioned  that  the  regiments  left  the  battle- 
field of  their  own  accord,  that  "  the  disorganised  masses 
are  retreating  in  an  irresistible  torrent,  and  are  filling 
all  the  roads."  The  Soviet  replied  by  long  speeches 
of  protest  against  "  the  enemies  of  the  Revolution, 
who  never  fail  to  take  advantage  of  the  misfortune 
at  the  front  in  order  to  play  a  great  political  game." 
The  Izvestia  accused  the  authors  of  the  official  com- 
munique of  "  a  malicious  distortion  of  actual  events." 
"  The  General  Headquarters  notice  only  the  reckless 


210     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

gallantry  of  the  officers,  while  their  silence  as  regards 
the  soldiers,  the  emphasising  of  exceptional  cases  of 
treachery  and  cowardice  among  them,  acquires  a  very 
definite  and  very  dangerous  meaning.  It  is  evident 
that  while  the  army  is  fighting  gallantly  and  is  dying 
for  the  cause  of  the  Revolution,  a  clique  of  shady  persons, 
imusually  near  to  the  liigher  commanding  circles,  is 
carrying  on  a  hideous  provocation,  and  by  means  of 
systematic  lies  and  a  perversion  of  facts  is  setting 
Russia  against  her  army,  and  is  taking  advantage  of 
the  misfortune  which  has  befallen  the  country  for 
sinister  purposes  with  the  design  of  throwing  discredit 
on  the  revolutionary  order  in  the  army,  of  setting  the 
masses  of  the  population,  both  at  home  and  abroad, 
against  the  Russian  Revolution"  {Izvestiay  4th  Sep- 
tember). 

With  the  Soviet  majority  in  such  a  mood,  vain  were 
Prince  Tsereteli's  belated  demands  for  the  re-introduc- 
tion of  capital  punishment  into  the  army,  and  vain  was 
the  still  more  belated  order  issued  by  Kerensky  in 
which  he  at  last  declared  that  it  was  necessary  to  sup- 
port the  authority  of  the  officers,  "  who  made  no  de- 
mands, who  never  made  any  representations  of  their 
needs.  The  flower  of  the  army,  its  officers,  had  lived 
through  the  bloodless  Revolution  in  fraternal  unity 
with  the  soldiers,  consolidating  the  work  of  those  who 
had  thrown  off  the  shameful  fetters  of  slavery.  The 
officers  have  shown  that  they  are  one  flesh  with  the 
people."  Then  followed  a  short  enumeration  of  all  the 
undeserved  trials  which  had  fallen  to  the  lot  of  the 
officers :  distrust,  curtailment  of  rights,  insults,  mockery. 
In  spite  of  all,  the  officers  had  remained  at  their  posts, 
had  '^  shown  the  greatest  heroism,  manifested  by  the 
fact  that  in  some  units  almost  all  the  officers  had  been 
killed  off.    No  less  courage  had  been  shown  by  those 


n  KERENSKY'S  SWAN  SONG  211 

officers  who,  hand  in  hand  with  the  committees  and  the 
more  intelligent  soldiers,  had  struggled  against  those 
who  miderstood  liberty  to  mean  freedom  from  all  obliga- 
tions, who  had  fallen  under  the  evil  influence  of  the 
conscious  or  unconscious  agents  of  the  Kaiser,  and, 
hiding  their  cowardice  under  ideal  watchwords,  were 
bringing  ruin  and  treachery  into  the  ranks  of  the  army  " 
(4th  September). 

Had  Kerensky  used  such  language  in  addressing 
the  representatives  of  the  whole  of  organised  Russia, 
gathered  together  at  the  State  Conference  in  Moscow  in 
August,  perhaps  it  might  have  arrested  the  ruin  of  the 
army,  it  might  have  healed  the  breach  between  the 
Government  and  the  army  commanders.  Only  by 
joint  action  could  they  have  saved  Russia  from  Bol- 
shevist anarchy  and  the  ruin  of  the  army.  Such  an 
agreement  seems  all  the  more  possible,  as  the  Supreme 
Commander-in-Chief,  KornilofE,  round  whom  the  most 
experienced  Generals  had  gathered,  was,  of  course,  no 
counter-revolutionary,  that  is  to  say,  was  in  nowise 
striving  to  restore  the  old  regime. 

The  son  of  a  Transbaikal  Cossack,  Lavr  Komilofi 
was  a  real  democrat  by  birth.  At  the  age  of 
thirteen  he  was  still  herding  cows  in  the  sleepy 
hollow  of  a  Siberian  village.  Thanks  to  his  excep- 
tional abilities  he  made  his  way,  finishing  his  course 
of  studies  in  the  high  school  and  entering  the 
army  as  an  officer.  In  Russia  officers  did  not  form 
a  caste  open  only  to  the  gentry,  as  in  Prussia,  but  any 
one  with  a  certain  amount  of  education  might  get  a 
commission.  On  finishing  at  the  military  academy 
of  the  General  Staff,  Korniloff  went  to  Turkestan  and 
wrote  some  interesting  works  on  this  picturesque  and 
remote  region,  and  secured  a  great  influence  over  the 
natives,  having  learned  the  Turkoman  language.    This 


212     FEOM  LIBEETY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

acquaintancesliip  proved  to  be  of  great  service  to  him 
later,  after  lie  was  arrested.  The  Tekke  Turkoman 
Regiment  treated  him  less  as  a  prisoner  to  be  guarded 
than  as  a  chief  to  be  protected. 

During  the  war  Korniloff  commanded  a  division. 
In  Galicia  in  the  Carpathians  his  division  had  to  cover 
the  retreat  of  the  whole  Russian  Army.  For  three  days 
they  withstood  the  pressure  of  greatly  superior  forces, 
and  it  was  only  thanks  to  their  steadiness  and  heroism 
that  the  army  escaped  with  its  artillery,  munitions,  and 
material.  Almost  the  whole  division  perished.  Korni- 
loff  was  wounded  and  taken  prisoner.  He  managed  to 
escape  from  prison,  disguised  as  a  beggar.  In  this  he 
was  aided  by  his  knowledge  of  languages,  and  probably 
also  by  his  exceedingly  democratic  appearance,  for  he 
had  nothing  of  the  "  General  "  about  him. 

After  the  Revolution  Korniloff  was  appointed  Com- 
mander-in-Chief of  the  troops  of  the  Petrograd  district, 
but  he  did  not  occupy  this  post  for  long,  as  he  could 
not  permit  the  Petrograd  Soviet  to  interfere  in  his 
military  orders.  He  was  then  appointed  to  command 
an  army,  and  after  Alexeieif 's  resignation  he  was  made 
Supreme  Commander-in-Chief  of  the  whole  Army. 
Korniloff  was  a  brave  soldier,  well-educated,  honest,  and 
upright.  As  a  fervent  patriot  he  knew  and  perceived 
all  the  defects  of  the  Tsarist  regime,  and  understood 
that  a  return  to  the  old  order  was  not  only  impossible 
but  even  undesirable  for  Russia. 

Korniloff  was  not  opposed  to  the  democratisation  of 
the  army,  but  he  said  that  "  an  army  which  had  lost 
its  discipline  was  more  dangerous  than  any  wild  beast," 
and  strove  to  reorganise  the  army  in  such  a  way  that 
respect  for  the  soldier's  person  should  be  compatible 
with  the  demands  of  discipline. 

At  the  Moscow  State  Conference  Korniloif  declared  : 


I 


KERENSKY'S  SWAN  SONG  213 

"  I  am  not  against  army  committees.'*  In  his  scheme  of 
army  reforms  he  again  said  plainly  that  the  committees 
must  not  interfere  in  matters  of  strategy  or  discipline, 
but  must  still  be  retained  for  purely  economic  questions. 

"  It  is  surprising  how  little  these  new  elective  institu- 
tions have  diverged  from  the  straight  path,  and  how 
often  they  have  lived  up  to  the  ideal,  sealing  their 
gallant  work  with  blood." 

These  words  are  the  best  refutation  of  the  accusa- 
tions and  suspicions  of  the  Left,  who  were  alarmed  at 
Komiloff's  growing  popularity.  Patriots  had  great 
hopes  of  his  influence  for  Russia,  hopes  doomed,  alas, 
to  a  tragic  disappointment. 

The  fear  of  a  counter-revolution,  which  reigned  not 
only  in  the  Smolny  Institute,  whither  the  Soviet  had 
migrated,  but  also  in  the  Winter  Palace,  where  Kerensky 
had  taken  up  his  abode,  prevented  the  possibility  of  any 
agreement  between  the  Premier  and  the  military 
commanders. 

The  strained  relations,  so  full  of  mutual  distrust, 
ended  in  a  catastrophe  the  details  of  which  await  the 
historian.  In  order  to  sift  this  matter  calmly  and 
impartially  it  is  necessary  to  know  all  the  preliminary 
negotiations,  to  re-establish  that  chaos  of  conflicting 
influences,  intrigues,  and  chance  occurrences,  which, 
like  a  net,  enveloped  the  inexperienced  Ministers,  who 
could  nowhere  find  serious  support.  The  general  posi- 
tion was  as  follows : 

On  the  9th  of  September  there  was  a  rumour  all  over 
Petrograd  that  General  Komiloff  was  marching  on  the 
city  in  order  to  arrest  the  Soviet,  and  declare  himself 
dictator.  On  the  10th  of  September  the  newspapers 
announced  that  Vladimir  Lvoff  ^  had  come  to  Kerensky 

*  The  very  appearance  of  V.  Lvoff  in  this  a£fair  is  even  now  incompre- 
hensible.    A  member  of  the  Duma,  belonging  to  the  Right  \ring,  narrow 


214     FEOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

and,  in  the  name  of  General  Korniloff  (the  Headquarters 
in  Moghilev),  had  demanded  that  all  civil  and  military- 
authority  should  be  placed  in  the  hands  of  the  General 
and  a  new  Cabinet  be  formed. 

This  is  how  subsequent  events  are  described  by 
Boris  Savinkoff,  the  revolutionary  then  acting  as 
Minister  of  War.  According  to  his  account,  among  the 
members  of  the  Officers'  Union  there  was  a  group  of 
men  who  were  conspiring  to  overthrow  the  Government, 
and  to  make  General  Kornilof!  dictator.  This  was  being 
done  without  Korniloff's  knowledge. 

General  Korniloff,  who  was  considered  to  he  a  loyal  citizen, 
was  at  the  same  time  dissatisfied  with  the  weakness  of  the 
Government  policy,  and  insisted  on  the  necessity  of  an  exceed- 
ingly powerful,  revolutionary  authority,  in  which  I  also  agreed 
with  him.  .  .  .  When,  on  the  5th-6th  of  September,  at  Head- 
quarters I  again  told  him  that  in  the  near  future  the  Provisional 
Government  would  examine  the  bill  which  was  being  prepared 
by  the  order  of  the  Prime  Minister,  for  the  measures  to  be  taken 
at  the  base,  he  beheved  that  the  Government  was  no  longer 
hesitating,  and  when  bidding  me  farewell  on  the  6th  September 
at  Headquarters  he  declared  that  he  would  give  his  full  support 
to  the  Prime  Minister,  for  the  good  of  the  country.  On  my 
return  to  Petrograd  I  reported  my  conversations  with  General 
Komiloff  to  the  Prime  Minister,  and  on  the  evening  of  the  8th 
September  the  bill  for  legalising  measures  at  the  base  (i.e. 
severe  penalties  for  breaches  of  discipline)  was  to  have  been 
examined  by  the  Provisional  Government.  But  on  the  8th 
September  I  was  summoned  to  the  Winter  Palace,  and  the 
Prime  Minister  told  me  something  that  was  a  complete  surprise 
to  me.  He  told  me  that  V.  N.  Lvoff  had  come  to  him  with  an 
ultimatum  from  General  KornilofE,  who  demanded  that  the 
supreme  authority  should  be  given  over  to  the  Commander-in- 

and  insignificant,  he  had  got  into  Prince  LvofE's  Cabinet  only  because  some 
one  was  wanted  to  manage  ecclesiastical  affairs.  In  the  Provisional  Govern- 
ment this  rabid  Monarchist,  for  some  reason  or  other,  began  to  vote  with  the 
Left  wing,  led  by  Kerensky.  This  man  Lvofif,  destitute  of  any  serious  ability, 
by  the  irony  of  fate  was  destined  to  play  a  tragic  part  in  Russian  history. 


KERENSKY'S  SWAN  SONG  215 

Chief,  with  all  military  and  civil  power  over  the  country,  and 
that  he,  the  Commander-in-Chief,  was  to  form  a  Cabinet  in 
which  I  was  to  be  Minister  of  War  and  the  Prime  Minister  was 
to  be  Minister  of  Justice.  The  ultimatum  was  in  writing,  but 
was  signed,  not  by  General  Korniloff,  but  by  V.  N.  Lvoff  himself. 
Then  the  Premier  called  Korniloff  up  on  the  Hughes'  apparatus, 
and  asked  him — without  reading  out  to  him  the  text  of  the 
declaration  signed  by  V.  N.  LvofE — whether  he  was  ready  to 
sign  the  ultimatum  presented  by  V.  N.  LvofE  ?  General  Komiloff 
replied,  "  Yes,  I  am  ready  to  sign."  On  the  same  day  (8th  of 
September)  the  Prime  Minister  sent  a  telegram  to  General 
Kornilojff  at  Headquarters,  demanding  that  KomilofE  should 
immediately  give  up  his  post  and  leave  the  army.^ 

Thus  a  great  deal  of  suspicion  and  this  conversation 
over  the  telephone,  perhaps  based  on  a  misunderstanding, 
was  sufficient  for  all  communication  between  the  Premier 
and  the  Commander-in-Chief  of  the  Army  to  be  broken 
of!  at  once.  Then  followed  a  series  of  repressive  measures 
against  Headquarters.  An  order  was  sent  to  all  the 
railways  not  to  obey  the  orders  of  the  Commander-in- 
Cbief ,  and  above  all,  not  to  transport  any  troops  by  his 
orders.  It  was  in  vain  that  efforts  were  made  by 
General  Alexeieff,  Milyukoff ,  Maklakoff ,  and  other  public 
men,  to  act  as  intermediaries,  to  persuade  the  Govern- 
ment first  of  all  to  inquire  into  the  matter,  and  only  then 
to  decide  the  fate — not  only  of  a  talented  Russian 
General,  but  perhaps  of  the  army  itself.  The  Govern- 
ment at  once  took  decisive  measures  against  KomilofE 
and  other  Generals,  who  were  defending  Russia  against 
Germany,  such  stem  measures  as  it  had  not  ventured 
to  take  against  the  Cronstadt  sailors  who  in  July 
had  shot  down  peaceful  inhabitants  in  the  streets  of 
Petrograd. 

On  the  11th  of  September  an  order  was  given  for  the 
arrest  of  the  "insurgent  General,"  who  "wanted  to 

*  "  Boris  Sayinkoff's  Account,**  Rech,  September  26,  1917. 


216     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

start  a  fratricidal  war."  This  order  was  carried  out. 
General  Kornilof!  offered  no  resistance,  and  allowed 
himself  to  be  arrested.  Before  his  arrest,  General 
Kornilofi  issued  an  Order  from  Headquarters,  also  dated 
11th  September,  in  which  he  declared  that  he  never  had 
any  idea  of  becoming  dictator,  nor  planned  any  insurrec- 
tion or  revolution,  but  had  marched  his  cavalry  on 
Petrograd  in  accordance  with  a  preliminary  agreement 
with  Kerensky  himself,  who  had  wanted  to  have  trust- 
worthy troops  at  his  disposal,  as  the  Bolsheviks  were 
again  preparing  for  action. 

This  was  likewise  corroborated  by  B.  Savinkoff's 
evidence:  "The  movement  of  the  cavalry  corps  to- 
wards Petrograd  had  been  undertaken  by  order  of  the 
Provisional  Government  for  the  protection  both  of  the 
Government  and  of  the  Soviet,  the  representatives  of 
which  had  in  July  been  in  no  less  danger  than  the 
Ministers  "  (Rech,  29th  of  September  1917). 

In  his  last  Army  Order,  issued  at  Mohilev  on  the 
11th  of  September,  General  Korniloff  explained  the 
march  of  events  to  ''  commanders,  commissaries,  and 
elected  organisations,"  and  concluded  the  Order  with 
the  following  words  : 

I  pledge  you  my  word  of  honour,  as  an  officer  and  a  soldier, 
and  assure  you  once  more  that  I,  General  Korniloff,  the  son  of 
a  simple  Cossack  peasant,  have  by  my  whole  life  and  not  in 
words  only  shown  my  unfailing  devotion  to  my  country  and  to 
freedom,  that  I  am  alien  to  any  counter-revolutionary  schemes 
whatever,  that  I  stand  on  guard  over  the  liberties  we  have  won, 
desiring  only  that  the  great  Russian  nation  should  continue  to 
enjoy  its  independent  existence. 

Kornilofi's  Order  did  not  get  into  the  newspapers, 
which  obtained  their  information  and  explanations 
only  from  Government  circles.  The  true  meaning  of 
this  conflict,  so  fatal  to  Russia,  was  understood  by  the 


J 


KERENSKY'S  SWAN  SONG  217 

population  only  later,  after  the  November  catastrophe. 
After  the  lesson  given  by  the  Bolsheviks,  many  officers 
rushed  to  the  Don  Territory,  to  enter  Komiloff's  Volun- 
teer Army,  though  in  August  they  had  believed  him  to 
be  an  enemy  of  the  people.  But  for  the  higher  officers 
the  idea  of  Korniloff's  being  deprived  of  the  supreme 
command  was  unthinkable.  From  the  Generals  com- 
manding the  Western,  South- Western,  and  Rumanian 
fronts  came  telegrams  requesting  Kerensky  not  to 
dismiss  the  Supreme  Commander-in-Chief,  and  expressing 
their  complete  solidarity  with  him.  The  most  decisive 
opinion  was  formulated  by  the  Commander  of  the 
South- Western  front.  General  Denikin :  "  I  am  a 
soldier,  and  am  not  accustomed  to  beat  about  the  bush. 
On  the  29th  of  July  at  a  conference  with  the  members 
of  the  Provisional  Government  I  declared  that  by  a 
series  of  measures  the  Government  had  destroyed  and 
corrupted  the  army  and  trampled  our  martial  banners 
in  the  mud.  I  interpreted  the  fact  of  my  having  been 
allowed  to  remain  in  the  position  of  Commander-in-Chief 
as  the  avowal  by  the  Provisional  Government  of  its 
heavy  sin  before  the  Motherland  and  its  desire  to  amend 
the  evil  it  had  wrought.  To-day  I  hav#  received  the 
communication  that  General  Komilofi,  who  has  pre- 
sented certain  demands  which  may  yet  save  the  country 
and  the  army,  is  to  be  dismissed  from  the  post  of  Supreme 
Commander-in-Chief.  Accepting  this  as  a  return  of  the 
authorities  to  the  course  of  a  deliberate  destruction  of 
the  army,  and  therefore  that  of  the  country,  I  hold  it 
my  duty  to  announce  to  the  Provisional  Government 
that  I  will  not  follow  the  same  course." 

Such  were  the  thoughts  and  words  of  one  of  the  most 
gifted  of  Russian  military  leaders.  But  Kerensky, 
having  completely  lost  his  head,  was  no  longer  capable 
of  hearkening  to  the  voice  of  wisdom  and  honour. 


218     FEOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

By  Kerensky's  orders  Generals  Korniloff,  Denikin, 
Lukomsky,  and  others  were  arrested  and  tried  as 
"  rebels,  counter-revolutionaries,  and  enemies  of  the 
people." 

They  were  in  great  danger,  surrounded  by  soldiers 
whose  minds  had  been  inflamed  by  false  rumours. 
Fortunately,  however,  when  Korniloff  was  put  into  the 
Bykhov  prison,  he  was  surrounded  by  his  faithful 
Turkomans,  who  protected  not  only  him  but  also  his 
fellow-prisoners,  officers  who  were  members  of  the 
Officers'  Union. 

Incomparably  harder  was  the  position  of  Generals 
Denikin,  Markoff,  ErdeU,  and  others,  who  had  been 
arrested  at  Berdichev  (Headquarters  of  the  South- 
western front).  They  were  in  constant  danger  of  being 
lynched.  In  order  to  save  their  lives,  they  were  trans- 
ferred to  the  same  prison  in  which  Korniloff  was  incar- 
cerated. On  the  way,  as  they  were  being  taken  along, 
scenes  occurred  which  were  a  foretaste  of  the  subsequent 
Bolshevist  massacres  of  officers. 

Neither  Kerensky ,  who  had  appointed  himself  Supreme 
Commander-in-Chief,  nor  the  committees  even  attempted 
to  protect  th#  Generals  from  insult  by  the  soldiers. 

A  mob  of  soldiers  met  the  arrested  Generals  and 
accompanied  them  to  the  railway  station.  They  were 
not  allowed  to  be  taken  in  motor-cars,  but  were  forced 
to  walk.  On  the  way  there  were  cries  of  "  Take  them 
through  the  mud !  Let  them  churn  it  up  with  their 
Generals'  feet."  There  was  a  shower  of  insults  and 
coarse  jokes.  The  soldiers  shouted  :  "  Denikin,  head 
up  !  Bring  down  your  foot  firmer !  Look  lively !  " 
Stones  were  thrown.  General  Orloff  was  wounded  in 
the  head.  It  was  only  the  self-sacrifice  of  the  military 
Cadets  who  formed  the  escort  that  saved  the  arrested 
Generals  from  being  mishandled,  although  no  one  had 


KERENSKY'S  SWAN  SONG  219 

any  definite  idea  of  what  they  were  guilty.  People 
merely  repeated  the  accusations  made  by  Kerensky : 
"  Enemies  of  the  people  and  counter-revolutionaries." 
This  took  place  much  later  (16th  of  October).  Before 
this,  during  the  whole  month,  arrests  were  made  among 
the  military.  An  order  was  issued  for  the  arrest  of 
General  Kaledin,  the  "  ataman,"  or  chief,  of  the  Don 
Cossacks.  He  was  at  Novocherkassk,  the  capital  of  the 
Don  Territory,  and  the  Cossacks  refused  to  give  him  up. 

The  arrest  of  Komiloif  and  other  Generals  was  the 
final  step  that  led  to  the  long-impending  breach  between 
the  whole  of  the  army  commanders  and  the  leaders  of 
Soviet  circles.  They  spoke  different  languages,  thought 
in  different  ways  of  the  future  of  Russia,  and  sooner  or 
later  a  breach  between  these  two  parties  was  inevitable. 
The  military,  with  Komiloff  at  their  head,  found  them- 
selves incapable  of  taking  the  power  into  their  own 
hands.  Patriotic  people,  both  national  Socialists  and 
large  non-Socialistic  organisations,  with  the  Cadets  at 
their  head,  were  likewise  unable  to  give  Headquarters 
the  requisite  political  support.  At  the  critical  moment 
Korniloff  found  himself  in  the  company  of  such  petty 
political  adventurers  as  Zavoiko  and  Aladin.  Respon- 
sible politicians  tried  to  mitigate  the  catastrophe  when 
all  was  practically  lost.  As  a  result,  the  two  Russias 
who  had  met  so  inimically  at  the  Moscow  Conference, 
parted  in  a  long  and  tragic  divorce. 

Kerensky,  who  shared  the  fears  of  the  Soviet  as 
regards  counter-revolution,  having  branded  Komiloff 
and  Denikin  as  rebels  and  traitors,  then  got  rid  of  all 
non-Socialistic  Russia,  and  became  wholly  dependent 
on  Soviet  circles. 

Again  frail  authority  began  to  crumble  away.  The 
Cadet  Ministers — Kokoshkin,  Yurenieff ,  and  Oldenburg — 
who  disapproved  of  Kerensky's  action  against  Korniloff, 


220     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

left  the  Cabinet.  A  sort  of  Directory,  under  tlie  name 
of  The  Five,  was  formed  of  the  remaining  Ministers. 
They  were — Kerensky,  Nekrasoff ,  Tereshchenko,  Admiral 
Verderevsky,  and  General  Verhovsky. 

On  the  same  day  Russia  was  proclaimed  a  Republic. 
This  was  really  an  infringement  of  the  rights  of  the 
Constituent  Assembly,  where  the  elected  representatives 
of  the  people  were  to  determine  the  form  of  government 
themselves.  But  the  Left  wing  thought  fit  to  establish 
a  republic  beforehand.  Kerensky  lost  his  head  so  far 
as  to  take  upon  himself  the  supreme  command  of  the 
army.  When  Nicholas  II.,  after  removing  the  Grand 
Duke  Nikolai  Nikolaievitch,  declared  himself  the  Supreme 
Commander-in-Chief  of  the  enormous  Russian  Army, 
people  smiled.  But  every  one  knew  that  he  had  the 
wise  and  talented  leader.  General  Alexeieff ,  at  his  back. 

By  the  bitter  irony  of  fate  Kerensky  was  walking  in 
the  footsteps  of  the  autocrat  who  had  been  overthrown 
by  the  Revolution,  and  with  the  self-assurance  of  a 
madman  took  upon  his  shoulders  that  awful  military 
responsibility  for  which  he  had  neither  the  knowledge, 
the  talents,  nor  even  the  force  of  character. 

And  again  General  Alexeieff  was  beside  him,  ready, 
as  before,  to  give  up  all  his  strength,  all  his  patriotism,  to 
the  service  of  Russia.  But  just  as  before  the  decaying 
routine  of  despotism  and  the  Tsar's  prejudices  had 
rendered  impotent  the  heroism  of  the  Russian  soldier 
and  the  talents  and  energy  of  Russian  Army  leaders, 
so  now  General  Alexeiefi  found  himself  before  a  new 
obstacle — ^revolutionary  prejudices  and  the  anarchy 
created  thereby. 

Like  Nicholas  II.,  Kerensky  thought  (perhaps  sin- 
cerely) that  he  was  necessary  to  Russia,  and  that  in  the 
army  he  would  be  of  more  use  than  General  KornilofP, 
with  all  his  military  experience.     Having  risen  to  the 


KERENSKY'S  SWAN  SONG  221 

very  height  of  military  authority,  the  new  Supreme 
Commander-in-Chief  tried  to  bring  the  army  to  its  senses 
— the  very  army  which  he  himself  had  completely  thrown 
ofi  its  balance. 

In  agreement  with  General  Alexeieff,  Kerensky  drew 
up  and  issued  an  Order  to  the  Army  and  Navy  (14th  of 
September)  demanding  the  cessation  of  arrests  and 
deposition  of  commanders,  and  the  transportation  of 
troops  in  accordance  with  the  orders  of  the  authorities. 

This  Order,  signed  by  Kerensky  and  General  Alexeieff, 
contained  a  part  of  the  demands  on  which  Komiloff  had 
insisted  in  vain.  "  I  order  that  the  political  struggle 
among  the  troops  shall  cease,  and  that  all  efforts  should 
be  directed  towards  strengthening  our  fighting  power," 
was.  the  very  first  clause.  But  how  could  it  be  expected 
that  this  Order  would  be  obeyed  when,  before  clearing 
up  the  Komiloff  affair,  the  Government  itself  had 
already  sent  round  a  telegram  directing  the  non-fulfil- 
ment of  orders  ;  when,  in  view  of  everybody,  the  higher 
circles  were  seething  with  political  struggles,  contrary 
tendencies  clashed  and  chaos  reigned,  affecting  all 
spheres  of  military  and  civil  life.  Under  such  conditions 
it  was  useless  to  speak  of  strong  authority,  of  severe 
penalties,  of  duty. 

The  Order  of  the  14th  of  September  remained  a  dead 
letter.  Kerensky  was  powerless  to  put  it  into  force, 
the  more  so  as  the  Government  commissaries  who  should 
have  carried  out  the  ideas  of  the  Government  and 
Revolutionary  Democracy  in  the  army  listened  princi- 
pally to  the  Soviet,  and  not  to  the  Ministers.  Any  real 
support  of  the  ideas  of  a  firm  and  sole  authority  could 
not  be  expected  from  the  Soviet.  To  the  latter  this 
seemed  a  counter-revolutionary  idea,  coming  chiefly 
from  the  Cadets,  Right  Socialists,  and  counter-revolu- 
tionary-" Generals." 


222     FEOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       oh. 

After  the  Komiloff  affair  the  Soviet  politicians, 
alarmed  at  the  bare  glimpse  of  the  terrible  spectre  of 
strong  authority,  threw  themselves  in  terror  to  the 
Left  for  support.  This  was  merely  an  intensification  of 
their  former  radical  leaning  to  the  Left.  In  spite  of  the 
fact  that  General  Korniloff,  in  his  evidence,  had  cate- 
gorically denied  the  accusation  of  wishing  to  establish 
a  military  dictatorship,  the  Revolutionary  Democracy 
was  in  a  state  of  panic.  At  meetings,  political  and 
other,  speeches  were  made  on  the  growth  of  counter- 
revolution. At  a  meeting  of  the  Executive  Committee 
a  member  of  the  Government,  the  Minister  Avksentiefi, 
also  proclaimed  the  danger  which  threatened  the 
conquests  of  the  Revolution. 

From  the  leaders  the  panic  spread  to  the  soldiery. 
These  rushed  off  to  catch  the  "  Kaledinists "  and 
"  Kornilovists."  In  Helsingfors,  Viborg,  Dvinsk,  Reval, 
awful  brutal  massacres  of  officers  took  place.  The 
poisonous  seeds  of  class  suspicion  and  civil  war  were 
cast  in  greater  and  greater  abundance  among  the  masses. 
Their  mentality  grew  distorted,  full  of  hate,  goading 
them  to  crime.  Under  the  Bolsheviks  this  hatred  was 
to  form  the  basis  of  government  in  the  Soviet  Republic. 
But  the  first  Soviets  must  also  share  the  responsibility 
of  having  darkened  the  minds  of  the  people,  since  their 
preaching  laid  the  foundation  of  the  evil  work. 

The  military  chaos,  dyed  red  with  the  blood  of 
defenceless  officers,  was  spreading  in  consequence  of  the 
interference  of  the  Soviet  in  the  affairs  of  the  Govern- 
ment. Avksentieff,  the  Minister,  spoke  in  the  Soviet 
of  the  threatening  advance  of  Kaledin's  counter-revolu- 
tionary troops  from  the  South  (which  turned  out  to  be 
entirely  wrong,  as  Kaledin  had  not  moved  anjrwhere 
nor  undertaken  any  operations  against  the  Provisional 
Government).     To  counter  this,  the  Military  Commission 


X  KERENSKY'S  SWAN  SONG  223 

of  the  Central  Committee  of  the  Soviet  of  Workmen's 
Delegates — according  to  AvksentiefE  himself — ''  without 
consulting  the  War  Office,  had  called  out  a  division  of 
soldiers  and  destroyers  from  Finland  to  Petrograd. 
Such  actions  increase  the  danger  and  cause  a  panic,'*  the 
Minister  very  truly  reproached  them.  While  the  Soviet 
was  trying,  timidly  and  undecidedly,  to  take  the  com- 
mand into  its  own  hands,  the  Germans  were  preparing 
to  land  troops  in  Finland.  This  was  public  knowledge 
and  discussed  in  the  Press.  But  neither  the  plans  of 
the  Germans  nor  the  war  in  general  troubled  the  Soviet 
very  much.  The  members  were  occupied  with  the 
question  of  creating  a  new  authority.  On  the  13th  of 
September,  at  a  meeting  of  the  Soviet  Executive  Com- 
mittee, Kameneff  (the  same  who  had  been  in  the  service 
of  the  Tsar's  police)  introduced  a  resolution  in  the  name 
of  the  Bolsheviks  for  the  formation  of  a  Government 
composed  of  representatives  of  the  revolutionary  pro- 
letariat and  the  peasantry.  He  proposed  to  establish  a 
democratic  republic,  to  abolish  private  property  in  land 
for  the  gentry,  to  annul  secret  treaties,  and  immediately 
to  propose  a  democratic  peace. 

In  the  name  of  the  Mensheviks  Prince  Tsereteli 
brought  in  another  resolution,  with  an  appeal  to  forget 
"  class  interests  for  the  sake  of  national "  and  support 
the  Coalition  Government.  It  is  curious  that  for  the 
purpose  of  keeping  order  Prince  Tsereteli  proposed  to 
"  act  in  close  union  with  the  Committee  of  the  National 
Struggle  against  Counter-Revolution,  attached  to  the 
All-Russian  Central  Committee." 

Thus  by  the  Mensheviks  themselves  was  approved 
that  inquisitorial  tribunal,  hastily  organised  under  the 
stimulus  of  fear,  which  later  on,  imder  the  name  of  the 
Extraordinary  Conmiission  for  the  Struggle  against 
Counter-Revolution,  Speculation,  and  Sabotage,  became 


224     FKOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       en. 

a  terrible  instrument  against  all  Russian  citizens,  not 
excepting  the  Mensheviks.  It  was  Kameneff  who  won, 
and  not  Prince  Tsereteli.  His  resolution  was  passed 
with  the  hearty  support  of  the  Social-Revolutionaries, 
led  by  Chernoff.  The  Bolsheviks  got  a  majority  of  279 
against  115.  The  presiding  officials,  who  had  supported 
Prince  Tsereteli's  resolution,  resigned.  Thus  came  about 
the  retirement  of  the  Centre  Socialists,  with  Chheidze 
at  their  head,  who  had  tried  to  infuse  Zimmerwald 
class  principles  into  the  execution  of  the  national  tasks 
of  the  defence  and  reconstruction  of  the  Russian  State. 
For  six  months  they  had  been  the  most  influential 
poUtical  group,  on  whom,  to  a  considerable  extent, 
depended  the  direction  of  State  affairs.  They  were 
replaced  by  pure  Zimmerwaldists,  irreconcilable  Social- 
ists, who  demanded  that  the  doctrines  of  Karl  Marx 
should  be  put  into  practice  without  delay  and  without 
reservation. 

The  Revolutionary  Democracy  was  totally  at  a  loss, 
and  the  position  was  made  worse  by  the  Bolsheviks,  who 
had  been  released  from  prison  without  any  trial  and 
who  immediately  began  a  furious  campaign  against 
the  Provisional  Government.  When  Trotsky  appeared 
after  his  release  from  prison  he  had  an  ovation. 

It  was  becoming  evident  that  the  Executive  Com- 
mittee, which  had  been  the  guiding  organ  of  the  Soviet, 
no  longer  satisfied  the  Soviet  which  had  elected  it.  The 
hero  of  the  day  was  Trotsky.  His  speeches  in  the 
Soviet  were  warmly  supported.  Trotsky  demanded  a 
purely  Socialistic  Government,  and  reproached  the  Soviet 
for  supporting  Kerensky,  '*  who  had  introduced  capital 
punishment."  At  the  same  time  Trotsky  reminded 
them  that  the  Jacobins  had  Imown  how  to  defend  the 
Revolution  and  fight  the  bourgeoisie^  by  establishing  the 
guillotine  for  the  latter. 


I 


X  KERENSKY'S  SWAN  SONG  225 

The  Mensheviks  called  out : 

"  The  guillotine  led  to  Napoleon  !  " 

"  I  prefer  Napoleon  to  Kerensky,"  replied  Trotsky 
frankly. 

Thus  on  the  22nd  of  September  1917  one  of  the 
future  leaders  of  Soviet  Russia  on  the  one  hand  con- 
demned capital  punishment,  and  on  the  other  pointed 
to  Terror  as  the  mainstay  of  Socialistic  authority. 

Practically,  Terror  was  rearing  its  head  in  various 
places.  Whole  districts  were  pogromed.  Landlords  were 
being  murdered.  Officers  were  murdered.  Engineers 
were  murdered.  The  cost  of  human  life  began  to 
depreciate  as  rapidly  as  the  rate  of  exchange  of  the 
Russian  rouble.  The  masses,  with  increasing  greedi- 
ness, tried  to  take  from  the  new  regime  only  profits 
and  privileges,  while  their  leaders  clung  to  abstract 
watchwords  which  bore  the  high-flown  name  of 
"  the  conquests  of  the  Revolution."  This  hazy  term 
was  acquiring  a  more  and  more  Maximalistic  interpre- 
tation, and,  as  a  consequence,  both  the  power  of  the 
Provisional  Government  and  the  influence  of  the  first 
Executive  Committee  with  which  Kerensky  and  the 
Socialist  Ministers  were  closely  connected  began  to 
totter. 

Before  finally  laying  down  its  authority,  the  Central 
Executive  Committee  made  one  more  attempt  to  find 
support  in  those  democratic  masses  who  had  formerly 
upheld  it.  A  so-called  Democratic  Conference  was 
held  in  Petrograd.  Besides  delegates  from  provincial 
Soviets,  there  were  representatives  of  co-operative 
societies,  trade  unions,  national  organisations,  etc.  No 
representatives  of  the  so-called  proprietary  Russia  were 
invited  to  the  Conference,  only  those  of  the  Revolu- 
tionary Democracy.  The  political  chaos  which  reigned 
in  the  latter  once  more  showed  itself  at  this  Conference, 

Q 


226     FEOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

the  cldef  object  of  which  was  to  determine  what  kind 
of  Government  must  be  set  up.  It  was  resolved  that 
the  Conference  "  was  not  to  be  dismissed  until  the 
conditions  for  the  formation  and  functioning  of  Govern- 
ment were  drawn  up,  in  a  form  acceptable  to  the  Demo- 
cracy." But  what  form  was  the  Government  to  take, 
in  order  to  become  really  powerful,  to  preserve  unlimited 
freedom,  which  was  considered  one  of  the  "  conquests 
of  the  Revolution  "  ?  The  Democracy  at  the  Conference 
was  powerless  to  solve  this  problem.  The  Conference 
sat  from  the  27th  of  September  till  the  6th  of  October. 
Speeches  were  made  by  Kerensky,  Ministers,  soldiers — 
any  one  and  every  one  made  speeches.  There  was  a 
moment  when  the  Government  almost  succeeded  in 
convincing  the  members  of  the  Conference  of  the 
necessity  for  a  Coalition. 

The  motion  supporting  a  CoaUtion  Government  had 
already  been  passed  by  a  majority  of  766  votes  against 
688.  But  the  victory  was  uncertain.  Amendments 
began  to  be  made.  One  was  to  the  effect  that  no  Cadets 
or  "  Kornilovists  "  were  to  take  part  in  the  Government. 
Then  later,  the  whole  motion  was  put  to  the  vote  a 
second  time,  and  was  rejected.  There  were  813  votes 
against  it,  183  for  it,  and  80  non- voters. 

This  muddle  in  the  settlement  of  a  question  which 
they  themselves  considered  fundamental  clearly  shows 
what  an  unstable  mass,  unaccustomed  to  examine 
questions  seriously,  or  seriously  to  support  definite 
opinions,  was  the  Revolutionary  Democracy  at  that 
time.  Ideas  were  so  confused  that  in  answer  to  the 
demand  that  no  Cadets  should  be  admitted,  as  impli- 
cated in  the  KornilofE  affair,  Mme.  Ekaterina  Kuskova, 
a  representative  of  co-operative  societies,  a  talented 
writer,  and  a  Social-Democrat  of  the  Plekhanoff  group, 
said :      "  Such    an    amendment    is    unworthy    of    a 


X  KERENSKY'S  SWAN  SONG  227 

Democratic  Conference,  because  it  implies  the  supposi- 
tion that  some  one  in  this  hall  might  enter  into  a  coalition 
with  the  accomplices  of  the  Komiloff  insurrection." 
Several  months  later  (in  February  1918),  when  Bolshevist 
tjnranny  was  at  its  height,  Ekaterina  Kuskova  courage- 
ously announced  in  the  Vlast  Naroda  (People's  Power), 
a  Moscow  paper,  that  practically  every  honest  patriot 
must  accept  Kaledin's  programme. 

No  one  used  such  language  at  the  Democratic  Con- 
ference. The  Revolution  had  overshadowed  the  Mother- 
land. And  Chhenkeli,  the  Georgian  Social-Democrat, 
was  right  when  he  said  bitterly :  "I  hear  speeches 
about  social,  political,  and  other  problems,  but  I  do 
not  hear  the  most  important  thing — I  do  not  hear  of 
any  alarm  for  Russia's  fate." 

And  how  could  this  show  itself  in  an  assembly  of 
people,  the  majority  of  whom  considered  themselves 
bound  to  stand  up  for  the  interests  of  a  class  and  not  of 
the  State,  of  the  "  Internationale  "  and  not  the  nation, 
persons  among  whom  internationalists  like  Trotsky 
were  growing  more  and  more  important  ?  Trotsky 
demanded  that  the  Soviets  should  take  the  Government 
into  their  own  hands.  On  becoming  a  Government, 
the  Soviets  would  appeal  "  to  the  democracies  of  the 
whole  world,  demanding  peace.  If  this  peace  is  not 
attained,  then  the  proletariat  will  know  what  to  fight 
for,  and  the  Germans  advancing  on  Petrograd  will  meet 
with  such  a  repulse  as  they  have  never  had  before." 

Of  course,  none  of  the  audience  could  then  guess 
what  a  future  awaited  the  clever  demagogue  and 
eloquent  orator  Trotsky,  that  before  them  stood  the 
future  author  of  the  most  shameful  Peace  of  Brest- 
Litovsk,  and  the  future  Commander-in-Chief  of  the 
Red  Army.  Even  then,  however,  many  acknowledged 
that  in  the  person  of  Trotsky  there  had  appeared  a 


228     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

dangerous  political  opponent  of  the  Socialist  Centre, 
while  people  with  more  penetration  felt  that  he  was  a 
dangerous  enemy  of  the  Russian  State  and  the  Russian 
people. 

Just  as  the  Moscow  State  Conference  did  not 
strengthen  but  rather  weakened  the  Provisional  Govern- 
ment by  whom  it  had  been  convened,  so  the  Petrograd 
Democratic  Conference  did  not  strengthen  but  weakened 
the  Central  Executive  Committee  which  had  convened 
it.  Two  days  after  the  termination  of  the  Conference 
the  Petrograd  Soviet  had  its  election.  Chheidze,  who 
had  been  the  President  of  the  Soviet  from  the  first  day 
of  the  Revolution,  was  not  re-elected.  Trotsky  was 
chosen  to  fill  his  place.  And,  as  if  with  the  object  of 
removing  any  suspicion  as  to  the  meaning  of  this  election, 
a  motion  was  immediately  passed  refusing  any  support 
whatever  to  ''a  Government  of  power  and  privilege 
and  counter-revolutionary  oppression." 

In  regard  to  Kerensky  and  his  companions  this 
sounded  like  bitter  irony,  as  not  only  had  they 
no  privilege,  but  they  had  no  power  at  all.  Just  a 
week  before,  Kerensky  had  published  an  order  dispersing 
the  Centro-Flot,  i.e,  the  elective  Naval  Committee, 
which  was  a  plaything  of  the  Bolsheviks  and  the  Ger- 
mans. From  the  moment  of  its  formation  the  Centro- 
Flot  never  obeyed  any  one.  In  the  middle  of  September 
it  issued  a  special  order  to  the  Baltic  Fleet,  protesting 
against  the  Government  delaying  the  inauguration  of 
a  Federal  Democratic  Republic.  As  the  Germans  were 
already  advancing  on  the  Gulf  of  Finland  this  was  a 
dangerous  game  to  play,  and  it  was  extremely  necessary 
to  take  energetic  measures  against  the  impudence  of  the 
sailors.  But  the  Government  proved  powerless  to 
exact  obedience,  and  was  obliged  simply  to  cancel  its 
order.      It    was    likewise    powerless    against    Finnish 


X  KERENSKY'S  SWAN  SONG  229 

separatism,  already  seeking  for  a  way  of  throwing  off 
the  anarchistic  yoke  of  the  Russian  soldiers'  and  work- 
men's Soviets  and  other  Territorial  Committees  and 
Soviets,  which  were  issuing  orders  not  to  obey  the  Finnish 
Government  so  long  as  the  "  bourgeois  "  took  part  in  it. 
Day  by  day  the  machinery  of  Government  grew 
worse  and  worse.  In  the  provinces  and  distant  border- 
lands, and  in  the  centre  of  Russia,  the  voice  of  State 
authority  was  no  longer  heard,  and  orders  were  given 
arbitrarily  by  one  committee  or  another,  which  troubled 
themselves  not  at  all  about  the  interest  of  Russia  as  a 
whole.  Workmen's  organisations  also  showed  complete 
oblivion  of  national  interests.  The  railwaymen  raised 
their  demands,  threatening  to  strike,  although  the 
transport  of  corn  was  in  danger  of  failing.  At  the 
Donetz  coalfields  anarchy  was  on  the  increase.  Some 
collieries  were  taken  away  from  the  owners  by  the 
miners.  At  others  the  latter  not  only  demanded  an 
enormous  increase  of  wages,  but  the  payment  of 
"  arrears  "  of  all  such  rises  for  1915-1916  as  well.  It 
must  be  mentioned  that  the  extravagant  economic 
demands  of  the  miners  were  to  a  great  extent  justified 
by  the  fact  that  during  the  war  the  mine-owners  had 
been  specially  barefaced  in  their  exploitation  of  this 
laborious  kind  of  work,  taking  advantage  of  the  workmen 
being  unable  to  leave.  The  shareholders  got  enormous 
dividends  (up  to  200  per  cent),  while  wages  were  raised 
at  a  most  parsimonious  rate.  The  workmen's  anger 
was  growing.  But  this  does  not  of  course  justify  the 
brutal  attacks  and  lynching  of  directors,  engineers,  and, 
in  general,  all  the  educated  employees.  Requisitions, 
robberies,  and  murders  were  conmion  not  only  in  the 
coalfields — they  had  spread  all  over  Russia.  And, 
moreover,  though  the  law-courts  continued  to  operate, 
they  found  no  one  to  carry  out  the  sentences  passed. 


230     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

The  mob  released  criminals  and  prisoners,  and  the 
judges  lived  under  perpetual  threat  of  mob-law. 

Under  such  circumstances,  on  the  8th  of  October 
Kerensky  managed  with  great  difficulty  to  form  a  new 
Coalition  Government,  as  it  was  necessary  to  fill  up  the 
Directory.  The  Social-Democrats  Prokopovitch,  Gvoz- 
deff ,  Nikitin,  the  Cadets  Kartashoff ,  Kishkin,  Konovoloif, 
Smirnoff,  Tretyakoff,  joined  the  Cabinet.  The  rest 
belonged  to  no  particular  party. 

These  parties  whom  the  experiences  and  disappoint- 
ments of  the  Revolution  had  not  brought  any  nearer 
each  other,  but  rather  still  further  separated,  who  were 
neither  welded  together  inwardly,  nor  supported  from 
outside  by  homogeneous  and  cordial  assistance — ^these 
people  were  called  upon  to  solve  more  and  more  compli- 
cated problems  of  State,  both  in  home  and  foreign 
politics. 

The  Government  had  to  wage  war  with  an  enemy 
who  had  even  formerly  excelled  the  Russian  Army  in 
technical  matters  and  in  discipline.  Meanwhile  the 
army  had  almost  ceased  to  exist.  It  was  not  an  army, 
but  merely  a  crowd  of  millions  of  men  who  disregarded 
not  only  their  officers,  but  even  their  committees,  and 
who  thought  only  of  how  to  get  home  quickly.  Neither 
could  that  be  called  a  navy  where  warships  were  ruled 
by  committees  which  passed  resolutions  like  the  follow- 
ing :  "  We  do  not  acknowledge  the  Provisional  Govern- 
ment, which  is  an  alliance  between  open  Kornilovists  and 
'  leaders  of  the  Democracy.'  "  (This  was  the  ironical 
name  of  Kerensky  and  his  supporters.)  Such  a 
motion  was  passed  by  the  Soviet  in  Cronstadt,  a  few 
days  after  the  formation  of  the  new  Cabinet.  Those 
were  the  September  days  when  the  Germans  advanced 
from  the  sea  and  occupied  the  islands  of  Dago  and 
Oesel,  the  next  stages  after  Riga  on  the  road  to  Petro- 


X  KERENSKY'S  SWAN  SONG  231 

grad.  The  Left  Press  again  began  to  speak  of  "the 
struggle  for  peace,  as  the  only  condition  of  successful 
defence."  The  common  watchword  of  all  the  Socialist 
papers,  except  the  Volia  Naroda  (the  organ  of  the 
Right  Social-Revolutionaries),  was :  "  The  Revolution 
is  in  danger  both  from  the  Germans  and  from  the 
Kornilovists." 

Gorki's  half-Bolshevist  Novaia  Zhizn,  which  con- 
sidered itself  the  organ  of  the  Social-Democratic  Inter- 
nationalists (a  small  group  standing  between  the  Bol- 
sheviks and  the  Mensheviks),  expresses  very  clearly  the 
point  of  view  held  both  by  the  Left  Press  and  the 
Cronstadt  sailors : 

The  group  of  usurpers  of  power  in  the  Winter  Palace  has 
undertaken  to  carry  out  the  amended  and  supplemented 
programme  of  the  14th  of  August  (i.e.  the  programme  of 
t£e  Left  portion  of  the  Moscow  Conference).  In  reality  it 
cannot  and  will  not  give  us  anything  but  war  to  the  end  instead 
of  peace,  lead  instead  of  land,  and  a  bayonet  instead  of  bread. 
Until  this  Government  of  disgrace  to  the  Revolution  is  Uquidated 
it  is  of  no  use  to  think  of  the  termination  of  the  general  crisis 
in  the  country,  or  of  the  cessation  of  anarchy.  Only  a  democratic 
authority  can  end  the  count/er-revolution,  and  not  the  present 
fictitious  Government,  which  is  the  direct  source  of  counter- 
revolution and  Komilovism  (Novaia  ZhizUy  October  19th,  1917). 

These  were  no  chance  opinions  of  separate  groups, 
but  the  systematic  enunciation  of  watchwords  elaborated 
in  the  Centre,  i.e.  the  Committee  of  the  Social-Demo- 
cratic party,  and  in  the  Petrograd  Soviet,  where  the 
Bolsheviks  were  already  playing  the  leading  part.  They 
made  no  secret  of  their  work,  but  boldly  prepared  for 
battle,  not  only  against  the  bourgeoisie,  but  against  the 
Socialist  Centre  likewise. 

On  the  20th  of  October  the  Council  of  the  Republic 
was  opened  in  Petrograd.   This  was  the  name  given  to  the 


232     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       oh. 

consultative  assembly  of  representatives  of  all  parties 
and  large  public  organisations,  convened  by  the  Pro- 
visional Government.  This  was  something  like  a  Parlia- 
ment where,  in  expectation  of  the  Constituent  Assembly, 
the  public  opinion  of  the  country  might  find  expression. 

The  Bolsheviks  demonstratively  left  the  Council  on 
the  first  day,  without  even  waiting  to  see  what  course 
affairs  would  take.  Trotsky  read  a  declaration,  in 
which  it  was  said  that  the  Bolsheviks  "  did  not  wish 
to  have  anything  in  common  with  a  Government  of 
treachery  against  the  people,  nor  with  a  Council  of 
counter-revolutionary  collusion.  The  foreign  policy 
of  the  bourgeoisie  and  its  Government  is  criminal. 
After  forty  months  of  war  the  metropolis  is  threatened 
with  mortal  danger.  In  answer  to  this  there  is  a  plan 
of  removing  the  Government  to  Moscow.  The  idea  of 
surrendering  the  revolutionary  capital  to  the  German 
troops  in  no  way  rouses  the  indignation  of  the  bourgeois 
classes." 

The  inhabitants  of  Petrograd  remembered  these 
words  with  some  irony  several  months  after,  when 
Trotsky  and  his  colleagues  themselves  ran  away  from 
the  Germans  to  Moscow.  But  in  the  Council  of  the 
Republic  the  Bolsheviks  spoke  for  the  last  time  as  an 
irresponsible  Opposition,  and  repeated  all  their  war- 
cries  :  '*  All  power  to  the  Soviets.  All  the  land  for  the 
people.  An  immediate  democratic  peace.  Hail  to  the 
Constituent  Assembly !  " 

Their  declaration  and  departure,  their  speeches  at 
meetings,  the  tone  of  their  press,  the  extent  of  their 
secret  and  open  agitation — all  clearly  showed  that  Lenin 
was  again  preparing  for  battle.  Lenin  himself,  in  spite 
of  the  fact  that  the  arrested  Bolsheviks  had  been 
liberated,  very  cautiously  kept  in  hiding,  but  his  hand 
was  felt  in  the  well-planned  and  aggressive  activity  of 


X  KERENSKY'S  SWAN  SONG  233 

the  whole  Left  Socialist  wing.  The  "  push  "  was  visible 
to  all,  and  especially  to  the  Government  and  those 
guiding  circles  which  sat  in  the  Council  of  the  Republic. 

All  felt  the  approaching  danger,  but  no  one  knew 
how  to  avert  it,  nor  how  to  formulate  it  clearly,  and, 
still  less,  how  to  rally  and  organise  against  it,  in  order 
in  consort  to  repel  the  approaching  foe.  Each  group, 
each  party  continued  to  live  and  think,  shut  in  by  party 
walls,  repeating  the  same  formulae,  which  had  not  only 
been  worn  threadbare  during  the  Revolution,  but  had 
also  shown  their  utter  futility. 

The  Revolutionary  Democracy,  in  the  person  of  the 
Mensheviks  and  Social  Revolutionaries,  kept  speaking 
of  the  inviolability  of  the  Army  Committees,  of  the  repeal 
of  capital  pimishment,  of  democratic  peace  without 
annexations  and  indemnities,  of  fighting  the  counter- 
revolution. Vainly  did  General  Alexeiei!  try  to  convince 
the  members  of  the  Council  not  to  slacken  discipline,  as 
without  a  firm  military  force  it  was  impossible  either  to 
fight  or  to  restore  order  at  the  base,  demoralised  by 
lawlessness  and  by  the  want  of  proper  authority.  The 
Council  listened  to  his  speeches  in  a  very  unfriendly 
spirit.  Almost  the  same  animosity  was  called  forth  by 
the  speeches  of  the  Populist-Socialists.  E.  Kuskova,  in 
a  powerful  speech,  full  of  bitter  patriotism,  called  upon 
her  audience  "  to  battle  against  anarchy,  to  form  a  hloc 
of  defencists,  as  it  was  necessary  to  take  measures  that 
we  should  really  come  out  of  the  war  without  annexa- 
tions and  indemnities,  which  will  not  be  paid  to  the 
Russian  people,  but  by  the  Russian  people."  Her  speech 
was  interrupted  by  applause  from  the  Right  and  criticism 
from  the  Left. 

The  public  men,  gathered  together  in  the  Council  of 
the  Republic,  could  not  come  to  any  agreement  even  on 
the  question  of  defending  Russia. 


234     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

They  disputed  for  several  days,  and  when  on  the 
1st  of  November  they  at  last  began  to  vote,  it  turned 
out  that  there  were  as  many  as  five  different  motions  : 
(1)  the  Menshevik  ;  (2)  Menshevik-Internationaiist ;  (3) 
Social-Democrat ;  (4)  Left  Social-Revolutionary  ;  and 
(5)  Co-operative  Societies,  together  with  Cadets, 
Cossacks,  Plekhanovists,  and  several  national  groups. 
Notwithstanding  the  anarchy  at  home  and  the  military 
menace  abroad,  the  same  differences  of  opinion  con- 
cerning words  still  continued,  but  the  radical  diver- 
gence in  the  points  of  view  on  the  war,  defence,  and 
army  grew  greater  and  greater.  The  Left  wing  still 
continued  to  fear  everything  that  gave  grounds  for  sus- 
picion of  the  desire  for  victory  over  the  Germans.  The 
aim  of  the  Socialists  was  not  victory,  but  the  liquidation 
of  the  war.  The  Plekhanovists  and  Populist- Socialists 
alone  supported  the  motion  of  the  Co-operative  Societies 
and  the  Cadets,  who  had  moved  that  "  Only  an  active 
defence  of  the  country  can  protect  the  integrity  of  our 
country's  independence."  But  the  Socialists  desired,  by 
means  of  a  democratic  peace,  to  protect  the  interests  of 
the  proletariat  of  the  whole  world.  It  is  obvious  that 
both  the  aims  and  methods  were  totally  different.  It 
is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  the  debate  on  the  motions 
was  very  stormy,  and  resulted  in  all  the  motions  being 
rejected.  It  turned  out  that  the  Council  of  the  Republic, 
to  which  Kerensky's  Government  looked  for  support, 
had  not  even  a  majority  desirous  of  defending  Russia 
against  the  Germans.  The  last  support  was  failing  the 
Government.  It  now  tried  to  take  up  the  position  of 
passive  defence,  and  found  at  the  same  time  that  it 
had  wrecked  the  Headquarters  Staff  of  the  Russian 
Army  by  discharging  or  arresting  the  ablest  Generals, 
and  appointing  to  responsible  command  not  those 
officers  who  could  be  of  most  use  in  fighting  the  Germans, 


X  KERENSKY'S  SWAN  SONG  235 

but  such  as  knew  how  to  ingratiate  themselves  with  the 
Army  Committees. 

The  soldiery  had  been  converted  into  a  dangerous 
mob  of  embittered,  excited,  and,  moreover,  armed  men. 
The  prestige  of  the  officers  was  dead.  The  officers  made 
desperate  attempts  to  save  the  army.  In  spite  of  the 
constant  danger  which  threatened  them  from  the  soldiers, 
steeped  in  suspicion,  they  remained  at  their  posts  and 
tried  to  organise  themselves.  Some  days  before  the 
Bolshevist  coup  d'etat  the  Soviet  of  Officers'  Delegates 
in  Moscow  passed  a  resolution,  in  which  they  demanded 
protection  for  the  honour  and  lives  of  officers.  The 
officers  pointed  out  that  it  was  necessary  to  revise  the 
Declaration  of  Soldiers'  Rights,  to  stop  the  interference 
of  the  Committees  in  the  appointment  of  commanders, 
to  cease  political  persecution  (the  Committees  introduced 
regular  examination  of  officers,  to  find  out  whether  they 
were  adherents  of  Korniloff  or  not),  and,  finally,  to 
penalise  the  murder  of  officers.  This  last  demand  shows 
plainly  what  went  on  in  the  army  at  that  time.  The 
officers  and  a  part  of  the  soldiers  who  understood  all 
the  horror  of  the  situation  were  quite  powerless,  as  the 
Government  and  its  army  commissaries  did  not  venture 
to  struggle  against  the  storm-tossed  sea  of  soldiery. 
Kerensky  took  upon  himself  the  responsibility  of  the 
Russian  Army,  without  having  any  idea  of  what  an 
army  may,  in  general,  be  founded  on.  When  experi- 
enced and  honest  military  specialists  tried  to  explain  to 
him  the  secret  of  military  psychology  and  organisation, 
he  jealously  suspected  them  of  merely  trying  to  get 
power  into  their  own  hands  to  establish  a  Dictatorship. 
This  over-estimation  of  his  own  fitness  for  all  forms  of 
statemanship,  and  the  under-valuation  of  the  experience 
and  knowledge  of  others,  made  Kerensky  follow  a  path 
that  led  to  the  ruin  of  Russia,  and  also  to  his  own. 


236     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

The  resolution  of  the  Soviet  of  Officers  ended  in 
the  following  words,  now  seen  to  be  prophetic  :  "On 
the  day  when  the  officers  fall  in  the  struggle  against 
anarchy,  the  military  power  of  Russia  will  be  completely 
wrecked,  and,  together  with  it,  the  Russian  Empire. 
The  moment  has  arrived  when  silence  is  criminal." 

But  the  voices  of  the  people  who  thought  of  saving 
the  Russian  Empire  did  not  reach  the  minds  of  the 
leaders  of  the  mob,  not  to  speak  of  the  mob  itself. 
They  did  not  think  of  saving  Russia,  but  only  of  saving 
the  Revolution.  And  when  Vladimir  Burtzeff ,  the  old 
Socialist,  who  had  passed  half  his  Hfe  in  prisons, 
in  exile,  or  as  a  refugee  abroad,  who  was  famous  for 
having  unmasked  the  Tsarist  agent  'provocateur  Azeff — 
when  in  his  paper  Obstcheye  Dielo  (the  Common  Cause) 
he  raised  a  cry  that  the  country  was  in  danger,  his 
former  friends  on  the  Left  shrugged  their  shoulders  con- 
temptuously. Naturally,  for  did  not  Vladimir  Burtzeff 
demand  the  release  and  rehabilitation  of  Kornilofi,  whom 
Revolutionary  Democracy  had  branded  as  an  enemy  of 
the  people  ?  Burtzeff  said  that  it  was  "  necessary  to 
apply  to  Kaledin,  to  place  him  and  Korniloff  in  power. 
To  appeal  to  the  whole  population  of  Russia,  as  was 
done  in  1613,  and  to  assemble  all,  all,  all  together  under 
one  banner  to  save  the  country." 

But  where  was  that  strong  arm  which  could  do  this, 
when  the  national  flag  was  torn  to  rags  and  thrown  in 
the  mud,  and  the  red  flag  that  replaced  it  was  torn  by 
the  Socialists  themselves  from  each  other's  hands,  when 
its  red  had  ceased  to  be  a  symbol  of  the  crimson  dawn 
and  had  become  the  ominous  symbol  of  bloody  civil 
war? 

The  spectre  of  civil  war  hovered  over  Russia.  Part 
of  the  Socialists  openly  called  for  armed  insurrection. 
In  Moscow  preparations  were  being  made  for  a  general 


KERENSKY'S  SWAN  SONG  237 

strike  of  municipal  employees,  who  wanted  to  fight  the 
Provisional  Government  with  the  same  weapons  they 
had  used  against  Tsarism,  i.e.  by  stopping  the  trams, 
railways,  and,  if  necessary,  by  cutting  ofi  the  water 
and  electric  light.  Socialists  of  the  Centre  went  the 
rounds  of  the  works  and  barracks,  trjring  to  bring  the 
men  to  their  senses,  but  they  met  with  a  very  unfriendly 
reception.  Bolshevist  speeches  were  more  acceptable  to 
the  masses.  The  Government  took  no  measures  at  all, 
for  what  kind  of  serious  measure  was  the  order  for 
Lenin's  arrest,  given  by  the  Minister  of  Justice,  or  the 
order  to  close  Burtzeif 's  paper,  and  even  sequestrate  the 
printing-ofi&ce  (evidently  for  the  too  hostile  attacks  on 
Kerensky  and  the  passionate  defence  of  Komiloi!).  The 
papers  published  soothing  communiques,  saying  that  the 
necessary  measures  had  been  taken  against  the  possi- 
bility of  a  Bolshevist  attempt.  Many  believed  this. 
Indeed,  at  that  time  very  few  people  clearly  understood 
the  extent  of  the  Bolshevist  danger.  The  Government 
itself  was  foremost  in  this  non-comprehension.  All  its 
actions  and  declarations  bear  the  stamp  of  a  wonderful, 
unpardonable,  and  thoughtless  self-assurance.  In  answer 
to  the  British  Ambassador's  inquiry  as  to  whether 
the  Provisional  Government  was  aware  of  the  military 
preparations  of  the  Bolsheviks,  Kerensky  replied  that  it 
was,  and  had  every  means  at  its  disposal  to  overcome 
them  finally.  In  reality  there  was  nothing  of  the  kind. 
In  the  Marie  Palace,  where  the  Council  of  the  Republic 
held  its  meetings,  and  in  the  Winter  Palace,  where 
Kerensky  lived  and  the  members  of  the  Government 
used  to  assemble,  there  were  only  floods  of  oratory. 
There  was  not  even  a  plan  of  campaign.  To  make  up 
for  this,  in  the  Smolny  Institute,  where  the  Petrograd 
Soviet  was  sitting,  with  Trotsky  as  leader,  not  only  had 
a  plan  of  campaign  been  drawn  up,  but  it  was  being  acted 


238     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

upon.  The  object  of  the  Bolsheviks  was  to  seize  power 
by  force  of  arms,  and  therefore  they,  first  of  all,  formed 
a  Military  Revolutionary  Committee,  attached  to  the 
Petrograd  Soviet.  On  the  3rd  of  November  the  autho- 
rity of  this  committee  was  acknowledged  by  the  Petro- 
grad garrison  and  fortress.  The  very  next  night  the 
representatives  of  the  committee  came  to  the  Head- 
quarters of  the  Petrograd  District,  for  the  purpose  of 
assuming  control  over  them.  Colonel  Polkovnikoff,  the 
Chief  of  the  District,  refused  to  acknowledge  their 
authority.  Then  the  representatives  of  the  garrisons 
assembled  in  the  Smolny  Institute  and  sent  telephono- 
grams,  saying  that  the  "  Headquarters  had  become  the 
tool  of  counter-revolutionary  forces.  No  garrison  orders 
were  to  be  fulfilled,  unless  signed  by  the  Military  Re- 
volutionary Committee.  The  Revolution  is  in  danger. 
Long  live  the  Revolutionary  Garrison."  Kerensky  was 
still  Premier,  but  the  Soviet  had  already  appointed 
commissaries  to  all  the  military  units,  and  to  aU  especi- 
ally important  points  in  Petrograd,  and  informed  the 
population  of  these  appointments,  announcing  that  the 
persons  of  the  commissaries  were  inviolable,  and  that 
*'  any  opposition  offered  to  the  commissaries  would  be 
regarded  as  opposition  to  the  Soviet."  The  Head- 
quarters of  the  District,  instead  of  arresting  the  ring- 
leaders and  drawing  up  its  forces  for  the  defence  of  the 
members  of  the  Government  and  Government  institu- 
tions, issued  a  counter-proclamation.  In  the  Winter 
Palace  it  was  resolved  to  "  regard  the  formation  of  the 
Military  Revolutionary  Committee  as  a  criminal  act, 
aggravated  by  its  being  committed  in  the  theatre  of 
war." 

On  the  6th  of  November,  at  a  sitting  of  the  Council 
of  the  Republic,  Kerensky  made  a  detailed  report  on 
the  state  of  affairs,  and  on  the  measures  which  the 


KERENSKY'S  SWAN  SONG  239 

Government  intended  to  take.  In  a  parliamentary 
country  his  action  would  have  been  quite  proper,  but 
it  produces  an  embarrassing,  a  tragi-comical  impression 
if  one  remembers  that  at  that  time  there  was  neither 
parliament  nor  Government  authority  in  Russia,  that 
while  he  was  speaking  the  second  Revolution,  so  fatal 
to  the  country,  was  taking  place. 

This  was  Kerensky's  last  overt,  responsible,  political 
act.  And  it  was  the  last  day  of  the  authority  exercised 
by  the  Revolutionary  Democracy,  as  whose  favourite 
Kerensky  had  begun  his  career  as  statesman.  This  is 
how  he  defined  his  view  of  the  problems  which  life  had 
so  tragically  set  before  Russia. 

"  Of  late,  the  nearer  the  time  approaches  for  the 
convening  of  the  Constituent  Assembly,  which  will  for 
ever  establish  in  Russia  a  free  Democracy,  obtained  by 
the  great  Russian  Revolution  " — ^thus  began  Kerensky's 
speech — "  the  more  impudent  and  brazen  become  the 
attempts  of  the  two  wings  of  Russian  society  to  prevent 
and  destroy  the  possibility  of  convening  the  Constituent 
Assembly."  The  Government  considers  it  a  duty  to 
protect  the  liberty  of  every  person,  and  "  therefore 
remains  apparently  indifferent,  in  spite  of  exceedingly 
violent  attacks." 

The  extreme  Right  demands  that  the  Government 
should  be  replaced  by  a  Dictatorship  (voices  from  the 
Right  benches  correct  him  :  "  Strong  Government !  " 
and  then  asked  him  where  did  these  reactionary  demands 
come  from?).  Kerensky  could  only  name  two  news- 
papers, of  no  political  importance  whatever,  viz.  the 
Novaia  Rus  (New  Russia)  and  Zhivoye  Slovo  (Living 
Word),  and  Burtzeff's  Obstcheye  Delo  (The  Common 
Cause).  He  placed  them  on  a  level  with  the  Bol- 
shevist papers  Soldat  and  Rabotchi  Put  (The  Work- 
man's Way),  which  published  direct  calls  to  insurrection. 


240     PROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       oh. 

and  gave  their  support  to  overt  preparations  for  the 
latter. 

Kerensky  quoted  extracts  from  Lenin's  article, 
"Letters  to  Comrades,"  in  the  Rabotchi  Put,  where 
"  this  State  criminal  Lenin  called  upon  the  Petrograd 
proletariat  and  troops  to  repeat  the  experiment  of  the 
1 6th-l  8th  July. ' '  One  of  Lenin's  articles  concluded  with 
the  following  ironical  words  :  "  What  are  you  going  to 
wait  for  ?  For  a  miracle  ?  Are  you  going  to  wait  for 
the  Constituent  Assembly  ?  Wait  and  starve !  Ker- 
ensky has  promised  you  to  convene  the  Constituent 
Assembly !  " 

At  political  meetings  the  audience  was  also  incited 
to  open  rebellion.  The  campaign  was  carried  on  princi- 
pally by  Bronstein-Trotsky.  ''  But,"  says  Kerensky,  "  I 
must  point  out  an  exceedingly  important  thing,  namely, 
the  very  definite,  obvious,  and  inseparable  connection 
between  the  attacks  made  by  both  wings."  The  articles 
in  the  Rabotchi  Put  and  the  Soldat  are  similar  in  style  and 
turns  of  phrases  with  those  in  Novaia  Rus. 

Thus  Kerensky  placed  on  the  same  level  the  Bol- 
sheviks, strong  in  their  nearness  to  the  masses,  and  the 
small  group  of  people,  without  either  political  power  or 
party  to  back  them,  who  wrote  for  the  Novaia  Rus. 
Even  on  the  eve  of  ruin,  when  the  armed  Bolsheviks 
were  already  advancing  against  him  from  the  left, 
Kerensky  was  still  timidly  expecting  an  attack  from 
the  right. 

He  made  a  further  quotation  from  Lenin's  article : 
"  Having  scores  of  newspapers,  freedom  of  meetings, 
having  a  majority  in  the  Soviet,  we — the  international 
proletariat  who  hold  the  best  position  in  the  world — 
can  we  refuse  to  support  the  German  revolutionaries 
and  insurgent  organisations  ?  "  Kerensky  begged  his 
audience  to  notice :  "  It  is  of  great  importance  to  me 


X  KERENSKY^S  SWAN  SONG  241 

that  this  should  be  noticed,  that  the  organisers  of  the 
insurrection  themselves  acknowledge  that  the  political 
conditions  for  the  free  activity  of  all  parties  are  at 
present  most  advanced  in  Russia,  under  the  present 
Provisional  Government."  Those  who  organise  an  in- 
surrection in  such  a  free  country  "  are  not  assisting  the 
proletariat  of  Germany,  but  are  aiding  the  ruling  classes 
of  Germany,  are  opening  the  front  of  the  Russian  State 
to  the  mailed  fist  of  the  Kaiser  and  his  friends.  The 
action  of  the  party  which  is  doing  this  either  con- 
sciously or  unconsciously  I  declare  to  be  treachery 
and  treason  to  the  Russian  State."  Kerensky  reminds 
them  that  there  are  only  three  weeks  left  to  the  elections 
to  the  Constituent  Assembly.  The  Government  is  pre- 
paring to  hand  over  the  land  to  the  Land  Committees 
"  temporarily,  until  the  Constituent  Assembly."  The 
Government  is  sending  delegates  to  the  Paris  Conference, 
in  order  to  "  draw  the  attention  of  the  Allies  to  the 
question  of  the  necessity  for  a  decided  and  accurate 
definition  of  the  aims  and  objects  of  the  war,  and  ques- 
tions in  regard  to  the  measures  for  bringing  the  war  to 
an  end,  i.e.  the  question  of  peace." 

Having  enumerated  all  these  proposals  of  the 
Government,  Kerensky  returns  to  the  Bolsheviks. 
"  They  have  already  begun  to  carry  out  the  insurrection, 
they  have  sent  out  orders  to  the  troops  not  to  obey  the 
orders  from  Headquarters.  The  military  authorities 
consider  this  action  of  the  Revolutionary  Headquarters 
as  clearly  criminal,  and  have  demanded  that  this  order 
should  be  annulled  without  any  delay.  But  even  here, 
though  there  was  every  reason  to  take  immediate, 
decisive,  and  energetic  measures,  the  military  authori- 
ties, at  my  instigation,  considered  it  necessary  first  to 
give  the  men  an  opportunity  of  becoming  aware  of 
their  conscious  or  unconscious  mistake  (cries  from  the 

R 


242     FEOM  LIBEETY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

Eight :  '  That  is  what's  wrong  !  ')  and  to  give  time  for 
this  mistake — if  it  be  a  mistake — to  be  rectified  by 
them.  We  had  to  do  this  for  another  reason  also, 
namely,  because  during  the  first  twenty-four  hours 
after  this  order  had  been  issued,  no  practical  conse- 
quences resulting  therefrom  were  observed  among  the 
troops.  In  general,  I  prefer  that  the  authorities  should 
act  more  slowly,  but,  to  make  up  for  that,  more  surely, 
and,  when  requisite,  more  resolutely." 

The  Prime  Minister  then  acknowledged  that  his 
expectations  of  the  Bolsheviks  showing  hearty  repent- 
ance were  not  justified.  "  At  three  o'clock  in  the 
morning  an  announcement  was  made  to  us  (he  did  not 
state  by  whom)  that  the  ultimatum  of  the  military 
authorities  had  been  accepted.  Thus  at  3  a.m.  the 
organisers  of  the  insurrection  had  been  obliged  to 
declare  formally  that  they  had  committed  an  unlawful 
act,  which  they  now  repudiated  (Milyukofi,  from  his 
seat :  '  That  is  original !  ').  But — as  I  had  expected, 
and  was  sure,  from  the  whole  preceding  tactics  of  these 
men — this  was  a  case  of  their  usual  delay  and  deliberate 
deceit  (voices  from  the  Eight :  '  At  last  you  have 
learned  that  much  ! ').  At  the  present  time  all  periods 
of  grace  have  expired,  and  still  we  do  not  see  the  declara- 
tion which  should  have  been  made  in  the  regiments. 
On  the  contrary,  there  has  been  an  unauthorised 
distribution  of  cartridges  and  arms,  and  likewise  the 
troops  have  been  called  out  twice  to  the  assistance  of 
these  Eevolutionary  Headquarters.  Thus,  I  am  obliged 
to  inform  the  Provisional  Government  that  the  actual 
attitude  of  a  certain  part  of  the  population  is  that  of 
open  insurrection  (cries  from  the  Eight :  '  It  has  come ! '). 
That  is  from  the  legal  point  of  view,  and  I  propose 
that  a  corresponding  judicial  investigation  should  be 
immediately  begun  (noise  from  the  Left).     It  is  like- 


t  KERENSKY'S  SWAN  SONG  243 

wise  proposed  to  make  the  necessary  arrests  (protests 
from  the  Left).  Yes,  yes !  Listen !  Because  at  the 
present  time,  when  the  State  is  being  ruined  by  treason, 
whether  conscious  or  unconscious,  the  Provisional 
Government,  myself  included,  would  rather  be  killed 
and  destroyed  than  betray  the  life,  the  honour,  and 
independence  of  the  State."  These  words  raised  a 
storm  of  applause  in  the  whole  meeting,  with  the 
exception  of  the  Left  group.  Kerensky  continued : 
**  The  Provisional  Government  may  be  reproached  for 
its  weakness  and  excessive  patience,  but  at  any  rate 
no  one  has  the  right  to  say  that  the  Provisional  Govern- 
ment, while  I  have  been  at  its  head,  aye,  and  even 
before,  has  had  recourse  to  any  measures  of  coercion 
before  immediate  danger  and  ruin  threatened  the 
State."  He  reminded  his  auditors  that  the  Govern- 
ment considered  it  their  duty  to  strengthen  the  cause 
of  freedom,  that  they  "  never  infringed  the  complete 
freedom  in  the  enjoyment  of  political  rights  by  the 
citizens  of  the  Russian  State."  This  gives  him  the  right 
"  to  demand  that  the  country  should  support  our 
decisive  measures."  This  support  had  already  been 
promised  him  from  the  front.  The  general  Army 
Committees  at  Headquarters  promised  to  support  the 
authorities  in  their  struggle  against  the  destroyers  of  the 
State,  and  declared  that  the  army  "  demands  that  the 
Provisional  Government,  in  agreement  with  the  Council 
of  the  Republic  and  the  All-Russian  Central  Committee 
of  the  Soviets,  should  immediately  and  universally  stop 
the  wild  military  pogroms  in  towns  and  villages,  and 
calls  upon  it  to  suppress  all  rioting  resolutely  and 
energetically." 

No  sooner  had  Kerensky  read  this  resolution  than 
the  Minister,  A.  Konovaloff,  handed  him  some  kind  of 
document.    This  was  an  Order  of  the  Military  Revolu- 


244     PROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       en. 

tionary  Committee  to  the  effect  that  the  Petrograd 
Soviet  was  in  danger,  that  the  troops  must  prepare  for 
action,  and  wait  for  orders.  The  Order  bore  two 
signatures — ^Podvoisky  and  Antonoff. 

As  a  lawyer,  Kerensky  first  of  all  estimated  this 
document  from  a  criminal  point  of  view,  and  only  then 
drew  his  political  conclusions  from  it.  He  read  it  aloud 
and  said:  "  So,  at  the  present  time,  the  state  of 
affairs  in  the  capital  is  one  which  the  law  and  the 
judicial  authorities  term  a  state  of  insurrection.  It  is 
an  attempt  to  raise  the  rabble  against  the  existing 
order,  to  prevent  the  Constituent  Assembly  being 
convened,  and  to  open  out  the  front  to  the  serried 
ranks  of  the  mailed  fist  of  the  Kaiser." 

The  word  "  rabble "  raised  a  storm  of  protest 
from  the  Left,  but  Kerensky  repeated  it :  '*  I  say  it 
deliberately — ^rabble — because  the  whole  of  intelligent 
Democracy  and  its  Central  Executive  Committee,  all 
army  organisations,  all  that  free  Russia  is  proud  of, 
and  should  be  proud  of — ^the  reason,  the  conscience, 
and  honour  of  the  great  Russian  Democracy — all 
protest  against  this." 

He  concluded  his  speech  with  the  demand  that  the 
Council  should  support  the  Government. 

This  was  Kerensky's  swan  song.  Into  it  he  put  all 
his  wisdom,  as  a  statesman,  a  Premier,  and  Commander- 
in-Chief,  or  rather,  he  betrayed  all  his  blindness. 

One  great  excuse  for  him  is  that  he  was  not  the 
only  one  who  did  not  understand  the  interdependence 
of  political  forces  and  the  psychology  of  the  masses. 
At  the  same  sitting  another  member  of  the  Cabinet, 
Gvozdeff,  Minister  of  Labour  and  Social-Democrat, 
declared :  "I  have  been  a  workman  for  twenty  years, 
and  I  think  I  have  some  right  to  speak  in  the  name  of 
Revolutionary  Democracy.    I  assert  that  the  Petrograd 


X  KERENSKY'S  SWAN  SONG  245 

workmen  are  incapable  of  organising  a  pogrom,  and  an 
insurrection  leads  to  nothing  else.  In  what  has  been 
said  here,  to  wit,  that  the  Government  does  not  possess 
the  confidence  of  the  people  (this  was  said  by  Kamkoff, 
the  Social-Revolutionary),  I  see  a  libel  on  the  intelli- 
gence of  the  people.  I  have  never  curried  favour  with 
any  one.  I  only  speak  of  what  is  true,  and  am  con- 
vinced that  intelligent  workmen  will  take  no  part  in 
the  present  movement."  Gvozdeif  demands  that  the 
question  should  be  put  squarely :  ''  Either  you  are 
with  Trotsky,  or  against  him." 

But  he  did  not  manage  to  get  this  clearly  stated, 
neither  by  his  comrades  the  Social -Democrats,  nor 
the  Social  -  Revolutionaries.  The  Left  motion  is  so 
characteristic  that  I  quote  it  in  extenso,  the  more 
so  as  it  was  the  last  political  act  of  Revolutionary 
Democracy. 

The  attempt  at  insurrection,  for  which  preparations  have 
lately  been  made,  and  which  has  for  its  object  the  seizure  of 
power,  threatens  to  cause  civil  war,  creates  conditions  favourable 
to  pogroms  and  the  mobiUsation  of  Black-gang  counter-revolu- 
tionary forces,  and  will  inevitably  lead  to  the  Constituent 
Assembly  not  being  convened,  to  a  new  military  catastrophe 
and  the  fall  of  the  Revolution,  accompanied  by  economic  paralysis 
and  the  complete  ruin  of  the  country.  The  ground  for  the  success 
of  this  agitation  has  been  prepared  not  only  by  the  objective 
conditions  of  war  and  disorganisation,  but  likewise  by  the  delay 
in  carrying  out  urgent  measures,  and  therefore  it  is  first  of  all 
necessary  that  a  decree  should  immediately  be  passed  for  the 
transference  of  the  land  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Land  Com- 
mittees, and  that  decisive  action  be  taken  in  our  foreign  policy, 
with  a  proposal  to  the  Allies  to  announce  the  conditions  on  which 
peace  might  be  concluded,  and  to  start  peace  negotiations.  In 
order  to  fight  against  active  outbursts  of  anarchy  and  pogroms 
it  is  necessary  to  take  immediate  measures  to  liquidate  them, 
and  for  this  purpose  a  Committee  of  Public  Safety  should 
be  formed  in  Petrograd,  consisting  of  representatives  of  the 


246     FEOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       oh. 

mmiicipal  corporation  and  of  Revolutionary-Democratic  institu- 
tions, acting  in  concert  with  the  Provisional  Government. 

In  tHs  Left  motion  there  was  no  repudiation  of 
Trotsky,  but  only  an  indirect  condemnation  of  the 
Bolsheviks,  and  the  liquidation  of  the  insurrection  was 
to  be  entrusted,  not  to  the  Government,  but  to  a  new 
committee,  which  was  yet  to  be  formed. 

The  second  motion  was  proposed  by  the  Cadets, 
Co-operators,  and  the  Right  Centre  in  general. 

The  Provisional  Council  of  the  Russian  Republic,  having 
heard  the  coromunication  of  the  Prime  Minister,  declares  that 
in  the  struggle  against  the  traitors  to  the  country  and  the  cause 
of  the  Revolution,  who,  before  the  face  of  the  enemy,  and  on 
the  eve  of  the  Constituent  Assembly,  have  had  recourse  to  the 
organisation  of  open  rebellion  in  the  capital,  the  Council  will 
give  its  full  support  to  the  Government,  and  demands  that  the 
most  resolute  measures  be  taken  for  the  suppression  of  the 
rebellion. 

The  Cossacks  likewise  seconded  this  motion.  But, 
before  voting,  they  made  a  separate  declaration,  full 
of  harsh  accusations  both  against  "  all  open  and  secret 
Zimmerwaldists,  those  criminals  and  traitors,"  and 
against  the  Government. 

The  Provisional  Government,  having  proved  its  failure  to 
act  in  regard  to  the  events  of  the  3rd-5th  of  July,  and  shown 
its  utter  weakness  of  authority  after  these  events,  and  inaction 
in  the  face  of  events  that  are  now  about  to  take  place,  is  thereby 
guilty  of  collusion  with  the  Bolsheviks.  In  view  of  the  aforesaid, 
and  not  wishing  to  shed  Cossack  blood,  as  was  the  case  on  the 
3rd-5th  of  July,  and  not  being  assured  that  the  Provisional 
Government  has  really  decided  to  finish  with  the  Bolshevist 
movement  and  to  free  its  policy  from  the  influence  of  the  Zimmer- 
waldists, the  Cossack  Section  announces  that  the  Cossacks  are 
ready  to  do  their  duty  to  their  country  and  to  Liberty,  but 
demand  guarantees  from  the  Government  that  no  favour  will  be 
shown  to  the  Bolsheviks. 


KERENSKY'S  SWAN  SONG  247 

This  sounded  like  a  threat,  as  all  were  aware  that 
Kerensky  reckoned  very  much  on  the  Cossack  forces, 
which  nevertheless  did  not  prevent  him  a  few  days 
before  the  rebellion  from  prohibiting  an  intended 
Cossack  church  procession.  The  Cossacks  paid  no 
attention  to  the  prohibition,  but  the  irritation  among 
them  was  growing,  and  Kerensky  paid  dearly  for  it. 

When  the  motions  were  put  to  the  vote,  the  Socialist 
motion  was  supported  by  123  votes,  while  the  Cadets 
only  got  102,  twenty-six  members  having  abstained 
from  voting.  Kerensky  did  not  retain  the  confidence 
of  the  majority.    Even  this  stake  he  lost. 

Among  those  who  had  abstained  from  voting  were 
the  Populist  Socialists,  some  of  the  Co-operators,  Vera 
Figner,  and  N.  Chaikovsky.  At  that  decisive  moment 
these  old  revolutionaries  could  not  muster  up  their 
courage  to  take  either  one  side  or  another  definitely, 
but  silently  stepped  aside. 

While  the  Council  of  the  Republic  was  engrossed  in 
passing  motions,  firing  had  already  commenced  in  the 
streets,  and  ominous  motor-cars  with  machine-guns 
and  rifles  had  begun  to  appear. 


CHAPTER  XI 

THE   NOVEMBER  REVOLUTION 

The  General  Staff  and  the  Winter  Palace — ^Arrest  of  members  of  the 
Provisional  Grovemment — ^Adventure  or  coup  d'itat  ? — No  defenders 
— ^Kerensky  disappears — ^The  Petrograd  Mmiicipal  Council  as  the 
centre  of  opposition — ^The  Mihtary  Cadets — ^The  Moscow  fighting — 
Strike  of  officials — Seizure  of  the  State  Bank — ^tJnion  of  Unions — 
Impotence  of  the  intelligentsia- 

The  Bolslieviks  opened  military  operations  on  the  6tli 
of  November.  On  the  night  of  the  6-7th,  the  Military- 
Revolutionary  Committee  occupied  the  railway  stations. 
The  orders  of  the  district  staff  were  with  great  difficulty 
transmitted,  as  the  exchanges  were  seized  by  Bolshevist 
soldiers,  and  even  when  transmitted  were  not  obeyed. 
The  cruisers  Aurora  and  Zaria  Svohody  with  two 
torpedo-boats  had  come  up  from  Cronstadt.  Several 
Bolsheviks  still  remaining  in  prison  were  liberated  by 
order  of  the  Military  Revolutionary  Committee.  The 
Governor  of  the  prison  had  some  doubts  as  to  whether 
he  should  obey  the  order,  but  the  soldiers  of  the  Volynsky 
Regiment,  who  were  on  guard,  rang  up  their  regimental 
committee  and  received  the  command  to  obey  the 
Military  Revolutionary  Committee. 

The  revolt,  of  which  the  true  dimensions  were 
realised  by  very  few,^  was  beginning  to  develop  into  an 
actual  revolution. 

^  A.  Shingarefif,  a  clever  and  observant  man,  wrote  in  the  Rusakija 
Viedomoaty,  on  the  6th  November :  "  Will  the  Bolsheviks  come  out  or  not  ? 
Personally,  I  believe  that  the  whole  thing  will  be  hmited  to  empty  rhodomontade 
and  pohtical  blackmailing  by  cowardly  rioters  and  obscure  demagogues." 

248 


THE  NOVEMBER  REVOLUTION  249 

The  Bolsheviks  were  distributing  to  these  workmen 
arms  which  had  not  been  confiscated  after  the  July 
revolt.  A  Red  Guard,  advocated  long  ago  by  the  very 
first  Executive  Committee,  was  being  organised.  On 
the  7th  November,  Petrograd  was  already  in  the  hands 
of  the  rebels.  In  the  afternoon  soldiers  and  sailors 
surrounded  the  Marie  Palace ;  armoured  cars  drove 
up.  An  ofiicer  transmitted  the  order  of  the  Military 
Revolutionary  Committee  that  the  members  of  the 
Council  of  the  Republic  should  quit  the  Palace.  The 
President  of  the  Council  of  the  Republic,  Avksentieff, 
communicated  the  order  to  the  assembled  members. 
There  were  very  few  of  them — ^barely  a  hundred  (out 
of  800)— yet  even  here  was  discord.  The  Right  wing, 
headed  by  the  Cadets,  was  of  opinion  that  they  ought 
not  to  submit  to  the  demand,  but  the  majority  decided 
to  withdraw  under  protest,  and  yield  to  force. 

Upon  the  same  day  the  Military  Revolutionary 
Conmiittee  declared  in  a  special  proclamation  : 

The  Provisional  Government  is  deposed.  All  State  power 
has  passed  into  the  hands  of  the  Petrograd  Soviet  of  Work- 
men's and  Soldiers'  Deputies,  i.e.  to  a  MiUtary  Revolutionary 
Committee  placed  at  the  head  of  the  Petrograd  garrison  and  pro- 
letariat. The  goal  for  which  the  people  fought,  the  immediate 
proposal  of  a  democratic  peace,  the  aboUtion  of  private  landed 
property.  Labour  control  of  industry,  the  establishment  of  a 
Soviet  Government — all  this  is  guaranteed. 

Thus  seven  months  after  his  arrival  in  Russia  did 
Lenin  once  again  repeat  his  long-standing  programme  ; 
but  it  was  no  longer  the  abstract  speech  of  a 
propagandist.  It  was  the  programme  of  a  Government 
in  formation.  Only  a  small  band  of  men,  bearing 
the  sonorous  and  dangerous  title  of  Ministers  of  the 
Provisional  Government,  stood  between  him  and  power. 
But  the  man  who  had  been  able  to  enlist  the  sympathies 


250     FKOM  LIBEKTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

of  the  workers  and  soldier  masses  found  no  difficulty  in 
despatching  them  once  for  all. 

In  the  afternoon  of  the  7th  of  November,  Kerensky, 
with  his  assistant  Kuzminsky,  left  Petrograd  in  a  motor- 
car, as  was  generally  thought  for  the  front.^  KonovalofE 
remained  as  his  substitute,  while  N.  M.  Kishkin  was 
invested  "  with  extraordinary  power  for  re-establishing 
order  in  the  capital."  In  other  words,  he  was  made 
Dictator.  But  he  lacked  the  main  attribute  of  a  dictator 
— mi]itfl.ry  force.  A  company  of  Cadets  from  the 
artillery  school  marched  to  the  Winter  Palace  and 
went  away  again.  Later  came  a  small  detachment  of 
Cadets  from  other  military  schools.  A  company  of 
136  women-soldiers  of  the  Women's  Battalion  was  also 
quartered  in  the  Palace.  None  of  the  other  mihtary 
units  came  to  defend  the  Government. 

P.  Arzubieff  gives  the  following  narrative  of  what 
was  going  on  at  the  Staff  and  in  the  Winter  Palace 
during  the  night  of  6-7th  November.  This  talented 
and  trustworthy  journalist  had  spent  a  long  time  at 
the  front,  and  had  known  the  meaning  of  war,  had 
known  the  Russian  Army  in  the  days  of  its  brave 
fighting.  As  a  correspondent  he  had  accompanied 
Kerensky  in  his  visits  to  the  front,  and  was  a  witness 
of  his  frantic  efforts  to  substitute  eloquence  for  com- 
pulsion. Arzubieff's  career  as  a  miUtary  correspondent 
ended  with  the  last  hours  of  the  old  Russian  Army's 
existence. 

According  to  Arzubieff,  on  the  eve  of  the  rising  the 
Intelligence  Department  of  the  General  Staff  had  been 
receiving  the  most  contradictory  reports.     Some  said 

*  I  am  obliged  to  compile  the  narrative  of  the  first  days  of  the  coup  d*etat 
from  brief  newspaper  extracts  prepared  while  I  was  still  in  Russia.  Hence 
mistakes^'are  possible.  I  apologize  beforehand  to  my  readers,  as  I  have 
nothing  else  to  go  upon,  and  I  was  not  an  eye-witness  of  these  events.  I 
returned  to  Petrograd  from  the  Caucasus  four  days  after  the  cotip  d'itat. 


XI  THE  NOVEMBER  REVOLUTION  251 

that  Government  troops  formed  an  overwhelming 
majority.  Those  who  were  more  observant  pointed 
out  that  there  was  unrest  in  the  barracks,  that  various 
obscure  persons  were  persuading  the  soldiers  that  if 
they  held  aloof  and  did  not  come  out  to  fight  against 
the  Ministers  they  would  suffer  for  it  later  on. 

'*  Next  day  (it  was  the  7th  of  November,  the  day  of 
Kerensky's  departure)  the  magic  words  flew  throughout 
'  bourgeois  '  Petrograd  :   '  It  has  come.' 

"  It  was  the  beginning  of  that  long-expected  some- 
thing, whose  coming  was  awaited  with  fear  or  hope  by 
the  inmates  of  Petrograd,  by  soldiers,  by  workmen  in  the 
factories,  by  women  in  the  queues,  by  all,  in  fact,  with 
the  exception  of  the  plenipotentiary  leaders  of  the 
Revolutionary  Democracy  and  the  members  of  the 
Provisional  Government. 

"Neither  of  them  apparently  believed  in  theBolshevist 
peril,  and  now  that  it  had  at  last  burst  upon  them  they 
completely  lost  their  heads.  Bolshevist  patrols  occupied 
the  State  Bank  and  the  Telephone  Exchange.  The 
Peter  and  Paul  Fortress  was  also  in  their  hands.  The 
Council  of  the  Republic  was  dispersed.  Patrols  of  the 
Pavlovsky  Regiment  appeared  in  the  afternoon  upon 
the  Nevsky  Prospect  and  began  to  verify  the  officers' 
passports. 

"  A  feeling  of  unconcealed  fear  and  the  conscious- 
ness of  pitiful  helplessness  pervaded  the  Intelligence 
Department.  .  .  . 

"  I  resolved  to  go  to  the  Winter  Palace.  Had  not 
Kerensky,  in  the  name  of  the  Provisional  Government, 
declared  their  decision  to  die  at  their  post.  .  .  . 

"  The  Winter  Palace  was  empty.  Scared  couriers 
huddled  together  in  comers,  fearfully  awaiting  the 
coming  of  new  masters.  Journalists,  the  chorus  of  all 
contemporary  historical  tragedies,  were  chatting  volubly 


252     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

in  one  of  the  apartments.  A  short  distance  away,  in 
the  large  hall,  Ministers  roamed  about  in  solitary  state. 

"No  one  paid  any  attention  to  the  Ministers,  no 
one  came  to  take  their  orders.  Every  one  abandoned 
them  in  the  moment  of  danger,  just  as  eight  months 
before  every  one  had  abandoned  Nicholas  II.  Had 
the  troops  of  the  Military  Revolutionary  Committee 
appeared  at  once,  they  might  have  arrested  the  entire 
united  Cabinet  without  firing  a  single  shot. 

"Delegates  of  the  14th  Don  Cossack  Regiment 
appeared  at  last.  Apparently  this  regiment  could  be 
relied  upon.  Therefore  the  Government  could  dispose 
of  the  Cadets,  the  women's  shock  battalion,  and  several 
hundreds  of  Cossacks.  They  also  possessed  six  guns, 
and  two  or  three  armoured  cars  also  remained.  Not  a 
bad  beginning.  The  suppression  of  the  revolt  of  the 
17th  July  had  been  undertaken  with,  perhaps,  fewer 
forces." 

But  some  kind  of  authority  for  giving  orders  was 
needed  even  over  six  guns.  Yet  upon  that  fatal  day 
the  attentive  observer  could  trace  no  authority  either 
in  the  Palace  or  at  the  Staff,  whither  he  again  retraced 
his  steps.  N.  Kishkin,  seeing  the  inactivity  of  the 
Military  Authorities,  dismissed  a  colonel  and  at  once 
named  General  Bagratuny  as  his  successor. 

"Bagratuny  never  dreamed  of  giving  orders  or  of 
organising  a  defence  were  it  only  with  the  troops  at 
his  disposal.  What  was  the  meaning  of  it  ?  Was  it  a 
premeditated  strike  or  a  paralysis  of  will  to  act  in  the 
face  of  danger  ?  It  was  the  fatal  consequence  of  the 
system  established  in  the  army  by  Kerensky,  which 
resulted  in  all  posts  of  the  higher  command  being 
occupied  by  men  of  weak  character,  devoid  of  firm 
principles  and  moral  courage,  ready  to  bow  down  to 
force  whatever  its  origin.     Yet  surely  we  had  strong 


XI  THE  NOVEMBER  REVOLUTION  253 

men  among  our  soldiers,  men  of  another  caste,  whose 
character  had  been  steeled  amid  the  hardships  of  war 
and  in  the  stern  school  of  former  military  service  ! 
Where  were  they  ? 

"One  of  these  men  arrived  at  the  Staff.  It  was 
General  Alexeieff.  Officers,  privates,  even  the  brazen 
Staff  clerks,  stood  at  attention  before  him.  For  one 
lightning  moment  the  fascination  of  glory  and  authority, 
the  old  half -forgotten  hypnotism  of  military  discipline, 
pervaded  that  distracted,  timid  crowd.  Alexeieff 
passed  rapidly  into  Kishkin's  apartment,  stayed  there 
for  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  went  out  again,  addressed  a 
few  kindly,  encouraging  words  to  the  officers  who 
clustered  round  him,  and  walked  downstairs. 

"I  do  not  know  the  reason  of  Alexeieff 's  visit. 
Forgetting  all  former  offences,  deceits  and  injustice, 
did  he  wish  to  offer  his  assistance  to  the  perishing 
Government  ?  If  such  was  the  case  his  offer  was 
apparently  rejected,  and  the  man  who  alone  might 
perhaps  have  saved  a  cause  obviously  doomed  to 
perdition,  once  more  departed  rejected  and  misunder- 
stood. His  departure  served  as  a  signal  for  a  general 
stampede.  Officers  who  had  presented  themselves  at 
the  Staff  of  their  own  free  will,  dispersed.  Clerks 
began  to  disappear,  and  so  did  even  some  of  the  officers 
occupying  permanent  posts  at  the  Staff.  The  vast 
reception-rooms  became  empty. 

"  Four  armoured  cars  drove  up  to  the  Palace 
Square.  (The  Staff  Headquarters  occupied  one  side  of 
it,  and  the  Winter  Palace  the  other.)  These  were 
already  Bolshevist  armoured  cars.  The  enemy  was 
preparing  for  assault,  yet  no  one  seemed  to  be  thinking 
of  defence.  Not  a  shot  was  fired.  After  standing  for 
a  while  before  the  Palace,  the  armoured  cars  turned 
back." 


254     FEOM  LIBEETY  TO  BEEST-LITOVSK       oh. 

In  one  of  the  streets  leading  to  the  Palace,  ArzubiefE 
overheard  a  conversation  between  a  small  platoon  of  a 
shock  battalion,  which  defended  the  Government,  and 
two  soldiers  delegated  from  the  fortress  with  an 
ultimatum  to  the  Ministers  to  surrender  within  a  space 
of  twenty  minutes,  as  otherwise  the  fortress  guns  would 
open  fire. 

The  journalist  offered  to  take  these  messengers  to 
the  Staff,  and  on  the  way  began  to  test  the  firmness  of 
the  "  delegate  comrades." 

*'  Do  you  imagine  there  are  no  guns  in  the  Palace  ? 
They  have  mine -throwers,  and  bomb -throwers,  and 
all  kinds  of  machines.  You  will  be  smashed  to 
smithereens." 

"  We  ourselves  know  that  we  can't  hold  out,  but 
what  could  we  do  ?  They've  sent  us,  and  so  we  went. 
It's  the  majority  that  decides,  we  only  follow  suit." 

"  Well,"  thought  I,  "  what  sort  of  people  are  in 
the  fortress  I  do  not  know — ^but  the  delegates  are  no 
good." 

Yet  General  Bagratuny,  to  whom  they  presented 
their  ultimatum,  was  equally  useless.  The  Cadets,  the 
shock  troops,  the  officers  who  were  ready  to  fight  for 
the  Government,  received  no  orders  and  could  not  even 
make  out  whether  the  Government  intended  to  defend 
itself  or  to  surrender  ! 

"  General,"  said  N.  Kishkin,  in  a  loud  voice,  "  I 
command  you  to  resist  the  rebels." 

The  General  smiled.  But  the  smile  was  not  a  merry 
one.    He  answered  gently  : 

*'  I  have  been  accustomed,  sir,  as  a  soldier,  to 
weigh  the  circumstances.  To  my  mind  the  actual 
circumstances  present  no  data  for  offering  resistance." 

"  As  a  soldier  it  is  your  duty  to  die  when  ordered 
to  do  so  !  " 


THE  NOVEMBER  REVOLUTION  256 

"  Yes,  of  course;  still  the  actual  circumstances.  ..." 
Kishkin  decided  that  there  was  nothing  to  hope 
from  the  Staff,  and  returned  to  the  Winter  Palace, 
where  all  the  other  Ministers  were  also  assembled. 
They  were  all  able  to  escape,  but  regarded  such  an 
act  as  unworthy  of  members  of  the  Provisional  Govern- 
ment, and  confronted  the  peril  bravely.  A.  Konovaloff, 
N.  Kishkin,  M.  Tereschenko,  N.  Smirnoff,  Tretyakoff, 
Palchinsky,  Rutenberg,  Gvozdeff,  Nikitin,  Liverovsky, 
Masloff,  M.  Bernatsky,  A.  Kartasheff — all  assembled  in 
the  Palace,  now  transformed  into  a  besieged  fortress, 
only  without  defenders.  A  few  hundred  Cadets,  who 
had  no  cartridges  for  their  rifles,  and  the  Women's 
Company  could  not  be  counted  as  a  serious  defensive 
force. 

The  women-soldiers  found  themselves  in  the  Palace 
by  accident.  On  the  5th  of  November,  the  day  before 
the  Bolshevist  rising,  Kerensky  had  held  a  review  of 
the  Women's  Battalion.  The  women  were  certain  that 
after  the  review  they  would  be  inmaediately  sent  to 
the  front.  They  were  full  of  burning  zeal  to  fight  the 
Germans,  and  did  not  in  the  least  realise  what  was  going 
on  around  them.  Great  was  their  disappointment  when 
they  were  ordered  to  return  to  their  barracks.  After 
the  review  was  over  some  one  proposed  to  Kerensky  to 
keep  the  battalion  at  the  Palace.  The  commander  of 
the  battalion  refused,  but  told  off  one  company  of 
135  women-privates  to  guard  the  motor-cars  which 
fetched  benzine  from  the  stores  where  the  workmen 
were  on  strike.  So  that  when  the  Reds  commenced 
the  siege  of  the  Palace,  the  Women's  Company,  to  its 
amazement  and  indignation,  found  itself  drawn  into 
the  civil  war.  They  had  trained  themselves  to  fight 
the  Germans,  but  had  not  the  slightest  desire  to  be 
mixed   up   in   political    conflicts.      The   story   of   the 


256     FKOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

Women's  Company  furnished  another  proof  of  the 
childish  inefficiency  of  Generalissimo  Kerensky,  incapable 
even  of  organising  the  defence  of  the  Palace,  much  less 
of  Russia.  As  a  member  of  the  Petrograd  Municipal 
Council  I  made  an  inquiry  concerning  the  position  of 
the  Women's  Battalion  after  the  coujp  d'etat,  and  both 
officers  and  women-privates  spoke  to  me  with  equal 
indignation  of  how  they  had  been  drawn  into  a  struggle 
the  meaning  of  which  they  did  not  even  understand. 

The  Winter  Palace  was  quite  unprepared  for  defence. 
There  was  no  trace  of  those  mine-  and  bomb-throwers 
with  which  Arzubieff  had  tried  to  intimidate  the  delegates 
from  the  fortress.  There  were  no  arms,  no  cartridges, 
not  even  bread  for  the  defenders.  The  members  of  the 
Government  assembled  in  the  Palace  had  not  the 
slightest  possibility  of  defending  themselves.  No  one 
came  to  their  assistance — ^neither  workmen  nor  soldiers. 

Only  civilians  in  the  Town  Hall  listened  excitedly  to 
the  speeches  of  the  deposed  leaders  of  the  first  Soviet, 
who  had  come  to  seek  aid  for  Kerensky  and  his  adherents 
and  called  upon  the  members  to  die  for  the  Provisional 
Government.  Members  of  the  Municipal  Council 
answered  with  enthusiastic  promises,  and  even  marched 
demonstratively  towards  the  Palace,  naively  believing 
that  having  been  elected  by  universal  suffrage,  their 
authority  would  be  recognised  by  the  people.  But 
the  mob  had  no  respect  whatever  for  any  lawful 
authorities,  albeit  it  had  formerly  voted  for  them. 
The  members  of  the  Municipal  Council  soon  realised 
this.  The  first  sentinels  they  came  across  barred  the 
way.  They  tried  to  persuade  them,  but  the  soldiers 
did  not  give  in.  Whereupon  the  whole  procession 
returned  to  the  Town  Hall,  where,  in  accordance  with 
a  receipt  prescribed  by  the  Socialistic  wing  of  the 
Coimcil   of   the   Republic,    a    "  Committee   of   Public 


XI  THE  NOVEMBER  REVOLUTION  267 

Safety  "  was  organised,  whose  first  act  consisted  in  a 
declaration  that  "  The  question  regarding  the  situation 
of  the  Government  remains  an  open  one."  These 
words  concealed  an  ambiguous  expectation  of  a  new 
master.    His  coming  was  at  hand. 

Petrograd  did  not  sleep  that  night — ^listening  to  the 
firing,  to  the  rattle  of  machine-guns,  to  the  boom  of 
the  fortress  guns.  The  capital  was  transformed  into  a 
battlefield  whose  centre  lay  around  the  former  Palace 
of  the  Tsars.  The  streets  swarmed  with  excited  crowds, 
armoured  cars  rushed  up  and  down,  horsemen  galloped 
past,  armed  patrols  warmed  themselves  round  bon- 
fires. One  might  have  thought  that  the  Russian  capital 
was  preparing  for  a  battle  against  the  Germans.  In 
reality  it  was  but  the  beginning  of  a  class-war  which 
was  destined  to  last  for  months. 

The  crowd  of  soldiers,  workmen,  women,  and 
common  street  rabble,  which  surged  around  the  Winter 
Palace,  stormed  in,  meeting  with  scarcely  any  resistance. 
The  assailants  possessed  artillery,  machine-guns,  shells, 
and  cartridges.  The  defenders  were  not  only  few  in 
numbers,  but  almost  unarmed. 

In  spite  of  the  deafening  firing,  there  were  not  many 
victims.  The  Women's  Battalion  suffered  no  casualties. 
The  women-soldiers  said  to  me  afterwards  with  a  con- 
temptuous smile  :  "  As  if  the  Red  Guards  are  soldiers  ! 
They  do  not  know  how  to  hold  a  rifle ;  they  can't  even 
handle  a  machine-gun." 

Most  of  the  bullets  did  indeed  fly  high  over  the 
people's  heads.  Although  in  the  square  soldiers  joined 
the  Red  Guards,  perhaps  they  took  no  pains  to  shoot 
properly.  Soldiers  of  the  Kexholm  Regiment,  which 
was  supposed  to  be  a  special  bulwark  of  Bolshevism, 
said  afterwards  that  they  had  been  ordered  to  leave  the 
barracks  in  the  morning  without  being  told  where  and 

s 


258     FEOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch 

for  what  purpose  they  were  led  out.^  Only  upon  finding 
themselves  in  front  of  the  Winter  Palace  at  nightfall  did 
they  realise  the  true  state  of  affairs.  But  even  soldiers 
who  were  out  of  sympathy  with  the  movement  had  no 
means  of  escape,  for  they  were  intermixed  with  the  Red 
Guards,  who,  although  they  did  not  know  the  use  of 
firearms,  were  full  of  neophyte  zeal. 

The  consciousness  of  their  own  wrongdoing  still  felt 
by  some  of  the  soldiers  may,  perhaps,  explain  the 
reason  why  the  Ministers  were  not  mishandled  by  the 
mob.  Fortunately  for  them,  Kerensky,  against  whom 
the  Bolsheviks  had  aroused  the  blind  hatred  of  the 
masses,  was  not  present  when  the  furious  mob  stormed 
the  Winter  Palace.  Everything  was  plundered,  broken, 
and  destroyed — even  the  hospital  occupied  by  wounded 
soldiers.  What  could  not  be  taken  away  was  smashed 
to  atoms.  It  seemed  as  if  a  horde  of  savages  had  swept 
the  vast  Palace  which  since  the  March  Revolution  had 
belonged  to  the  nation.  The  crowd  was  so  dense  that 
not  all  could  join  in  the  delight  of  taking  part  in  the 
plunder  and  destruction.  Numbers  remained  outside. 
Furious,  savage  shouts  greeted  the  appearance  of  the 
arrested  Ministers. 

A.  V.  Kartasheff,  the  Minister  of  Public  Worship, 
told  me  later  that  when  they  were  being  led  from  the 
Winter  Palace  to  the  Fortress  of  SS.  Peter  and  Paul, 
he  could  feel  the  "  dark  waves  of  hatred  "  rising  on  all 
sides  from  the  howling,  infuriated  mob.  Every  moment 
he  expected  these  waves  to  break  the  thin  chain  of  the 
convoy  which  closely  encircled  the  arrested  Ministers. 
Each  time,  when  these  waves  dashed  too  closely,  they 
were  saved  by  the  presence  of  mind  of  the  soldiers,  who, 
lowering  their  bayonets,  started  almost  at  a  run  to 

*  I  repeat  tliis  from  the  statement  made  by  the  Esthonian  representative 
in  London,  Prof.  A.  Piip,  who  had  it  from  Esthonian  soldiers. 


THE  NOVEMBER  REVOLUTION  259 

escape  the  infuriated  mob  ready  to  seize  its  victims. 
I  heard  the  same  story  from  the  Cadets  and  women- 
soldiers  who  were  taken  prisoners  at  the  Palace.  They 
were  all  saved  from  lynching  by  the  Bolshevist  soldiers 
themselves,  i.e.  by  soldiers  who  considered  themselves 
Bolsheviks  although  probably  realising  neither  the 
meaning  of  Bolshevism  nor  its  consequences. 

When,  after  having  been  set  at  liberty,  A.  V. 
Kartasheff,  an  idealist,  a  man  of  great  spiritual  power 
and  full  of  the  moral  courage  inseparable  from  true 
religious  sentiment,  lived  over  again  those  dark  hours, 
he  frankly  admitted  to  me  :  "I  felt  the  agony  of  a 
man  dying  slowly  at  the  stake." 

Another  chance  incident  helped  to  save  them. 
On  their  way  to  the  fortress  they  had  to  cross  the  Neva 
Bridge.  Suddenly,  as  they  were  crossing  the  bridge, 
arrested  Ministers,  military  convoy,  the  frenzied  crowd 
— all  came  under  a  volley  of  rifle-fire.  No  one  knew 
where  the  shots  came  from,  but  in  trying  to  escape  from 
this  common  deadly  peril,  every  one  flung  themselves 
prone  on  the  road,  and  lay  there  for  several  minutes 
while  the  bullets  whizzed  over  their  heads.  This 
cooled  down  the  victors.  The  soldiers  were  the  first 
to  jump  up,  and  together  with  the  Ministers  reached 
the  fortress  at  a  brisk  trot. 

When  the  gates  closed  upon  them,  both  the  prisoners 
and  the  convoy  heaved  a  sigh  of  relief.  The  people  had 
proved  more  terrible  than  the  gaolers. 

Here  is  a  description  of  Petrograd's  state  of  mind  on 
the  morrow  of  the  coup  d'etat  (8th  November),  given 
by  a  capable  journalist,  a  non-party  Socialist,  S. 
Kondurushkin. 

"  This  morning  Petrograd  is  almost  empty.  The  people, 
terrified  by  the  all-night  bombardment,  are  afraid  to  venture 
into  the  street.    All  Government  offices  are  closed.    The  Winter 


260     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

Palace  is  occupied  by  the  rebels.  Tbe  Tsar's  garden  is  strewn 
with  the  bodies  of  those  who  were  killed  in  the  night.  The 
treasures  of  the  Winter  Palace  have  been  plundered.  The 
Ministers  are  arrested  and  imprisoned  in  the  fortress. 

*'How  MaklakofE,  Khvostoff,  Sukhomlinoff  (the  Tsarist 
Ministers  imprisoned  in  the  fortress)  must  laugh !  Welcome, 
the  fresh  party  of  traitors  to  the  State !  Even  Socialism  has 
failed  to  save  the  Ministers. 

"  Guns  are  placed  on  the  Nevsky  Prospect.  Patrols  occupy 
street  comers,  bonfires  are  made  of  bourgeois  papers  (confiscated 
from  newsboys),  and  soldiers  and  street  urchins  are  warming 
themselves  around  them.  Lorries,  bristling  with  machine-guns 
and  crowded  with  soldiers  and  sailors,  tear  along  the  empty 
streets  towards  the  railway  stations.  Those  are  the  rebels 
hastening  to  meet  the  Government  troops.  Their  faces  are 
radiant ;  they  are  convinced  that  they  are  making  the  Revolution 
and  saving  their  country. 

"  Towards  evening  the  streets  are  filled  with  silent  people. 
At  first  sight  these  seem  to  be  the  same  as  in  March,  but  look 
at  their  faces — it  is  as  if  there  was  death  in  their  homes.  Those 
other  days  had  been  full  of  enthusiasm,  many  believed  in  the 
speedy  coming  of  a  new  era.  Now  all  faces  are  sullen  and 
melancholy.  Only  men  with  rifles  are  enthusiastic ;  what 
strong  and  well-fed  fellows  they  are,  these  Petrograd  soldiers  and 
sailors  !    I  might  even  add,  what  blockheads  !  " 

These  were  already  the  new  masters.  The  power  of 
the  Revolutionary  Democracy  and  of  the  Provisional 
Government  which  leaned  upon  it  was  at  an  end. 
They  had  been  animated  by  a  sincere  desire  to  serve 
the  people,  but  they  were  too  weak,  too  dogmatical, 
and  paid  for  their  weakness,  not  only  with  the  cruel 
price  of  humiliation  and  suffering,  but  maybe  by  losing 
faith  in  the  very  people  whose  servants  the  Ministers 
considered  themselves  to  be. 

The  political  March  Revolution,  which  deposed 
autocracy,  avoided  all  violent  measures  even  against 
the  most  hated  representatives  of  the  old  regime,  begin- 


«  THE  NOVEMBER  REVOLUTION  261 

ning  with  Nicholas  II.  himself.  In  the  early  days  of 
the  March  Revolution  each  time  that  evil  sparks  of 
hatred  and  revenge  flamed  up  among  the  mob  Kerensky 
boldly  quenched  them.  He  would  not  suffer  the  Ministers, 
not  even  Sukhomlinoff,  to  be  lynched. 

The  November  Revolution,  which  overthrew  the 
Democratic  Government,  followed  another  course — 
the  course  of  violence  and  bloodshed.  The  short  era 
of  Russian  political  liberty  was  over.  In  its  stead 
came  the  gloomy  period  of  enforced  communism,  and 
step  by  step  Russia  began  to  relapse  into  the  most 
terrible  experiences  of  the  Middle  Ages. 

This  catastrophic  change  did  not  become  immediately 
apparent.  Although  the  Provisional  Government  was 
under  arrest,  and  Lenin  and  Trotsky,  surrounded  at 
Smolny  with  machine-guns  and  with  artillery,  issued 
one  decree  after  another  in  the  name  of  the  new  Govern- 
ment of  workmen  and  peasants,  no  one  believed  such  a 
state  of  affairs  would  last.  Their  orders  were  so  absurd, 
the  Red  Guards  and  Bolshevist  Committee-men  were 
so  unlike  ordinary  Government  agents  that  public 
opinion  was  certain  all  this  was  not  a  coup  d'etat,  but 
merely  a  passing  adventure.  The  Bolsheviks  themselves 
frankly  admitted  that  they  would  not  hold  out  for  more 
than  a  fortnight. 

Besides,  where  was  the  possibility  of  judging  the 
situation,  when  neither  the  Bolsheviks  nor  their 
opponents  had  any  idea  of  what  was  going  on,  not 
only  in  Russia,  but  even  in  Petrograd  itself  ? 

In  his  diary,  dated  the  9th  November,  S.  Kondu- 
rushkin  gave  an  interesting  description  of  Smolny — 
the  Bolshevist  citadel. 

''  It  would  be  curious  to  have  a  look  at  what  13  going  on  at 
Bolshevist  Headquarters  at  the  Smolny  Institute  I 


262     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

"  The  vast  court  of  the  old  Elizabethan  building  is  crowded 
with  dozens  of  motor-cars.  For  seven  months  Tsereteli,  Chheidze, 
Skobeleff,  Gotz,  Lieber,  Dan,  have  driven  in  those  motor-cars.  .  .  . 
Now  they  are  taken  up  by  Lenin,  Trotsky,  Bronstein,  Kollontai, 
Kameneff  -  Rozenf eldt,  Zinovieff  -  Apf elbaum.  .  .  .  What  a 
pleiad ! 

"Will  the  Motherland  shortly  witness  a  new  constellation 
rising  in  our  political  spheres  ?  ^ 

"  Between  the  entrance-pillars  a  large  machine-gun  points  its 
muzzle  at  the  doorway.  Several  groups  of  armed  guards — all  is 
enthusiasm  and  bayonets ! 

"  On  the  ground-floor  I  receive  a  pass  for  going  upstairs.  I 
mount.  I  roam  over  the  marble  stairs,  along  the  wide  corridors. 
For  a  century  and  a  half  this  had  been  women's  intimate  domain. 
Gentle  maidens,  in  snow-white  pinafores  and  modest  gowns,  had 
paced  the  polished  floors  of  these  halls  and  corridors.  Now  they 
are  crowded  with  soldiers  and  sailors,  trampling  the  refuse 
and  mud  with  their  heavy  boots.  Party-girls  are  seated  at 
tables  selling  papers  and  pamphlets.  Smoke,  dust,  evil  smells, 
cigarette-ends.  ... 

"  The  authorities  occupy  the  apartments.  Long  queues  of 
soldiers  with  papers  and  letters  await  their  turn  at  the  door ; 
dark-complexioned,  nimble  little  men  run  in  and  out,  the  crowd 
winds  up  around  them. 

" .  .  .  All  right !  Very  good !  Yes,  yes  !  Oh,  do  leave  me 
in  peace,  I've  not  slept  three  nights  .  .  . 

"  Kerensky's  troops  are  approaching  Petrograd.  Smolny  is 
agitated.  Motor-horns  sound  at  the  gates  ;  soldiers  and  sailors 
are  hastily  running  up  and  down  stairs. 

"  I  glance  over  the  piles  of  books  lying  on  the  table  and  buy 
a  few.  At  home  in  the  evening  I  look  through  them.  Surely 
these  are  the  ravings  of  a  madman,  but  not  literature  ! 

"  Excitement,  frenzy,  torrents  of  meaningless  words,  threats, 
and  delirious  visions  of  some  new  unknown  life.  But  not  a  trace 
of  consciousness  of  the  actual  Russia.  A  madman's  ravings  are 
also  consecutive  and  full  of  fiery  vividness,  but  because  of  their 
absence  of  connection  with  reality  they  are  nevertheless  only 
ravings. 

"  We,  in  Petrograd,  are  cut  off  from  all  the  world.   Of  what  is 


»  THE  NOVEMBER  REVOLUTION  263 

happening  in  Russia  or  abroad  we  know  nothing.    Perhaps  we 
in  Petrograd  have  all  gone  mad  already  !  " 

Such  an  idea  occurred  to  many  of  us  in  those  days, 
so  difficult  was  it  to  obtain  a  clear  understanding  of 
what  was  really  happening  in  this  whirl  of  events  and 
rumours.  Authentic  news  was  also  hard  to  obtain. 
Bolshevist  papers  lied  as  usual,  all  others  were  suppressed. 
Sailors  and  Red  Guards  broke  into  printing-offices  and, 
with  levelled  bayonets,  dispersed  both  printers  and 
members  of  the  staff.  Wild  rumours  spread  over  the 
city.  The  Town  Hall  became  the  only  centre  of  anti- 
Bolshevist  political  life  and  public  defence.  Every 
evening  meetings  were  held,  which  received  often 
contradictory  and  confused  reports  of  all  that  had 
taken  place  in  the  city,  of  the  shooting  of  the  Cadets, 
of  arrests  and  looting,  of*  negotiations  with  Smolny, 
of  some  obscure  political  vacillations  at  Headquarters. 
All  this  sounded  feverish,  uncertain,  distracted. 

Kerensky  was  expected  to  bring  over  troops  and 
overthrow  the  Bolsheviks.  Small  bands  of  Cadets, 
acting  without  plan  or  unity,  fought  against  the  Bol- 
sheviks, who  dealt  with  them  as  cruelly  as  only  men 
who  are  a  prey  to  the  frenzy  of  civil  war  can  deal. 
Hundreds  of  young  men  were  flung  into  the  fortress 
or  into  prison.  Relatives  in  despair  rushed  from  place 
to  place  searching  for  their  near  and  dear  among  corpses 
in  the  mortuaries,  among  the  drowned  cast  up  by  the 
Neva  and  its  adjacent  canals,  among  the  prisoners 
whose  lists  no  one  knew. 

And  still  the  troops  of  the  Provisional  Government 
did  not  arrive.  Only  later  it  became  known  that  no 
such  troops  actually  existed.  The  few  units  which 
might  perhaps  have  been  persuaded  to  advance  against 
the  Bolsheviks  could  not  be  moved  to  Petrograd  owing 


264     FEOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

to  the  extremely  ambiguous,  half-Bolshevist  attitude 
taken  up  by  the  Central  Executive  Committee  of  the 
Railway  Union,  the  so-called  Vikzhel.  Under  pretext 
of  putting  an  end  to  the  civil  war  the  Vikzhel  forbade 
the  transit  of  anti  -  Bolshevist  units,  while  allowing 
Bolshevist  troops  to  travel. 

The  Bolsheviks  themselves,  after  proclaiming  them- 
selves a  Government,  did  not  know  what  forces  were  at 
Kerensky's  disposal.  Trotsky,  then  merely  President  of 
the  Petrograd  Soviet,  ordered  trenches  to  be  dug  around 
the  city  "  against  Kerensky's  Komiloff  bands."  Skir- 
mishes were  taking  place  around  Petrograd  at  Krasnoe- 
Selo,  Gatchina,  and  Tsarskoe.  No  one  knew  their  results. 
In  Petrograd  itself  there  was  no  organised  military 
resistance.  The  youthful  heroism  of  the  Cadets  was  of 
no  importance  whatever.  The  military  situation  became 
clear  five  days  after  the  occupation  of  the  Winter  Palace. 
The  Pravda  published  on  the  14th  of  November  a 
statement  of  General  KrasnofE,  signed  by  him,  in  which 
he  reported  his  last  conversation  with  the  Commander- 
in-Chief.     Kerensky  was  very  nervous  and  excited. 

"  General,  you  have  betrayed  me,"  said  Kerensky. 
*'  Your  Cossacks  say  that  they  will  arrest  and  deliver  me 
to  the  sailors." 

"  Yes,"  replied  Krasnoff,  "  such  talk  is  current  ;   I 
know  there  is  no  sympathy  for  you  anywhere." 
"  But  the  officers  also  say  the  same." 
"  The  officers  are  also  dissatisfied  with  you." 
"  What  am  I  to  do  ?    Am  I  to  commit  suicide  ?  " 
General  Bjrasnoff  proposed  that  Kerensky  should  go 
to  Petrograd  carrying  a  white  flag  and  enter  into  negotia- 
tions with  the  military  revolutionary  stafi.    Kerensky 
apparently  acquiesced  and  asked  for  a  guard,  but  while 
the  general  was  assembling  the  convoy  the  Commander- 
in-Chief  disappeared. 


M  THE  NOVEMBER  REVOLUTION  266 

In  such  terms  did  the  Cossack  General,  clearly  ill- 
disposed  towards  Kerensky,  describe  the  last  moments 
spent  by  the  ill-starred  Commander-in-Chief  in  the  midst 
of  his  handful  of  supporters.  It  is  difficult  to  define 
precisely  what  had  taken  place  at  Gatchina,  but  it  is 
certain  that  Kerensky  had  no  military  supporters  and 
found  himself  obliged  to  cling  to  a  few  hundred  Cossacks 
(of  whom  there  were  not  more  than  1600).  Moreover, 
the  Cossacks  had  for  a  long  time  been  antagonistic 
towards  him,  while  Kerensky  himself  mistrusted 
them,  suspecting  them  of  counter-revolutionary  leanings. 
Besides  this,  the  Cossacks  had  no  desire  to  fight  against 
superior  forces  of  Red  Guards.  They  began  to  fraternise 
and  ended  the  battle,  or  rather  the  slight  skirmish,  by 
a  peace  treaty  which  guaranteed  them  a  safe  return 
to  their  homes.  Under  such  conditions  Kerensky's 
sojourn  among  them  became  very  dangerous,  because  he 
was  confronted  by  a  foe  who  did  not  even  spare  peaceful 
citizens.  When  the  Cossacks  retreated  from  Tsarkoe 
Selo  the  Red  Guards  raided  the  dainty  little  town  and 
proceeded  to  lay  down  the  law.  The  priests  in  the 
churches  were  at  that  time  offering  prayers  for  "  the 
cessation  of  fratricidal  war."  One  of  them.  Father  John 
Kochuroff,  was  dragged  out  of  the  church  for  that 
prayer  and  shot  before  the  eyes  of  his  schoolboy  son. 

With  the  disappearance  of  Kerensky  the  Petrograd 
military  operations  came  to  an  end.  No  aid  was  forth- 
coming from  Headquarters,  for  there  too  no  one  knew 
what  to  do.  The  Chief  of  the  Staff,  Dukhonin,  assumed 
the  post  of  Supreme  Commander-in-Chief  on  the  14th 
November  in  view  of  General  Krasnofi's  report  that  Com- 
mander-in-Chief Kerensky  had  abandoned  thedetachment 
and  his  present  abode  was  unknown.  General  Dukhonin 
ordered  no  more  troops  to  be  sent  to  Petrograd,  more 
especially  as  "  negotiations  are  in  progress  between 


266     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       oh. 

political  parties  concerning  the  formation  of  a  Pro- 
visional Government.  In  anticipation  of  the  solution  of 
the  crisis,  I  smnmon  the  troops  calmly  to  fulfil  their  duty 
in  order  to  prevent  any  further  German  advance." 

Such  was  the  end  of  Kerensky's  military  career.  He 
did  not  even  risk  going  to  Headquarters  to  seek  support 
from  there.  Who,  indeed,  could  have  given  it  ?  After 
the  arrest  of  KornilofE  and  other  Generals,  the  authority 
of  Headquarters  was  already  broken. 

Negotiations  concerning  the  formation  of  a  Govern- 
ment were  actually  taking  place.  Part  of  the  Socialistic 
Centre  dreamed  of  creating  a  Coalition  Ministry  of 
members  of  all  Socialistic  parties,  including  the  Bol- 
sheviks. But  the  parties,  themselves  split  up  into  numer- 
ous factions,  could  arrive  at  no  agreement  upon  the 
subject.  One  faction  of  the  Mensheviks  desired  an  agree- 
ment. Another  was  opposed  to  it.  A  sharp  cleavage  took 
place  in  the  Social-Revolutionary  party.  Social-Revolu- 
tionaries of  the  Left  were  acting  in  accord  with  the  Bol- 
sheviks. Those  of  the  Right  supported  Kerensky  and 
were  consequently  antagonists  of  the  Bolsheviks.  The 
Centre,  led  by  Chernofi,  denounced  the  Military  Revolu- 
tionary Committee,  but  sought  for  an  understanding 
with  Smolny.  The  Bolsheviks  put  an  end  to  both 
vacillations  and  hopes,  by  adopting  the  resolution  that 
the  Central  Executive  Committee,  which  was  entirely  in 
their  hands,  "  was  the  only  source  of  authority."  This 
resolution  finally  set  aside  all  those  very  Socialists  who 
had  persisted  with  such  enduring  and  touching  fidelity 
in  treating  the  Bolsheviks  as  their  "  comrades-in-ideas." 

Even  the  Internationalists,  that  intermediate  faction 
of  the  Social  Democrats  which  from  the  first  days  of 
the  Revolution  had  professed  the  same  ideas  as  the 
Bolsheviks,  expressed  their  indignation. 

They  withdrew  from  the  Central  Executive  Com- 


THE  NOVEMBER  REVOLUTION  267 

mittee,  declaring  as  their  motive  that  the  Bolshevist 
resolution  was  "  a  challenge  to  all  parties.  .  .  .  Respon- 
sibility for  the  prolongation  of  the  civil  war  falls  upon 
the  Bolsheviks/' 

The  breach  was  soon  healed.  They  became  recon- 
ciled and  remained  in  the  Soviets,  occasionally  allowing 
themselves  the  luxury  of  criticism. 

In  acute  opposition  to  the  Bolsheviks  stood  all 
the  State  Socialists,  Plekhanoff's  group,  the  Populist 
Socialists,  a  faction  of  the  Social-Revolutionaries.  In 
this  they  were  at  one  with  the  Cadets,  who  adopted  an 
irreconcilable  attitude.  Notwithstanding  the  firing  in 
the  streets,  the  constant  domiciliary  visits,  arrests,  and 
menaces,  the  Cadet  party  never  ceased  openly  and  de- 
terminedly to  denounce  the  Bolsheviks  at  various  meet- 
ings and  in  the  Municipal  Council.  The  leader  of  the 
party,  P.  Milyukoff,  was  absent  from  Petrograd.  The 
central  figure  of  the  conflict  became  A.  Y.  Shingareff, 
one  of  the  most  popular  Cadet  leaders.  A  doctor  by 
profession,  a  man  of  enormous  capacity  for  work  and 
chivalrous  devotion  to  duty,  he  was  respected  and 
admired  not  only  by  his  numerous  adherents,  but  also 
by  opponents.  Enemies  he  had  none.  Modest,  straight- 
forward, gentle,  although  sternly  inexorable  in  questions 
of  moral  principle,  he  was  atypical  Russian  democrat,  both 
in  private  life  and  in  his  ideas.  His  name  was  familiar 
to  all  reading  Russia.  He  was  thrice  elected  to  the 
Dimia,  was  a  member  of  Prince  G.  Lvoff's  Cabinet, 
first  as  Minister  of  Agriculture,  later  as  Minister  of 
Finance.  At  the  same  time  he  remained  member  of  the 
Petrograd  Municipal  Council,  and  after  the  November 
Revolution  took  advantage  of  his  position  to  lead  a 
daring  anti-Bolshevist  campaign  from  the  platform  of  the 
Town  Hall.  His  speeches  had  an  enormous  influence 
upon  the  Municipal  Council,  and  rendered  any  com- 


268     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ca. 

promise  with  Smolny  morally  impossible  to  the  Social- 
Revolutionary  members.  A.  Y.  Shingareff  denied  with 
harsh  indignation  all  possibility  of  compliance  with  the 
Bolsheviks,  whom  he  denounced  as  usurpers  and  crim- 
inals. ''  There  may  be  fanatics  and  madmen  in  their 
midst,"  said  he,  "  but  there  seem  to  be  more  provocateurs 
and  members  of  the  Okrana.  .  .  .  The  Bolsheviks  have 
an  undoubted  mixture  of  German  spies  " — and  in  con- 
firmation of  his  statement  he  described  a  domiciliary 
visit  at  one  of  the  women's  organisations.  "  The  Reds 
looted  the  premises,  carried  off  clothes,  money,  valu- 
ables. They  carried  off  everything  they  could  lay  their 
hands  upon,  but  they  left  something  behind.  After 
they  were  gone  a  German  mark  was  found  upon  the 
floor.  Any  attempt  at  an  agreement  with  such  people 
would  be  countenancing  a  crime.  Those  among  you," 
he  added,  turning  to  the  SociaUsts,  "  who  think  to  put 
an  end  to  bloodshed  by  peaceful  methods  of  agreement, 
are  greatly  mistaken.  You  will  achieve  nothing,  for 
they  will  not  stop  half-way  in  their  struggle." 

Shingareff  demanded  the  restoration  of  the  authority 
of  the  Provisional  Government  and  the  most  energetic 
struggle  against  the  Bolsheviks. 

As  I  have  said,  during  those  November  days  the 
Petrograd  Municipal  Council  was  not  only  the  sole 
existing  political  centre,  besides  the  Smolny  Institute, 
but  also  the  only  lawful  body  of  representatives  of  the 
people.  In  this  we  could  rival  the  Soviet.  Elections 
to  the  Soviet  were  absolutely  arbitrary,  whereas  the 
Municipal  Council  had  been  elected  on  the  arch-demo- 
cratic principle  of  universal  or  proportional  represent- 
ation. Various  parties  were  represented  as  follows : 
76  Social-Revolutionaries  (205,000  votes),  67  Bolsheviks 
(183,000  votes),  42  Cadets  (115,000  votes).  The  remain- 
ing 16  members  represented  various  small  Socialistic 


XI  THE  NOVEMBER  REVOLUTION  269 

groups,  which  altogether  obtained  only  35,000  votes  out 
of  the  total  of  530,000.  The  Bolsheviks  were  in  an 
absolute  minority.  For  this  reason  the  Socialist  mem- 
bers of  the  Municipal  Council  attempted  to  influence  the 
population  against  the  Bolsheviks.  They  motored  to 
the  factories,  made  speeches,  put  up  posters,  appealing 
to  the  reason,  conscience,  or  even  to  the  mere  instinct  of 
self-preservation  of  their  electors.  All  was  in  vain. 
Popularity  had  flown  from  the  Social-Revolutionaries. 
Their  followers  of  yesterday  now  ran  after  the  chariot  of 
the  conqueror,  believing  that  Lenin  and  Trotsky  would 
give  them  peace  and  bread,  liberty  and  happiness. 

The  Bolsheviks  did  not  at  once  realise  the  full  scope 
of  their  influence.  They  thought  themselves  obliged  at 
first  to  reckon  with  the  Municipal  Council,  and  did  not 
risk  employing  those  physical  methods  of  compulsion 
which  had  enabled  them  to  seize  and  retain  power. 
After  the  cowp  d'etat  the  Bolshevist  members  issued  an 
appeal  to  the  population,  declaring  the  Municipal  Council 
to  be  a  bourgeois  iustitution.  "  Instead  of  fulfilling 
their  plain  duties,  the  Social  -  Revolutionaries  of  the 
Right  and  the  Cadets  have  transformed  the  Municipal 
Council  into  an  arena  of  political  strife  against  the 
Soviets,  against  the  Revolutionary  Government  of  peace, 
bread,  and  liberty."  Then  the  Bolsheviks  demonstra- 
tively left  the  Town  Hall.  Their  seats  remained  empty. 
Only  one  or  two  Bolsheviks,  obviously  delegated  for 
obtaining  iuformation,  remained  gloomily  listening  to 
the  orators  whose  speeches  usually  denoimced  Bol- 
shevist crimes. 

The  opposition  of  the  Petrograd  Municipal  Council 
acted  as  a  stimulant  to  the  irreconcilable  attitude 
adopted  by  the  majority  of  the  intelligentsia  towards  the 
Bolsheviks.  But  the  Municipal  Council  was  unable  to 
engage  in  any  active  conflict  against  the  armed  usurpers. 


270     PEOM  LIBERTY  TO  BRE8T-LIT0VSK       ch. 

On  the  night  of  the  coup  d'etat  a  Committee  of  Public 
Safety  had  been  organised  in  connection  with  the  Muni- 
cipal Council,  comprising,  besides  members  of  the  Council, 
representatives  of  various  democratic  organisations,  such 
as  the  Central  Executive  Committee  of  Workmen's 
Deputies,  the  Peasants'  Deputies,  the  Centro-Flot,  the 
Army  Committees,  etc. 

Amid  the  turmoil  of  civil  war  this  Committee  acted 
as  a  kind  of  Red  Cross  unit.  Owing  to  its  mixed  com- 
position, and  partly  thanks  to  the  Social-Revolutionary 
and  Internationalist  members,  the  Municipal  Council 
was  able  to  render  assistance,  not  only  to  the  Women's 
Battalion,  which  found  itself  under  the  surveillance  of 
the  Red  Guard,  but  also  to  the  military  Cadets.  The 
Municipal  Council  obtained  the  release  of  hundreds  of 
arrested  Cadets,  provided  them  with  money,  and  helped 
them  to  leave  Petrograd. 

The  Cadets  were  the  last  organised  unit  of  the 
Russian  Army.  Being  reliable  soldiers,  after  the  March 
Revolution  they  were  chiefly  employed  to  mount  guard. 
At  the  time  of  the  November  Revolution  they  found 
themselves  in  respect  of  Kerensky  in  the  position  of  the 
Swiss  Guards  of  Versailles  in  the  reign  of  Louis  XVI. 
The  officers  were  unorganised ;  whereas  after  all  the 
Cadet  schools  constituted  armed  and  disciplined  military 
units.  Their  composition,  as  regards  class  and  poKtical 
sympathies,  was  extremely  varied.  Before  the  war 
the  Cadet  schools,  which  trained  the  future  officers, 
were  more  or  less  caste  institutions  where  free  education 
was  given  to  officers'  sons.  But  after  the  terrible  losses 
sustained  by  the  officers'  staff  in  the  war  the  Cadet 
schools  began  to  admit  young  men  of  very  low  educa- 
tional standard  as  well  as  privates  who  had  distinguished 
themselves  in  active  service.  Just  before  the  Revolution 
these  schools  were  filled  with  sons  of  peasants,  artisans. 


THE  NOVEMBER  REVOLUTION  271 

small  shopkeepers,  clerks,  and  had  generally  become 
absolutely  democratic.  This,  however,  did  not  prevent 
the  Bolsheviks  from  declaring  that  all  the  Cadets  were 
"  the  sons  of  landowners  and  capitalists/' 

This  untruth  was  necessary  to  them  for  deepening 
class  consciousness,  or  rather  class-war.  Even  Gorky, 
who  in  many  respects  was  very  sympathetic  to  extreme 
Marxian  tendencies,  wrote  an  indignant  protest  in  his 
paper.  "  It  is,  of  course,  an  impudent  lie  to  say  that 
all  the  Cadets  are  landowners'  sons,  and  as  such  are 
subject  to  extermination.  It  is  a  falsehood  perpetrated 
by  adventurers  and  frantic  demagogues." 

Yet  this  conscious  falsehood,  so  persistently  and 
variously  repeated  by  the  Bolsheviks,  rendered  the  very 
name  of  "  Cadet  *'  odious  to  the  masses.  The  Red 
Guards,  and  especially  the  soldiers  who  had  joined  them, 
were  persuaded  that  they  were  fighting  not  against 
Kerensky  or  the  Provisional  Government,  but  against 
the  Cadets.  In  Bolshevist  language,  the  very  word 
"  Cadet "  became  a  word  of  abuse ;  whereas  people 
who  clung  to  any  hope  of  saving  Russia  from  anarchy 
saw  in  these  very  Cadets  the  last  mainstay  of  the 
crumbling  State. 

The  Cadets,  who  had  been  training  for  war  with 
Germany,  were  drawn  by  the  force  of  events  into  the 
vortex  of  a  far  more  terrible  civil  war.  Among  them 
were  young  men  of  various  political  convictions.  Many 
were  probably  simply  indifferent  to  politics  ;  but  being 
educated  soldiers  they  remained  more  loyal  to  duty 
and  their  oath  of  allegiance.  When  the  Bolsheviks  set 
up  the  frenzied  persecution  of  the  Cadets  they,  too, 
naturally  began  to  feel  a  fierce  resentment  against  those 
who  incited  the  mob  against  them.  After  the  fighting 
at  Petrograd  and  Moscow,  numbers  of  Cadets,  together 
with  the  officers,  fled  to  the  south  to  join  General 


272     FEOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LIT0V8K       ch. 

Alexeieff.  They  preferred  enlisting  in  the  ranks  of  an 
army,  even  a  Volunteer  Army,  to  living  under  the 
constant  menace  of  being  lynched  by  soldiers  or  Red 
Guards. 

At  Moscow,  the  resistance  to  the  Military  Revolu- 
tionary Committee  was  infinitely  better  organised  than 
the  attempts  at  self-defence  made  by  the  Provisional 
Government  at  Petrograd. 

The  Moscow  regional  commander,  Colonel  Riaboff, 
shut  himself  up  in  the  Kremlin  with  a  detachment  of 
officers,  students,  and  Cadets.  They  possessed  arms  and 
even  guns.  The  Municipal  Council  organised  a  Com- 
mittee of  Public  Safety,  which  found  itself  in  the  very 
centre  of  the  fighting,  as  the  Town  Hall  is  situated  by 
the  Kremlin.  The  Social-Revolutionaries,  beginning 
with  the  Mayor  (Mr.  Rudneff),  felt  very  uncertain.  By 
force  of  habit  they  were  on  the  side  of  the  Reds,  but 
were  defended  by  the  Whites,  as  the  Bolsheviks  had 
contemptuously  nicknamed  their  opponents.  The 
number  of  fighting-men  was  extremely  insignificant  on 
both  sides.  The  majority  of  the  workmen  and  the 
soldiers  remained  neutral  and  waited  to  see  who  would 
carry  the  day.  Once  more,  as  in  Petrograd,  the  demo- 
cratic elector,  who  had  so  largely  voted  for  the  Social- 
Revolutionaries  and  also  given  them  an  absolute 
majority  in  the  Moscow  Municipal  Council,  proffered 
no  support  to  the  men  of  his  choice  at  the  moment  of 
real  peril. 

The  battle  lasted  seven  days.  Shells  rained  over 
Moscow,  setting  fire  to  the  houses,  whose  inhabitants 
dared  not  leave  them,  for  rifle  and  machine-gun  bullets 
whizzed  along  the  streets.  The  city  was  transformed 
into  a  battlefield,  over  which  peaceful  citizens  still 
found  themselves  obliged  to  wander,  as  no  one  had 
sufficient  food  supplies  to  last  so  long.    Nq  one  knew 


XI  THE  NOVEMBER  REVOLUTION  273 

exactly  the  whereabouts  of  the  Government  or  of 
Bolshevist  forces.  Every  one  expected  the  arrival  of 
troops  from  the  front.  When  it  became  obvious  that 
no  troops  were  forthcoming,  the  Committee  of  Public 
Safety  concluded  a  treaty  with  the  Military  Revolu- 
tionary Committee  which  guaranteed  the  personal 
inviolability  and  liberty  of  the  vanquished,  i.e,  of  the 
Whites.  On  the  15th  of  November  Moscow  was  handed 
over  to  the  Bolsheviks. 

Thus  was  all  armed  resistance  practically  ended  in 
the  cities,  where  the  Soviets  had  at  their  disposal  stores 
of  ammunition  and  a  considerable,  although  disorderly, 
contingent  of  man-power.  On  the  contrary,  in  the  south, 
in  Cossack  lands,  the  nucleus  of  a  Volunteer  Army  was 
formed  in  November.  General  Alexeieff,  disguised  as  a 
workman,  with  only  a  few  roubles  in  his  pocket, 
fled  to  the  Don.  Officers,  who  did  not  wish  to  acknow- 
ledge the  Bolshevist  authority,  and  dreamed  of  con- 
tinuing the  struggle  against  Germany,  soon  began 
to  flock  around  him.  The  Socialist  -  Revolutionary 
Democracy  eyed  this  new  movement  with  disfavour,  as 
concealing  a  possibility  of  the  regeneration  of  a  strong 
and  disciplined  Russian  Army.  Generals  always  excited 
suspicion  among  the  first  Soviet's  members:  "What, 
if  they  are  plotting  a  counter-revolution  ?  " 

When  it  became  known  that  Komiloff,  Denikin,  and 
other  Generals  arrested  by  Kerensky  had  escaped  from 
the  Bykhov  Prison  and  joined  Alexeieff  and  Kaledin  at 
Novocherkassk,  this  suspicious  attitude  towards  the 
Southern  Volimteer  Army  became  still  more  pronoujiced. 

The  paper  edited  by  the  Social-Revolutionary  leader, 
V.  Chernoff,  while  demanding  a  purely  Socialistic 
Ministry  with  the  exclusion  of  Bolsheviks,  said  :  "  Bol- 
sheviks are  victorious  in  the  north  ;  Kaledin  in  the 
south.     They  join  hands  for  the  destruction  of  the 

T 


274     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

Revolution.  Our  task  is  to  knock  botli  counter-revolu- 
tions on  the  head.  We  must  fight  the  Bolsheviks  by 
force  of  organisation,  and  Kaledin — ^by  force  of  arms  " 
{Dielo  Naroda,  16th  December  1917). 

Far  greater  sympathy  was  manifested  in  Socialist 
circles  towards  another  effort  of  resistance  to  Bolshevist 
usurpation  organised  by  civilians,  namely,  the  strike  of 
the  Government  officials. 

Like  the  rest  of  the  population  Russian  officials 
welcomed  the  March  Revolution  which  brought  the 
Russian  people  their  longed-for  political  liberty.  They 
expressed  their  readiness  to  serve  under  the  Provisional 
Government,  and  all  remained  at  their  posts.  But 
when  the  Bolsheviks  seized  power  the  officials  at  one 
with  all  the  Russian  intelligentsia  received  them  with 
indignant  protest,  and  not  only  did  not  wish  to  work 
with  them,  but  flatly  refused  to  recognise  the  Soviet  rule. 

It  might  have  seemed  that  the  modest,  down-trodden 
officials,  stifled  by  office  routine,  unaccustomed  to 
political  struggle,  would  be  the  last  men  capable  or 
desirous  of  struggling  against  the  new  club-law,  pro- 
claimed as  it  was  in  the  name  of  Socialism.  But  ihe 
Russian  bureaucracy  so  constantly,  and  frequently 
with  such  good  cause,  denounced  and  rebuked  by  the 
intelligentsia  opposition  had  proved  itself  capable  of 
imbuing  its  servants  with  a  sense  of  responsibility 
towards  Russia  as  a  whole  which  was  lacking  in  many 
representatives  of  the  liberal  professions ;  and  in  the 
dark  hour  of  misfortune  which  beset  the  Russian  State 
created  by  the  strenuous  efforts  of  generations  of  Russian 
men  and  women,  these  inconspicuous  workers  who  had 
built  and  supported  it  all  rose  up  to  defend  it. 

It  goes  without  saying  that  the  officials  were  incapable 
of  offering  any  armed  resistance  when  even  the  officers 
were  unable  to  do  so.    But  the  entire  State  machine 


XI  THE  NOVEMBER  REVOLUTION  275 

was  in  the  hands  of  the  olBBLcials,  and  they  resolved  to 
prevent  the  Bolsheviks  from  assuming  its  control. 

After  the  March  Revolution,  numerous  officials 
employed  in  various  Government  offices  and  institutions 
had  organised  themselves  in  unions.  After  the  November 
coup  d'etat  these  separate  unions  became  associated  in 
a  Union  of  Unions,  which  comprised  both  senior  and 
junior  officials. 

During  the  Kerensky  regime,  besides  the  sittings  of 
the  Provisional  Government  where  Ministers  mainly 
discussed  and  decided  problems  of  general  policy,  there 
also  met  the  so-called  Minor  Council  of  Ministers, 
comprised  of  all  the  Assistant  Ministers,  which  settled 
questions  relating  to  administration.  After  the  arrest 
of  the  Provisional  Government  the  Minor  Council  of 
Ministers  continued  its  sittings,  striving  to  preserve 
the  succession  of  authority  and,  if  possible,  to  reinstate 
the  power  of  the  Provisional  Government. 

They  met  secretly,  like  conspirators,  constantly 
changing  their  quarters,  as  the  Bolsheviks  might  appear 
at  any  moment  and  arrest  them.  These  renmants  of 
the  Provisional  Government  were  certainly  devoid  of 
any  physical  force,  but  the  entire  mechanism  of  the 
State,  in  so  far  as  it  is  regulated  by  office  work,  was 
under  their  control.  The  officials  indignantly  refused 
to  recognise  the  commissaries  and  offered  them  every 
possible  resistance.  The  Minor  Council  met  this  patriotic 
state  of  mind  half-way.  A  strike  of  Government 
officials  was  decided  upon.  When  Bolshevist  connnis- 
saries  came  to  the  Government  offices  and  institutions 
they  found  either  closed  doors,  or  were  met  by  officials 
who  refused  even  to  speak  to  the  Soviet  representatives. 
If  the  latter  insisted,  bureaux  would  be  locked  up  before 
their  very  faces  and  keys  carried  away. 

An  important  part  in  the  organisation  of  the  Union 


276     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

of  Unions  and  of  the  official  strike  was  played  by 
Countess  SopHa  Panin.  She  was  a  member  of  the  Minor 
Council  as  Assistant  Minister  of  Education. 

An  aristocrat  by  birth,  the  sole  heiress  of  one  of  the 
largest  fortunes  in  Russia,  she  devoted  all  her  mind 
and  rare  energy,  to  say  nothing  of  means,  to  public 
education.  Countess  Sophia  Paniri  had  erected  in  one 
of  the  Petrograd  working-class  districts  a  model  People's 
Palace,  which  she  managed  herself,  thereby  winning 
the  workmen's  sympathy  and  approval.  The  Tsarist 
regime  was  no  lover  of  such  hobbies,  and  placed  obstacles 
in  the  way  of  all  cultural  enterprises.  But  owing  to  her 
close  ties  with  Court  circles,  Coimtess  Panin  contrived 
to  safeguard  her  People's  Palace  from  police  aggression. 
She  was  what  is  known  in  Russia  as  a  cultural  worker, 
and  took  no  part  in  politics.  The  war  broke  out. 
Countess  Panin  devoted  herself  to  the  complicated 
home  war-work,  without  which  no  army  could  have 
endured  the  strain  of  the  war.  The  Revolution 
compelled  her  to  take  up  politics.  She  joined  the 
Cadets  party,  was  elected  to  the  Central  Committee^ 
and  afterwards  successively  occupied  the  posts  of 
Assistant  Minister  of  Public  Welfare  and  Assistant 
Minister  of  Education.  A  woman  of  indomitable 
courage  and  resolution.  Countess  Panin  lent  not  only 
moral,  but  also  important  material  support  to  the 
strike  of  officials.  Every  strike  primarily  demands 
funds.  As  this  strike  was  organised  for  the  defence 
not  of  any  class  interests,  but  of  those  of  the  entire 
State,  it  naturally  had  to  be  supported  by  State  funds. 
Countess  S.  Panin  provided  the  officials  with  means  to 
continue  the  strike  for  two  months  by  advancing  certain 
sums  to  their  leaders. 

*  She  was  the  second  woman  member  of  the  Central  Committee  of  the  Cadet 
Party.    The  first  was  the  author  of  this  work,  elected  in  the  spring  of  1906. 


THE  NOVEMBER  REVOLUTION  277 

The  strike  of  the  officials  gradually  developed, 
arousing  the  vexation  of  one  part  of  the  population  and 
the  sympathy  of  the  other.  The  State  Bank  became 
the  object  of  the  most  bitter  contest.  The  Bolsheviks 
made  their  appearance  at  the  Bank,  demanding  that 
ten  million  roubles  should  be  placed  to  the  current 
account  of  the  Soviet  of  People's  Commissaries.  The 
Council  of  the  State  Bank  refused  upon  the  plea  that 
"  The  Soviet  of  People's  Commissaries  is  an  institution 
which  does  not  possess  legal  rights." 

The  Bolsheviks  arrested  several  officials.  The  Com- 
missary reappeared  at  the  State  Bank  and  announced 
that  the  ten  millions  were  wanted  for  the  Red  Guard, 
which  would  disperse  if  not  paid.  This  was  for  the 
Director  of  the  Bank  a  most  unconvincing  argument. 
He  would  have  been  only  too  pleased  if  all  the  Reds 
dispersed.  The  soldiers  of  the  Semenovsky  regiment 
who  mounted  guard  at  the  Bank,  apparently  realising 
that  the  whole  nation's  wealth  stored  in  the  Bank's 
cellars  could  not  be  handed  over  for  plunder  to  a  band 
of  usurpers,  ignored  the  Commissary  and  obeyed  the 
Director  of  the  Bank.  The  building  was  several  times 
surrounded  by  troops.  The  officials  would  not  yield. 
Then  the  Bolsheviks  changed  the  sentry  and  arrested 
the  Council  of  the  Bank.  All  the  clerks  struck  work 
and  withdrew,  carrying  away  books  and  keys,  and 
informing  the  population  of  their  action  in  the  following 
proclamation : 

The  State  Bank  is  closed.  The  acts  of  violence  performed 
by  the  Bolsheviks  at  the  State  Bank  have  rendered  work  impos- 
sible. The  very  first  act  of  the  People's  Commissaries  took  the 
form  of  a  demand  for  10  million  roubles,  while  on  the  14th  of 
November  they  already  demanded  25  millions  without  stating 
the  ultimate  allocation  of  these  sums.  Even  during  the  Tsarist 
regime  the  State  Bank  did  not  pay  out  money  without  receiving 


278     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

an  account.  We,  the  officials  of  the  State  Bank,  cannot  take 
part  in  the  plunder  of  the  nation's  inheritance.  We  have  struck 
work.  Citizens,  if  you  safeguard  the  nation's  wealth  from  plunder, 
and  defend  us  from  violence,  we  shall  immediately  resume  our 
work. 

Some  attempts  were  made  to  support  the  strikers  by 
collections,  but  unfortunately,  mostly  by  resolutions 
passed  in  various  political  parties  and  organisations, 
such  as  the  Municipal  Council,  the  Unions  of  Professors 
and  representatives  of  other  liberal  professions,  the 
Committee  for  Saving  the  Country  and  the  Revolution, 
organised  to  fight  the  Bolsheviks,  etc.  The  latter 
Committee  issued  a  proclamation  of  protest  against  the 
seizure  of  the  State  Bank  : 

This  must  be  put  a  stop  to.  We  call  upon  all  Petrograd 
citizens  to  protest.  Workmen,  you  are  menaced  with  imemploy- 
ment.  Soldiers,  the  Bolsheviks  make  robbers  of  you.  Protest ! 
Down  with  the  rule  of  the  usurpers  ! 

Neither  the  soldiers  nor  the  workmen  responded  to 
the  call.  They  believed  the  Bolshevist  leaders,  who 
incited  them  against  the  officials,  accusing  them  of 
sabotage,  counter-revolutionary  plots  and  branding 
them  as  enemies  of  the  people.  The  Military-Revolu- 
tionary Committee  issued  a  threatening  order  : 

The  wealthy  classes  and  their  menials  will  forfeit  the  right 
of  obtaining  victuals.  All  the  food  suppHes  in  their  possession 
will  be  requisitioned  and  the  property  of  the  chief  offenders 
confiscated  (20th  November). 

In  vain  did  the  intelligentsia  strive  to  prove  both  in 
the  Press  and  at  extempore  street  meetings,  which  were 
still  possible,  that  the  Bolsheviks  were  the  real  enemies 
of  the  people,  that  on  the  contrary  the  officials  were 
safeguarding  the  nation's  interests  by  preventing  the 
Bolsheviks  from  ruining  the  State. 


J 


XI  THE  NOVEMBER  EEVOLUTION  279 

In  vain  did  the  officials  themselves  attempt  to  refute 
the  Bolsheviks'  slanderous  accusations  by  publishing  a 
special  appeal  to  the  population  : 

"  It  is  not  true  that  the  ofl&cials  are  not  giving  money  for  the 
army  and  bread  for  the  population,  and  are  stopping  railway 
communication,"  ran  the  declaration  of  the  Union  of  Unions. 
**  On  the  contrary,  all  institutions  administering  these  branches 
are  unceasingly  and  unsparingly  working  by  order  of  the  Union 
of  Unions. 

"  It  is  not  true  that  the  officials  are  hand  in  glove  with  the 
rich.  The  salary  of  most  of  the  officials  does  not  exceed  a  work- 
man's wages.  We  ourselves  are  part  of  the  toiling  democracy ; 
we  uphold  not  the  rich,  but  the  rights  of  the  whole  nation,  the 
rights  of  an  all-national  authority,  the  rights  of  the  Constituent 
Assembly. 

"  Lenin's  Soviet  of  People's  Commissaries  is  not  a  Govern- 
ment of  workmen  and  soldiers,  but  a  group  of  men  who  have 
usurped  power  despite  the  will  of  a  vast  majority  of  the 
population. 

"  They  threaten  to  disperse  the  Constituent  Assembly  if  it 
does  not  submit  to  their  will.  They  are  preparing  a  new  civil 
war,  to  drown  in  the  blood  of  the  people  the  cause  of  national 
liberty. 

"  We  should  be  traitors  to  our  Motherland  if  we  offered  our 
knowledge  and  labour  to  the  usurpers,  if  we  assisted  them  in 
organising  their  power  over  the  country,  strengthening  them  for 
the  struggle  against  the  Constituent  Assembly,  and  seizing 
miUions  of  money  belonging  to  the  nation  for  the  continuation 
and  spreading  of  civil  war. 

"  But  we  are  not  traitors,  and  we  declare  that  we  will  not  work 
with  those  who  are  plotting  against  the  Constituent  Assembly.** 

This  proclamation  was  posted  up  secretly  in  the 
night  in  the  streets  of  Petrograd.  Several  young  men, 
caught  upon  the  spot  with  proclamations,  were  arrested 
by  the  Bolsheviks.  But  the  masses,  whom  the  strikers 
were  attempting  to  convince,  read  their  bitterly  truthful 
declaration  with  a  contemptuous  sneer. 


280     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       oh. 

Workmen,  soldiers,  women,  had  but  one  answer  to 
all  the  speeches  of  their  opponents  :  "  We  don't  believe 
you.  You  are  bourgeois,  Korniloff  minions.  You've 
drunk  enough  of  our  blood." 

There  was  little  sense  in  those  words,  but  they  were 
repeated  with  the  immutable  accuracy  of  a  sacred 
formula  responding  to  some  vague  long-concealed 
sentiments,  which  now  stirred  the  people.  An  impene- 
trable veil  seemed  to  be  drawn  between  the  crowd 
possessed  by  Bolshevist  frenzy  and  all  those  who 
attempted  to  struggle,  at  least  by  word  if  not  by  deed, 
against  this  wholesale  class  madness.  Every  act  of 
opposition  to  Bolshevism  aroused  the  acute  anger  of  the 
crowds.  The  People's  Commissaries  very  cleverly  fanned 
it  into  flames  in  the  Press  by  their  speeches  and  their 
decrees.  Spite  against  the  officers  and  officials,  against 
the  entire  intelligentsia,  which  had  from  the  very 
beginning  refused  to  submit  to  the  Soviet  of  People's 
Commissaries,  grew  apace. 

Amid  the  helpless  protests  of  the  more  cultured 
classes,  both  among  the  intelligentsia  and  workmen,  and 
to  the  loud  applause  of  the  ignorant  misled  populace, 
the  Bolsheviks  took  drastic  action  against  the  un- 
submissive officials.  The  great  majority  of  the  strikers 
were  modest  toilers  living  from  hand  to  mouth  upon 
small  salaries.  Some  of  them  occupied  Government 
lodgings ;  the  Bolsheviks  turned  them  out  into  the 
street  in  the  cold  with  their  wives  and  children.  But 
neither  material  privations  nor  arrests,  perquisitions 
nor  menace  of  court-martial  could  prevail  upon  the 
strikers  to  surrender.  True,  at  the  time  the  Bolsheviks 
had  only  proclaimed  the  terror,  but  had  not  yet 
introduced  it  as  a  system  of  government.  Still  shots 
were  always  heard  round  Smolny.  No  one  knew  who 
might  be  shot  at  any  time.    But  all  did  know  that  for 


THE  NOVEMBER  REVOLUTION  281 

**  sabotage  "  people  were  taken  to  Smolny.  And  yet,  in 
spite  of  danger  and  threats,  the  little  clerks,  whose 
names  never  were  and  never  will  be  known,  staunchly 
defended  the  Russian  State,  parts  of  which  were  being, 
one  by  one,  smashed  to  atoms  by  the  Bolsheviks. 

This  strike  of  Government  officials  in  which  all,  from 
Assistant  Ministers  down  to  the  last  junior  clerk,  took 
part,  presented  one  of  the  most  interesting  episodes  of 
the  Russian  Revolution.  It  demonstrated  that  Russian 
statehood  had  created  not  only  submissive  executors 
of  the  master's  will,  but  had  also  imbued  those  insignifi- 
cant executors  with  a  deep,  self-sacrificing  national 
sense  of  duty,  which  in  the  moment  of  peril  developed 
into  heroism. 

If  that  heroism  came  to  nothing  and  ended  in  victory 
for  the  Bolsheviks,  the  fault  lay  least  of  all  with  the 
officials  themselves.  .  .  .  Like  most  Russians,  they 
believed  that  Lenin's  power  could  not  last ;  that  after 
a  certain  lapse  of  time  the  Constituent  Assembly  would 
come  into  being  and  the  Provisional  Government  would 
be  reinstated. 

History,  however,  decreed  otherwise.  In  a  month's 
time  it  became  necessary  to  prepare  for  what  was  called 
the  "  liquidation "  of  the  strike.  It  was  drawn  out 
until  the  opening  of  the  Constituent  Assembly.  When 
it  became  obvious  that  no  Constituent  Assembly  was 
possible,  it  was  decided  to  end  the  strike.  By  that 
time  the  Bolsheviks  had  already  decided  they  could 
manage  everything  themselves  and  were  not  in  need 
of  experienced  and  expert  officials.  They  appointed 
porters  as  head-clerks,  charwomen  as  headmistresses  of 
girls'  schools,  etc.  Numbers  of  officials  remained  liter- 
ally in  the  street  doomed  to  a  lingering  death. 

Like  all  the  rest  of  the  Russian  intelligentsia,  the 
officials  were  confronted  with  the  hard  dilemma  of  either 


282     PROM  LTBEETY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

surrendering  to  the  mercy  of  the  victors,  whom  they 
looked  upon  as  criminals  and  enemies  of  Eussia,  or  of 
taking  up  physical  labour,  which  could  not  be  easily 
obtained,  or  as  a  last  resource  of  starting  on  a  pilgrimage 
across  the  vast  country  weltering  in  anarchy  until  they 
might  reach  some  border  State  unconquered  by  the 
Soviets. 

The  meritorious  service  rendered  by  the  officials  to 
the  Russian  State  was  emphasised  in  the  farewell 
decree  issued  on  the  1st  December  by  the  late  members 
of  the  Provisional  Government.  It  was  signed  by 
several  assistant  Ministers  and  by  the  Socialist  Ministers, 
S.  Prokopovich,  A.  Nikitine,  K.  Gvosdeff ,  A.  Liverovsky, 
S.  Masloff.  The  non-Socialist  Ministers  were  unable  to 
sign  it,  as  they  had  not  been  liberated,  but  were  still 
held  as  hostages  in  the  Peter  and  Paul  Fortress. 

'*  Most  valuable  service  has  been  rendered  by  the 
personnel  of  officials  and  clerks  working  in  Government 
institutions  in  safeguarding  the  institutions  from  at- 
tempts at  encroachment  on  the  part  of  irresponsible 
and  illegal  usurpers."  Thus  ran  the  declaration : 
"  Fearing  neither  threats,  nor  violence,  neither  shrinking 
from  personal  sacrifice,  fully  conscious  of  their  right  and 
their  duty  to  the  Motherland,  the  officials  and  employees 
unfalteringly  carried  out  their  trust,  protested  bravely 
and  decisively  against  the  seizure  of  the  institutions  by 
rebels  and  prevented  individuals,  styling  themselves 
the  '  People's  Commissaries,'  from  taking  possession  of 
the  national  inheritance." 

The  members  of  the  late  Provisional  Government, 
calling  upon  the  people  to  struggle  against  the  Bolsheviks, 
pointed  out  the  perils  of  their  rule  : 

The  negotiations  for  an  armistice  started  by  the  rebels  in 
the  name  of  the  Russian  State  can  only  lead  to  a  separate  peace 
shameful  and  ruinous  for  Russia.    Unless  powerfully  opposed 


THE  NOVEMBER  REVOLUTION  283 

by  the  Army  and  the  People,  these  insane  actions  will  reduce 
Russia  to  a  state  of  political  and  economic  slavery,  provoke  a 
rupture  with  the  Entente  Powers,  eliminate  Russia  from  among 
the  Great  Powers,  and  doom  her  to  the  fate  of  a  vanquished 
nation  surrendering  to  the  mercy  of  the  conquerors.  Such 
unprecedented  temerity  of  action  by  the  rebels  obliges  the 
Provisional  Government  of  the  Russian  Republic  to  declare 
that  these  actions  can  in  nowise  be  recognised  as  acts  of  Govern- 
ment or  as  expressing  the  will  of  the  people. 

Admitting  that  "  the  usurpers  will  not  refrain  from 
laying  their  hands  even  upon  the  Constituent  Assembly, 
if  the  latter  does  not  submit  to  their  will,  the  Provisional 
Government  appeals  to  all  citizens  in  the  Army  and  the 
Homeland  for  a  united  defence  of  the  Constituent 
Assembly  as  a  guarantee  of  the  possibility  of  its  powerful 
and  firm  declaration  of  the  will  of  the  People." 

While  acknowledging  the  merits  and  courage  of  the 
Government  ofl&cials  in  safeguarding  the  interests  of  the 
StatCj  the  representatives  of  the  Provisional  Government 
give  a  far  from  favourable  estimate  of  the  activities  of 
other  organisations : 

The  Committees  for  Saving  the  Motherland  and  the  Revolu- 
tion and  Committees  of  Public  Safety  organised  at  the  outbreak 
of  the  rebellion  offered  no  support  to  the  legal  supreme  authority, 
but  aimed  at  the  creation  of  a  uniform  Socialistic  Cabinet.  The 
Provisional  Government  has  throughout  firmly  adhered  to  the 
principle  of  an  all-National  power.  Acting  upon  such  a  basis, 
the  Provisional  Government  could  not  recognise  the  authority 
of  the  rebels  and  would  not  participate  in  the  attempt  to  create 
a  new  power  upon  the  eve  of  the  Constituent  Assembly. 

This  was  an  allusion  to  the  attempt  to  entice  the 
Socialist  Ministers  to  compromise  with  the  Bolsheviks. 

After  the  coup  d'etat  various  public  forces  grouped 
around  the  first  Soviet  endeavoured  in  their  own  way 
to  oppose  the  Bolsheviks.     They  first  organised  the 


284     FKOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

Committee  for  Saving  the  Motherland  and  the  Revolu- 
tion. Later,  they  formed  the  Committee  for  the  Defence 
of  the  Constituent  Assembly. 

As  the  leaders  of  the  Socialist  Centre  might  at  any 
moment  be  arrested  or  even  shot,  they  were  obliged  to 
act  in  secrecy  and  return  to  their  former  mode  of  living 
with  false  passports  and  under  disguise,  hiding  in  other 
people's  flats  as  in  the  days  of  Tsarism.  It  is  extremely 
difiicult  to  trace  their  underhand  activity,  particularly 
as  it  brought  no  results.  It  was  naturally  difficult  for 
representatives  of  parties  which  for  so  long  had  been 
in  friendly  intercourse  with  the  Bolsheviks  to  find  a 
psychological  standpoint  justifying  a  change  of  attitude 
on  their  part. 

Upon  a  certain  November  day  the  Bolsheviks 
suddenly  arrested  the  Lord  Mayor  and  several  members 
of  the  Mimicipal  Council,  both  Socialists  and  Cadets. 
The  Lord  Mayor,  6r.  Shreider,  was  one  of  the  superior 
representatives  of  the  Social-Revolutionary  party,  an 
honest,  fairly  able  man,  and  a  capable  journalist.  When 
he  was  brought  to  the  Smolny  and  led  into  the  room 
occupied  by  the  previously  arrested  members  of  the 
Municipal  Council,  the  arrested  Lord  Mayor  made  a 
tour  of  the  Red  Guard  sentries  and  shook  hands  with 
them  aU. 

"  What  are  you  doing  %  "  indignantly  asked  one  of 
the  municipal  members,  a  Cadet. 

"  What's  the  matter  ?  I  look  upon  them  as  com- 
rades." 

"  And  I  look  upon  them  as  gaol-birds,"  replied  the 
Cadet  brusquely. 

When  at  a  meeting  of  the  Petrograd  municipal 
corporation  another  Social-Revolutionary,  the  Mayor 
of  Moscow,  Rudnev,  was  telling  the  tragic  story  of  the 
capture  of  Moscow  by  the  Bolsheviks,  he  was  always 


THE  NOVEMBER  REVOLUTION  285 

trying  to  emphasise  the  fact  that  he  had  not  sought  nor 
desired  an  armed  struggle  against  them. 

Even  after  the  Bolsheviks  had  openly  renounced 
their  former  friendship,  after  the  Social-Revolutionary 
Kerensky  and  many  others  had  been  denounced  as 
counter-revolutionaries,  the  Socialists  of  the  Centre 
still  found  it  hard  to  understand  that  now  they  could 
no  longer  sit  between  two  stools,  that  they  would  either 
have  to  declare  war  against  the  Bolsheviks  or  submis- 
sively don  the  Bolshevist  uniform.  For  the  Bolsheviks 
were  Socialists,  and  Socialists  must  stand  shoulder  to 
shoulder  against  the  rest  of  non-Socialistic  mankind, 
lumped  together  as  the  bourgeoisie.  The  attempt  of 
the  Socialistic  parties  to  come  to  an  agreement  with 
the  Bolsheviks,  referred  to  by  the  Ministers,  is  thus 
comprehensible.  It  was  a  childish  scheme,  as  neither 
the  former  Ministers  nor  the  People's  Conmiissaries 
desired  such  an  agreement. 

The  Socialistic  group  that  had  seized  power  had  no 
intention  of  sharing  it  with  any  one.  On  the  contrary, 
the  Bolsheviks  were  getting  a  firmer  grip  of  everything, 
abolishing  aU  organisations,  all  institutions  which,  in 
one  way  or  another,  were  incarnations  and  expressions 
of  the  people's  will. 

The  first  stage  of  the  armed  struggle  between  the 
Bolsheviks  and  the  adherents  of  the  Provisional  Govern- 
ment was  rapidly  brought  to  a  close.  Hardly  had 
Petrograd  been  encircled  by  trenches  against  the 
*/  Kronilovist  gangs  of  Kerensky,"  by  Trotsky's  orders, 
than  there  were  no  longer  any  anti-Bolshevist  gangs 
either  in  Petrograd  or  in  the  environs.  Kerensky 
himself  disappeared  on  the  14th  of  November,  and  it 
was  only  in  the  summer  of  1918  that  he  again  turned 
up,  not  in  Russia,  but  abroad.  Moscow  resisted  from 
the  8th  to  the  15th  of  November.    Then  the  Bolsheviks 


286     PEOM  LIBEETY  TO  BEEST-LITOVSK    oh.  xi 

were  victorious.  In  both  Moscow  and  Petrograd  armed 
resistance  was  at  an  end.  True,  it  was  necessary  to 
conquer  the  rest  of  Eussia,  but  the  Bolsheviks  held 
the  arsenals  and  munition  works,  the  State  Bank, 
and  the  Government  Printing  Works.  They  declared 
Petrograd  to  be  in  a  state  of  siege,  and  treated  the 
population  as  conquerors  treat  a  conquered  country. 

In  the  Council  of  the  Eepublic — ^that  last  organ  of 
State  where  the  various  currents  of  Eussian  political 
life  could  still  find  expression — the  Bolsheviks,  on 
demonstratively  leaving  that  "  bourgeois  "  institution, 
repeated  their  war-cry :  "  All  power  to  the  Soviets  ! 
All  the  land  to  the  people  !  Hail  to  an  immediate, 
honest,  democratic  peace !  Hail  to  the  Constituent 
Assembly !  " 

Now  they  were  in  a  position  to  fulfil  these  promises, 
but  the  Bolsheviks  were  consistent  only  in  the  fulfil- 
ment of  the  first  two  clauses  of  that  short,  but  tempting 
programme — ^power  to  the  Soviets,  and  land  to  all. 


CHAPTER  XII 

THE  CONSOLIDATION  OF  THE   BOLSHEVIST  POWER 

Bolsheviks  and  Germans — ^Whence  came  the  money  ? — ^A  morality  of 
Lenin — Trotsky  and  other  heroes — Decrees  about  land  and  peace 
— Ensign  Krylenko — ^The  separate  armistice — The  march  against 
the  Stavka — Brutal  murder  of  Dukhonin  —  The  Brest-Litovsk 
Negotiations — Soviet  rule — Decrees  about  the  Press — ^Raiding  of 
newspaper  offices. 

A.  I.  Shingarepf,  in  his  diary  for  December  1917,  tlius 
defines  the  elements  involved  in  the  Bolshevist  move- 
ment : 

1.  (a)  The  labouring  classes,  ignorant,  poUtically  uneducated, 
and  embittered  by  social  inequality  and  the  economic  ruin  of 
the  country  entailed  by  the  War ; 

(6)  A  mass  of  unbridled  and  Ucentious  soldiery,  averse  from 
fighting,  young,  undrilled,  and  idle,  taken  away  from  healthy 
agricultural  labour,  at  an  age  when  their  energies  are  still  seeking 
an  outlet,  when  they  are  easily  carried  away  by  the  most  extreme 
theories.  Masses  poUtically  as  ignorant,  or  even  more  so,  than 
the  workmen,  and  still  more  inclined  to  violence  and  robbery. 

2.  Criminals  from  prison. 

3.  Former  Tsarist  secret  police  employees  who  have  attached 
themselves  to  Bolshevism. 

4.  German  spies  and  Germanophiles. 

5.  Idealists  of  the  dictatorship  of  the  proletariat,  fanatics  of 
Social  Revolution,  madmen,  and  adepts  at  internal  class  war. 

This  is  a  broad  and  exhaustive  analysis  of  their 
composition.    Its  value  is  increased  by  the  fact  that 

287 


288     FKOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

Shingareff  wrote  his  diary  while  imprisoned  in  the 
Portress,  where  he  was  in  constant  danger  of  being 
lynched  by  the  Reds.  Nevertheless,  even  in  prison, 
he  tried  to  be  just  in  his  estimate  of  them,  and  to  under- 
stand the  essence  of  Bolshevism. 

There  is  a  widespread  conviction  that  the  Bolsheviks 
attained  power  and  influence  with  the'  help  of  the 
Germans. 

The  officers  and  Cadets,  who  had  remained  loyal  to 
the  Provisional  Government,  related  afterwards  that 
the  Red  Guard  in  Moscow  was  commanded  by  German 
officers,  that  German  talk  was  frequently  overheard 
among  the  soldiers  besieging  the  Kremlin.  Krasnoff's 
Cossacks  also  said  that  the  Germans  had  assisted  the 
Reds  in  the  fighting  near  Gatchina.  In  proportion  to 
the  gradual  development  of  Bolshevism,  the  Soviets 
made  ever  more  frequent  use  of  German  and  Maygar 
prisoners  of  war  for  the  conquest  of  Russian  territories. 
Sometimes  these  prisoners  were  disguised  as  Russian 
soldiers.  In  January  1918  I  met  on  the  Neva  Embank- 
ment at  Petrograd  two  soldiers  wearing  Russian  military 
overcoats.  I  was  struck  by  their  soldierly  bearing,  for 
by  this  time  soldiers  had  lost  all  trace  of  military 
discipline.  As  these  two  smart-looking  Russian  soldiers 
approached,  I  overheard  them  talking  in  the  purest 
Berlin  dialect  of  what  they  would  do  upon  their  return 
to  Germany. 

It  is  by  no  means  easy  to  ascertain  how  far  the 
Bolsheviks  employed  German  aid  in  their  plot  to  take 
hold  of  the  Russian  State.  Kerensky's  Government 
had  not  concluded  the  investigation  of  the  July  revolt. 
The  veil  had  only  partially  been  withdrawn  by  the 
data  published  by  the  Procurator  on  the  3rd  of  August. 
It  certified  that  Lenin  and  Zinovieff  were  arrested  in 
Austria  in  1914,  then  liberated  under  certain  conditions. 


xn  BOLSHEVIST  POWER  289 

That  large  sums  of  money  were  transferred  to  Petrograd 
by  a  Russian  Jew  Helefant,  commonly  known  among 
international  Socialists  by  his  literary  pseudonym  of 
Parvus.  This  obscure  international  speculator,  who 
acquired  an  enormous  fortune,  styled  himself  as  the 
ideal  inspirer  of  Bolshevism.  The  German  Social- 
Democrat  Haase  revealed  the  strange  connections  of 
Parvus  with  the  Imperial  German  Government.  This  fact 
did  not  prevent  Scheidemann  from  keeping  up  friendly 
relations  with  Parvus,  and  from  staying  with  him  at 
Copenhagen  in  the  sumptuous  villa  of  this  apostle  of 
the  dictatorship  of  the  proletariat.  The  Russian 
Intelligence  Department  possessed  data  proving  the 
connection  between  the  Bolsheviks  and  the  German 
General  Staff.  But  Kerensky's  Government  fell  apart, 
without  having  published  its  information,  and  without 
arriving  at  any  definite  conclusion  upon  the  subject. 
At  the  time  of  the  November  cowp  d'etat  all  the 
documents  of  the  Intelligence  Department,  which 
was  inmiediately  seized  by  the  Bolsheviks,  apparently 
fell  into  the  hands  of  the  victors.  Possibly  we  shall 
never  learn  the  whole  truth  of  how  the  Bolsheviks  sold 
and  betrayed  Russia.  Perhaps  only  if  revolutionary 
Germany  consents  to  publish  the  documents  of  Imperial 
secret  diplomacy,  when  many  curious  details  concerning 
Bolshevist  activities  both  before  and  during  the  Revolu- 
tion may  come  to  light,  as  well  as  an  explanation  as 
to  why  Lenin  had  been  so  graciously  allowed  to  pass 
through  Germany. 

At  times  the  Russian  and  particularly  the  Foreign 
Press  published  various  documents  pointing  to  the 
pecuniary  and  military  connections  between  the 
Bolsheviks  and  the  German  Government.  However, 
experts  doubt  the  authenticity  of  these  documents,  and 
logically  they  contain  many  contradictions. 

u 


290     FEOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

But  some  facts  are  indubitable.  Firstly,  that 
Lenin  and  other  Bolsheviks  passed  through  Germany 
when  the  war  was  still  at  a  climax.  Secondly,  the 
enormous  sums  of  money  at  the  disposal  of  the 
Bolsheviks  from  the  very  outset  of  the  Revolution.  No 
other  party,  either  Socialist  or  Radical,  possessed  the 
means  of  subsidising  or  planning  their  propaganda  on 
such  a  large  scale  as  did  the  Bolsheviks.^  They  printed 
papers  and  pamphlets,  freely  distributing  millions  of 
copies  to  the  army  at  the  front  and  in  the  rear.  Their 
orators  received  high  day- wages.  Soldiers,  and  especially 
sailors  who  had  joined  the  Bolshevist  party,  had  their 
pockets  full  of  hundred-rouble  notes.  When  the  sailors 
came  to  the  villages  to  preach  Marxian  ideas  of  universal 
equalisation  of  property,  the  peasants  were  not  so  much 
impressed  by  their  words  as  by  the  sight  of  the  bank- 
notes, which  the  orators  dangled  carelessly  before  the 
simple-minded  village  audience. 

Bolshevist  emigres  abroad  lived  in  great  poverty. 
Later  they  received  money  from  the  Austrian  and 
German  Governments  and  set  up  publishing  Bolshevist 
papers  in  Switzerland  for  Socialistic  propaganda  among 
Russian  prisoners  of  war.  Besides  the  Bolsheviks,  the 
Social-Revolutionaries,  first  among  whom  was  their 
leader  Chernofi,  also  collaborated  in  these  papers. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution  in  Russia  the 
numbers  of  adherents  to  Bolshevism,  judging  by  the 
elections  to  the  Soviets,  were  not  considerable,  and 
they  could  not  provide  the  enormous  sums  spent  by 

1  The  Social-Revolutionaries  also  possessed  considerable  funds.  They  also 
spent  large  sums  on  agitation  and  the  sending  out  propagandists  to  the  villages. 
After  the  Bolshevist  coup  d'etat,  the  Znamia  Truda,  a  Left  Social-Revolutionary 
paper,  declared  in  December  1917  that  2,000,000  roubles  had  been  advanced 
to  the  Soc.  Rev.  party  by  the  Americans  through  a  certain  Mr.  Robins,  delegated 
to  Russia  upon  some  diplomatic  mission.  This  was  not  refuted.  If  that  were 
true,  then  it  follows  that  both  the  rival  Socialist  parties,  the  S.  R.  and  the 
Bolsheviks,  were  working  upon  foreign  money. 


BOLSHEVIST  POWER  291 

their  leaders.  Even  the  Petrograd  Soviet  and  the 
Executive  Committee  at  the  zenith  of  their  popularity 
were  poor  compared  with  the  Bolshevist  organisations. 
One  is  forced  to  draw  the  conclusion  that  the  hundreds 
of  thousands,  or  rather  millions,  spent  by  Lenin  and 
his  followers  were  furnished  to  them  from  some 
exchequer  which  possessed  millions  at  its  disposal. 
Only  banks  and  state  exchequers  have  the  possibility 
of  subsidising  propaganda  on  such  a  scale.  Bolsheviks 
were  of  no  advantage  to  banks,  they  were  rather  a 
menace.  Of  all  States,  Germany  and  Austria  were  the 
only  ones  interested  in  the  destruction  of  the  Russian 
Army  and  State,  in  the  disintegration  of  the  Russian 
people  through  the  medium  of  the  Bolsheviks.  There- 
fore we  are  faced  with  the  only  logical  solution,  that 
the  millions  of  roubles  spent  by  the  Bolsheviks  upon 
agitation  and  preparation  for  the  seizure  of  power 
could  only  come  from  German  source. 

The  link  uniting  the  Bolsheviks  to  the  Grerman 
General  Staff  can  also  be  mainly  established  by  indirect 
proofs.  From  the  outset  of  the  Revolution  the  propa- 
ganda of  the  Bolsheviks  as  well  as  that  of  other  Socialists 
about  ending  the  war,  democratising  the  army, 
fraternising  with  the  enemy,  met  the  unanimous 
support  of  German  propagandists  who  scattered  leaflets 
at  the  Russian  front.  The  text  of  those  pamphlets, 
printed  by  order  of  the  Kaiser's  Government,  often 
literally  coincided  with  that  text  of  the  leaflets  printed 
in  Russia  by  order  of  the  Central  Committees  of  the 
Socialist  parties. 

One  cannot  omit  the  fact  that  Bolshevist  propa- 
ganda was  especially  rife  and  successful  in  regions  of 
particular  strategic  importance,  or  in  food-supply 
centres,  equally  important  strategically.  Helsingfors, 
Vyborg,    Cronstadt,    Riga    were    all     approaches    to 


292     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       oh. 

Petrograd.  In  Petrograd  itself — the  Vyborgsky  side, 
Vasilievsky  Ostrov,  the  Putilov  and  Obukhov  munition 
factories.  On  the  Volga,  the  principal  corn  wharves, 
and  Rybinsk,  Tsaritsyn,  and  Kazan,  which  contained 
depots  of  artillery  plant  and  stores  of  explosives. 

During  the  armed  November  coup  d^etat  the 
Bolsheviks'  dispositions  exhibited  traces  of  a  military 
organisation  whose  specialists  were  not  to  be  found  in 
their  ranks.  The  Cossacks,  who  fought  the  Red  Guards 
and  sailors  near  Gatchina,  were  amazed  at  seeing  the 
Reds  execute  a  specific  German  manoeuvre. 

As  the  civil  war  waxed  stronger  the  participation  of 
German  officers  and  soldiers  became  ever  plainer.  A 
Magyar  division  was  organised  to  oppose  General 
Alexeieff  on  the  Don,  and  soon  became  the  military 
backbone  of  the  Bolsheviks. 

The  Brest-Litovsk  Peace  was  not  concluded,  when 
the  Germans  were  already  assisting  the  Bolsheviks  in 
their  conquest  of  Russia.  Later  on,  as  for  instance  in 
all  the  outbursts  of  civil  war  in  Siberia,  the  Bolsheviks 
made  still  broader  use  of  such  assistance.  Detachments 
composed  of  these  prisoners  of  war  were  sometimes 
called  international  Socialist  detachments.  I  happened 
to  witness  early  in  1918  a  Petrograd  street  demonstration 
of  these  internationalists  carrying  red  flags.  Their 
numbers  were  yet  small,  their  expression  surly  and 
sheepish.  But  certainly,  owing  to  German  discipline 
then  still  very  strong,  they  were  more  to  be  depended 
upon  for  military  support  than  the  Red  Guards. 

In  any  case,  in  spite  of  the  Bolsheviks'  clever 
capacity  for  concealing  the  secrets  of  their  diplomacy, 
one  can  boldly  assert  that  the  Germans,  or  rather  the 
Imperial  German  Government,  had  in  every  way  from 
the  very  first  days  of  the  Revolution,  if  not  before, 
supported  the  Bolsheviks,   encouraged  Bolshevism  in 


xn  BOLSHEVIST  POWER  293 

Russia,  and  been  in  close  contact  with  it  throughout.^ 
The  former  apparatus  of  military  espionage,  particularly 
well  organised  by  the  Germans  at  Petrograd,  and  in 
Finland,  was  transformed  by  them  into  an  instrument 
of  political  propaganda,  for  they  fully  realised  the 
advantage  of  disintegrating  Russia's  naval  and  military 
power  from  inside,  instead  of  attacking  it  with  armed 
force  from  outside.  And  Bolsheviks  aspired  to  a  similar 
disintegration. 

It  certainly  does  not  follow  that  Bolshevism  as  a 
whole  had  sold  itself  to  Germany.  Certainly  not. 
Bolshevism,  both  in  theory  and  in  practice,  is  a  complex 
phenomenon.  Its  ideology  is  based  upon  the  half- 
scientific  hypothesis  of  the  German  Jew,  Karl  Marx. 
Thus  Germany  becomes  the  motherland  of  Bolshevism. 
Practical  deductions  from  the  experience  of  the  Paris 
communists  were  later  added  to  this  purely  Marxian 
doctrine,  and  the  whole  was  subjugated  to  Lenin's 
ambitious  tactics  and  haughty  a-morality.  Lenin  and 
Scheidemann,  even  the  late  Bebel  and  Jaur^s  pursued 
one  aim  —  the  establishment  of  a  class-state  with  a 
dictatorship  of  the  proletariat,  an  annihilation  of  all 
personal  initiative  in  production  and  exchange. 
Bolshevism  differs  from  the  more  moderate  tendencies 
of  Social-Democracy  in  method,  date,  in  its  attitude 
towards  parliamentarism,  and  chiefly  in  morality. 
They  all  dreamed  of  a  world  revolution,  but  Lenin 
aimed  at  its  immediate  realisation,  unhampered  by  any 
scruples,  and  unhesitating  before  any  sacrifice. 

I  take  the  liberty  of  expressing  my  conviction  that 
to  organise  the  Russian  Revolution  he  had  accepted 
German   money  —  most  probably  through   the   inter- 

'  Not  in  vain  did  the  ideologist  of  German  Imperialism,  Rohrbach,  frankly 
say,  "  Russia  for  the  Bolsheviks,  and  Bolsheviks  for  us."  Only  neither  ho 
nor  the  Kaiser  had  calculated  that  Germany  might  also  become  infected  with 
the  rebellious  spirit  of  revolution. 


294     FEOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       om 

mediary  of  Parvus,  or  maybe  direct  from  some  Mgh 
or  subordinate  German  officials.  It  would  be  naive  to 
suppose  that  Lenin  could  be  bought.  He  does  not  sell 
himself,  but  will  accept  money  from  any  one.  Is  it  not 
one  and  the  same  to  him  whose  money  he  takes,  once 
his  entire  political  activity  is  founded  upon  the  principle 
that  the  end  justifies  the  means  ? 

In  that  respect  Lenin  was  not  by  far  the  first  among 
Russian  revolutionaries.  Perhaps  the  most  genuine  re- 
presentative of  the  type  was  the  well-known  revolu- 
tionist of  the  seventies,  Nechaeff.^  A  conspirator  with 
the  iron  will  and  .merciless  hardness  of  a  great 
inquisitor,  he  composed  the  famous  catechism  of  a 
revolutionary,  which  bears  the  same  black  seal  of 
a-morality — a  religious  man  would  call  it  the  seal  of 
Antichrist — as  do  the  words  and  deeds  of  Lenin. 

A  revolutionary  despises  public  opinion,  professed 
Nechaeff  in  his  catechism.  ..."  He  despises  and  hates 
contemporary  public  morality  in  all  its  aspirations  and 
manifestations.  For  him  morality  means  everything 
that  promotes  the  triumph  for  the  Revolution.  ...  A 
revolutionary  is  a  doomed  man.  Stern  unto  himself  he 
must  also  be  stern  unto  others.  All  tender,  softening 
ties  of  relationship,  friendship,  love,  gratitude  and  even 
honour  itself  must  be  crushed  in  his  heart  by  the  one 
cold  passion  of  revolution." 

In  conformity  with  this  doctrine  human  beings,  "  all 
this  polluted  society,"  were  divided  into  several  'cate- 
gories according  to  their  usefulness  for  the  Revolution. 
All  could  be  deceived,  exploited  or  even  murdered. 
"  Doctrinaires,  conspirators  and  revolutionaries  idly  ex- 
pounding at  meetings  or  on  paper  should  be  drawn  into 

*  In  his  novel  The  Poaseaaed,  Dostoievsky  had  portrayed  Nechaeff  under 
the  name  of  Verkhovensky,  although  he  rather  emphasised  the  caricature 
traits  instead  of  the  tragic  ones. 


BOLSHEVIST  POWER'  296 

head-splitting  activities  which  will  result  in  their  loss  of 
the  majority  of  votes." 

Even  that  detail  was  repeated  by  Lenin,  who  knows 
no  mercy  neither  to  bourgeois  nor  to  revolutionary. 

Certainly  revolutionaries  of  Nechaeff 's  or  Lenin's  type 
suffer  from  what  psychiatrists  term  as  moral  insanity. 
They  are  particularly  dangerous  on  account  of  their 
capacity,  frequently  to  be  found  in  lunatics,  of  shaping 
the  most  fantastic,  most  criminal  dreams  into  a  logical 
scheme.  It  is  the  psychical  state  which  begets  fanatics. 
In  former  times  fanaticism  generally  assumed  religious 
forms,  but  in  our  days  it  assumes  a  social  colouring. 
It  may  be,  perhaps,  because  it  seeks  the  support  of  the 
masses,  and  the  contemporary  masses  fall  a  far  easier 
prey  to  a  socialistic  than  to  a  religious  epidemic. 

To  understand  Bolshevism,  one  must  bear  in  mind 
that  the  Bolsheviks  deny  all  moral  standards.  In  that 
respect  Lenin  appears  not  only  as  the  strongest  but  as 
the  most  characteristic  figure.  He  draws  no  limit  be- 
tween truth  and  falsehood,  and  lies  with  the  calm  shame- 
lessness  of  a  man  who  is  convinced  that  a  universal, 
social  revolution  is  an  aim  in  itself,  and  is  ready  to  march 
towards  its  realisation  knee-deep  in  mire  and  blood, 
through  crime  and  deceit.  All  the  moral  principles 
fostered  by  civilisation  within  the  soul  of  contemporary 
mankind  are  simply  non-existent  in  Lenin's  soul.  This 
moral  disease  bears  a  definite  name  in  psychiatry — more 
insans — and  is  partly  transmitted  to  his  adepts  as  a 
new  super-moral  doctrine.  His  contempt  for  good  and 
evil  holds  the  door  wide  open  for  all  criminal  elements, 
members  of  the  okhrana,  spies,  robbers,  criminals,  who 
swarm  in  the  Soviets.  But  the  chief  members  of  the 
Soviet  likewise  bear  the  same  stamp,  at  best  of  an  absence 
of  fastidiousness,  and  immorality  at  the  worst. 

After  Lenin,  the  most  influential  Bolshevik  is  Trotsky- 


296     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch* 

Bronstein.  In  1905  he  was  member  of  the  Soviet  of 
Workmen's  Deputies  organised  during  the  first  Revolu- 
tion. He  was  arrested,  and  with  some  others  deported 
to  Siberia,  whence  he  escaped.  For  eleven  years  he  led 
the  strenuous  life  of  an  emigre,  painfully  earning  his 
living  as  a  journalist.  But  he  exhibited  no  particular 
talent  for  his  career.  His  articles  and  books  were  known 
only  among  the  restricted  circles  of  socialist  in- 
telligentsia. 

Trotsky  is  ambitious,  adroit,  certainly  unscrupulous. 
Those  who  have  met  him  assert  that  the  national 
humiliations  and  police  persecutions  which  he,  as  a  Jew, 
suffered  from  in  Russia  made  him  detest  Russia.  In 
any  case  his  actions  as  Bolshevist  Dictator  demonstrate 
if  not  hatred,  then  at  least  a  fierce  contempt  of  the 
Russian  people.  A  pusillanimous  and  self-centred  man, 
Trotsky  brought  over  from  England  a  hatred  also  of 
that  country,  because,  being  suspected  of  intercourse  with 
the  Germans,  he  was  put  into  an  English  prison  on  his 
way  from  America  to  Russia. 

Trotsky  did  not  at  once  become  Bolshevik.  In  a 
book  written  in  1906  and  entitled  Our  Revolution, 
he  professed  more  moderate  views  and  advocated  a  Con- 
stituent Assembly.  "  Only  an  all-national  Constituent 
Assembly,  holding  all  the  keys  and  picklocks^  of 
all  rights  and  privileges,  possessing  the  right  of  final 
decision  upon  all  questions,  only  such  a  sovereign  Con- 
stituent Assembly  can  without  hindrance  create  a  new 
democratic  law." 

At  the  time  he  still  professed  Marx's  view  that 
"  Socialism  could  not  be  introduced  in  the  place  of 
capitalism  by  means  of  a  few  decrees,"  and  uttered 

^  This  accidental  use  of  a  criminal  by-word  seems  rather  characteristic. 
Not  content  with  the  keys,  Trotsky  is  already  advising  the  use  of  the  robber's 
tool — ^the  picklock. 


BOLSHEVIST  POWER  297 

the   warning  that  would   bring   the  proletariat  to  a 
catastrophe. 

In  this  book,  Trotsky  expressed  himself  against  equal 
land-distribution,  as  it  would  lead  to  "  a  purely  formal 
expropriation  of  small  holders,"  and  a  weakening  of 
revolutionary  parties. 

And  in  the  spring  of  1917  Trotsky  appeared  in 
Russia  as  a  Marxian -Bolshevik.  Being  ambitious,  he 
knew  it  would  be  easier  for  him  to  obtain  a  prominent 
place  among  the  Bolsheviks,  because  the  Mensheviks 
mistrusted  him.  As  an  adroit  adventurer  he  realised 
that  the  maximum  programme  would  more  surely  attract 
the  masses  and  give  power  to  their  tempters.  His  cal- 
culations proved  correct.  In  April,  Trotsky  had  as  yet 
no  influence.  In  summer  he  was  imprisoned  for  organ- 
ising an  armed  rising,  but  already  in  September  was  once 
more  at  liberty  and  had  ousted  Chheidze  by  occupying 
his  post  of  President  of  the  Petrograd  Soviet.  This 
offered  him  the  possibility  of  organising  the  seizure  of 
power.  At  the  time  of  the  November  coup  d'etat 
Trotsky  was  the  leading  spirit  of  the  Bolshevist  uprising. 
He  has  remained  since  then  as  one  of  the  Bolshevist 
leaders.  An  eloquent  orator,  capable  of  hypnotising  the 
mob,  he  rules  over  part  of  Russia,  violating  ideas  and 
human  beings,  committing  treason  and  crime,  realising 
Machiavelli's  precept,  that  tyrants  must  have  no  fear 
of  bloodshed. 

Lenin  and  Trotsky  share  power  and  influence. 
Friendship  between  them  there  is  none.  It  is  said  that 
they  often  quarrel.  Yet  like  two  convicts,  bound  by 
the  same  chain,  together  they  go  from  crime  to  crime. 
And  when  they  perish  they  will  perish  together. 

There  are  few  Russians  among  the  Bolshevist  wire- 
pullers, i.e,  few  men  imbued  with  the  all-Russian  culture 
and  interests  of  the  Russian  people.    None  of  them  have 


298     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

in  any  way  been  prominent  in  any  stage  of  former 
Russian  life.  Among  the  Bolshevist  Commissaries  we 
may  meet  absolute  foreigners,  like  the  Austrian,  K. 
Radek,  a  capable  and  dishonest  young  adventurer,  for- 
merly expelled  from  the  ranks  of  Polish  and  German 
Social-Democracy  for  underhand  dealing.  Another 
foreigner  plajnng  an  important  part  in  Bolshevist 
diplomacy  is  an  internationalist-Social-Democrat,  C. 
Rakovsky,  a  Bulgar  by  origin  and  a  Rumanian  subject, 
sufficiently  well-read,  but  limited  almost  to  dulness. 
He  was  delegated  by  the  Soviet  of  People's  Commis- 
saries to  conclude  peace  with  Rumania.  It  is  open  to 
doubt  whether  this  Rumanian  subject  exhibited  par- 
ticular energy  in  the  defence  of  Russia's  interests.  I 
met  him  at  Petrograd  in  the  spring  of  1917  and  asked  : 
"  As  an  internationalist  adhering  to  the  principles  of 
the  Zimmerwald  Conference  of  no  annexations  and  in- 
demnities, you  naturally  do  not  seek  the  annexation  of 
Transylvania  to  Rumania  ?  " 

Rakovsky  retorted : 

"  What !  After  all  the  sacrifices  made  by  Rumania, 
you  wish  us  to  refuse  compensation  in  the  shape  of 
Rumanian  Transylvania  ?  .  .  .  Not  for  worlds  !  " 

Evidently,  like  the  Swiss,  Robert  Grimm,  this  Bul- 
garian Socialist,  who  invariably  attended  all  international 
Socialist  Conferences,  applied  different  standards  to  his 
own  country  and  to  foreign  ones,  particularly  to  Russia. 

Besides  obvious  foreigners,  Bolshevism  recruited 
many  adherents  from  among  emigres^  who  had  spent 
many  years  abroad.  Some  of  them  had  never  been  to 
Russia  before.  They  especially  numbered  a  great  many 
Jews.  They  spoke  Russian  badly.  The  nation  over 
which  they  had  seized  power  was  a  stranger  to  them, 
and  besides,  they  behaved  as  invaders  in  a  conquered 
country.     Throughout  the    Revolution  generally   and 


in  BOLSHEVIST  POWER  299 

Bolshevism  in  particular  the  Jews  occupied  a  very 
influential  position.  This  phenomenon  is  both  curious 
and  complex.  But  the  fact  remains  that  such  was  the 
case  in  the  primarily  elected  Soviet  (the  famous  trio — 
Lieber,  Dahn,  Gotz),  and  all  the  more  so  in  the  second 
one. 

In  the  Tsarist  Government  the  Jews  were  excluded 
from  all  posts.  Schools  or  Government  service  were 
closed  to  them.  In  the  Soviet  Republic  all  the  com- 
mittees and  commissaries  were  filled  with  Jews.  They 
often  changed  their  Jewish  name  for  a  Russian  one — 
Trotsky-Bronstein,  Kamenefi-Rozenfeld,  Zinoviefi-Ap- 
felbaum,  Stekloff-Nakhamkes,  and  so  on.  But  such  a 
masquerade  deceived  no  one,  while  the  very  pseudonyms 
of  the  commissaries  only  emphasised  the  international 
or  rather  the  alien  character  of  Bolshevist  rule.  This 
Jewish  predominance  among  Soviet  authorities  caused 
the  despair  of  those  Russian  Jews  who,  despite  the  cruel 
injustice  of  the  Tsarist  regime,  looked  upon  Russia  as 
their  motherland,  who  lived  the  common  life  of  the 
Russian  intelligentsia  and  refused  in  common  with  them 
all  collaboration  with  the  Bolsheviks. 

But  of  course  there  were  also  Russians  among  the 
Bolsheviks— workmen,  soldiers,  peasants. 

The  originator  of  Bolshevism,  OulianofE-Lenin,  is 
Russian.  Lunacharsky,  Bonch-Bruevich,  Mme.  Collon- 
tai,  Chicherin — all  these  influential  Bolshevist  leaders 
are  Russian  by  origin.  But  that  predominant  class 
which  very  rapidly  crystallised  around  the  Bolsheviks 
was  mainly  composed  of  individuals  alien  to  the  Russian 
people.  This  fact  is  probably  useful  to  them  to  keep 
control  over  the  masses,  for  Bolshevist  autocracy  is 
founded  upon  their  absolute  contempt  of  the  people 
whom  they  rule.  The  most  terrible  trait  of  Bolshevism 
is  its  utter  unscrupulousness  as  to  ways  and  means, 


300     FEOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       oh. 

and  the  blunt  cruelty  of  its  leaders.  Deceit,  forgery, 
calumny,  murder,  violence,  treachery  —  all  the  low, 
dark,  brutal  forces  which  mankind  had  for  centuries 
endeavoured  to  get  rid  of— have  become  weapons  of 
governing  and  suppression  at  their  hands. 

The  intelligentsia  turned  from  them  with  loathing, 
but  on  the  other  hand  criminals  small  and  great,  police- 
men, okhrana  officials,  spies — all  immediately  joined 
their  ranks,  frequently  occup3dng  important  posts  and 
defending  the  new  authorities  with  the  utmost  zeal. 

Any  struggle  against  this  compact,  rapidly  organised 
band  of  fanatics,  criminals,  and  traitors  became  ex- 
tremely difficult.  Before  coming  out,  they  had  pre- 
pared a  military  organisation.  Their  opponents,  the 
Provisional  Government  and  various  political  parties, 
possessed  no  armed  forces,  and  had  no  longer  any 
prestige  for  the  masses,  bewitched  by  Bolshevism. 

The  poor  were  wearied  by  the  privations  of  the  war 
and  Revolution.  The  wonderful  speeches  of  the  agitators 
baffled  their  understanding.  The  promises  made  their 
senses  reel  and  augmented  the  mass  psychosis  of 
destruction  which  accompanies  every  revolution.  The 
Bolsheviks  gave  their  savage  instincts  full  scope  by 
being  the  first  to  set  the  example.  But  their  principal 
card  was  that  they  promised  most.  What  wonder  that 
they  became  the  masters  ? 

Having  read  the  decrees  of  land  and  peace,  peasants 
and  workmen  went  over  with  a  rush  to  the  Bolsheviks, 
thus  giving  them  from  the  outset  the  support  of  the 
masses. 

Immediately  after  the  coup  d'etat,  the  Izvestia  of 
November  11th  published  the  following  official  state- 
ment signed  by  the  Military  Revolutionary  Committee  : 

The  late  Minister  Kerensky,  deposed  by  the  people,  refuses 


J 


BOLSHEVIST  POWER  301 

to  submit  to  the  decision  of  the  All-Russian  Soviet  Congress, 
and  criminally  attempts  to  oppose  the  Soviet  of  People's 
Commissaries  as  the  lawful  Government  elected  by  the  All- 
Russian  Congress."  It  further  stated  that,  "  acting  imder  the 
demand  of  the  nobles  and  landowners,  capitalists  and  specu- 
lators, Kerensky  is  marching  against  us  in  order  to  restore  the 
land  to  the  nobles,  and  to  renew  the  hated,  disastrous  war. 

As  a  contrast  to  the  bourgeois  Provisional  Govern- 
ment "  the  Government  of  Workmen  and  Peasants,  in 
conformity  with  the  firm  will  of  the  army  and  people, 
has  commenced  peace  negotiations,  and  given  over  the 
land  to  the  peasants." 

Thus  did  the  new  power  mark  its  very  first  state- 
ments with  falsehood  and  calumny.  Certainly  neither 
the  Social-Revolutionary  Kerensky  nor  the  half- 
Socialistic  Provisional  Government  had  any  intention 
of  taking  the  land  from  the  peasants  or  of  working  for 
capitalists.  The  Bolsheviks  knew  it,  but  this  falsehood 
was  useful  to  them  ''  for  tactical  considerations,"  i.e, 
as  a  surer  means  of  capturing  the  masses,  of  deepening 
class-consciousness,  of  keeping  the  mob  in  a  state  of 
constant,  fierce  mistrust  towards  all  other  parties, 
towards  the  entire  Russian  intelligentsia. 

The  position  of  the  Centre  Socialists,  repudiated  by 
the  Bolsheviks,  was  an  exceedingly  unhappy  one.  The 
men  who  had  wrested  the  power  from  their  hands 
appealed  to  the  people  with  the  very  words  of  land 
and  peace  which  had  been  uttered  by  the  Revolutionary 
Democracy  after  the  March  Revolution.  The  difference 
of  grades,  theories,  dates,  was  absolutely  incompre- 
hensible to  the  masses.  The  mob  only  saw  that  the 
leaders  of  the  first  Revolution  promised,  but  gave 
nothing,  whereas  these  men  no  sooner  had  deposed 
Kerensky  than  they  issued  two  decrees :  about  land 
and  peace.    The  first  decree  embodied  the  realisation 


302     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

not  only  of  the  Bolshevist  but  of  the  Social-Revolu- 
tionary agrarian  programme,  and  in  reality  only  re- 
affirmed what  had  already  been  accomplished  by 
seizure,  merely  legalising  it  by  the  term  of  nationalisa- 
tion. All  the  land  was  given  over  to  all  the  people. 
All  the  inventory,  whether  live  or  not,  became  State 
property.  No  hired  labour  can  be  employed  on  the 
land.  The  agrarian  problem  must  be  definitely  settled 
by  the  Constituent  Assembly  representing  all  the  people. 
But  the  principles  which  are  to  regulate  the  justice  of 
this  decision  are  exposed  beforehand.  First  of  all,  the 
abolition  of  private  landed  property  for  ever.  However, 
this  Bolshevist  decree  included  a  very  cautious  reserve 
clause  of  great  demagogic  importance,  but  striking  at 
the  very  root  of  the  idea  of  land-nationalisation :  "  The 
land  belonging  to  peasants  and  Cossacks  is  not 
confiscated." 

The  second  decree  about  peace  declared  that  the 
Government  of  Workmen  and  Peasants  had  addressed 
a  proposal  to  all  belligerent  States  to  conclude  an 
immediate  armistice  upon  all  fronts. 

The  official  Government  mouthpiece,  the  Izvestia, 
accompanied  this  decree  with  a  commentary  in  the 
style  of  the  pacifist  articles  published  in  the  Izvestia  of 
the  first  Soviet.  "  An  immediate  and  universal  demo- 
cratic peace  can  only  be  achieved  by  a  Peasants'  and 
Workmen's  Government.  While  demanding  an  armistice 
upon  all  fronts,  the  Government  of  Workmen  and 
Peasants  repudiates  the  mean  insinuation  that  Russian 
Social-Democracy  aspires  to  a  separate  peace.  It  does 
not  aspire  to  sever  its  ties  with  the  Allies,  but  it  forms 
a  stronghold  whose  support  will  give  the  decisive  vote 
to  the  true  Labour  Democracy  in  Allied  countries." 
This  recalls  the  speeches  of  Tsereteli  and  Skobeleff, 
who  also  held  the  view  that  a  democratic  peace  would 


XII  BOLSHEVIST  POWEK  303 

be  attained  not  as  a  result  of  the  military  operations  of 
the  Allied  armies,  but  as  a  gift  of  the  international 
proletariat. 

At  a  meeting  of  the  Central  Executive  Committee 
(20th  November)  Trotsky  gave  the  following  estimate 
of  the  attitude  of  the  Powers  in  regard  to  the  Soviet 
peace  decree : 

The  Allied  Powers  have  adopted  an  attitude  of  the  utmost 
antagonism  in  relation  to  our  decree.  As  to  our  enemies,  they 
are  mainly  interested  in  how  far  the  coup  d'Hat  in  Russia  has 
weakened  her.  ...  As  Germans  they  in  Germany  and  Austria 
rejoice,  but  as  bourgeois  they  fear  our  victory.  .  .  . 

Antagonism  to  the  Soviets  is  displayed  above  all  by  England, 
which  plays  the  leading  part  in  contemporary  events,  which  has 
the  least  to  lose  and  perhaps  the  most  to  gain  in  this  war. 

A  different  estimate  is  given  of  America's  attitude : 

America  entered  this  war  not  for  the  sake  of  the  ideals 
proclaimed  by  Wilson,  but  under  the  influence  of  a  sober  calcula- 
tion of  the  Exchange,  and  at  the  demand  of  the  representatives 
of  war-industry.  America  aspires  not  to  territorial  gains 
but  to  the  exhaustion  of  all  European  countries.  That  aim  is 
already  achieved ;  therefore  it  may  be  expected  that  America 
will  remain  the  most  tolerant  of  all  towards  the  Soviet  power. 

Trotsky  summed  up  his  views  by  declaring  that 
"  all  information  as  to  the  effect  of  our  decree  upon 
Western  Europe  tends  to  demonstrate  that  our  most 
optimistic  expectations  are  realised." 

A  few  days  after  the  cowp  d'etat  (if  I  am  not  mistaken 
it  was  the  19th  of  November),  Trotsky  announced  the 
creation  of  a  Soviet  Government  to  the  French 
Ambassador,  and  proposed  to  the  Allies  to  declare  an 
immediate  armistice  upon  all  fronts.  No  answer  was 
vouchsafed  to  this  letter,  nor  to  any  other  attempts  of 
the  People's  Commissaries  at  intercourse  with  the 
Allied  ambassadors.    The  Bolshevist  Government,  which 


304     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

repudiated  imperialistic  diplomacy  and  published  the 
so-called  secret  treaties,  naturally  did  not  pay  the 
slightest  attention  to  the  diplomatists'  unfriendly 
silence.  The  Soviet  was  heading  direct  towards  a 
separate  peace.  The  suffering  and  humiliation  inflicted 
by  such  a  peace  upon  Russia  could  not  trouble  inter- 
nationalists ;  the  Russian  State  which  they  had  seized 
was  to  them  but  a  field  of  social  experiments,  as  Lenin 
openly  avowed. 

General  Dukhonin,  who  had  assumed  command  at 
the  Stavka  after  Kerensky's  disappearance,  received  an 
order  signed  by  Lenin,  Trotsky,  Krylenko,  and  Bonch- 
Bruevich,  announcing  the  estabUshment  of  the  Soviet 
rule.  The  Stavka  was  to  propose  "  the  conclusion  of 
an  immediate  armistice  to  the  Allied  as  well  as  to  the 
enemy  coimtries.  .  .  .  The  Soviet  of  People's  Commis- 
saries bids  you,  Citizen  Commander-in-Chief,  to  present 
to  the  military  chiefs  of  the  enemy  armies  the  proposal 
of  imimediate  cessation  of  hostilities  for  the  purpose  of 
opening  peace  negotiations."     (20th  November.) 

Simultaneously  Ensign  Krylenko,  now  Commissary 
of  Military  Affairs,  that  is  to  say.  Minister  of  War,  issued 
an  army  order  inviting  every  unit  to  conclude  a  separate 
armistice. 

General  Dukhonin  gave  no  reply  to  the  order  of  the 
Soviet  of  People's  Commissaries.  Lenin  and  Krylenko 
then  inquired  by  telephone  whether  he  had  executed 
their  command.  The  Commander-in-Chief,  in  his  turn, 
replied  by  a  series  of  technical  questions  :  *^  (1)  Is  there 
an  answer  from  the  belligerent  powers  ?  (2)  What 
about  the  Rumanian  front  ?  (3)  Is  there  any  intention 
of  opening  negotiations  for  a  separate  peace,  and  if  so, 
with  whom  ?  (4)  What  about  the  Turks  ?  "  The 
People's  Commissaries  considered  these  questions  as 
unimportant,  and  sent  "an  ultimative  order  to  start 


xn  BOLSHEVIST  POWER  306 

immediate  and  unevasive  negotiations  for  an  armistice 
between  all  belligerent  countries,  both  Allied  and  such 
as  are  in  antagonistic  relations  with  us." 

Dukhonin  replied :  "I  can  but  understand  that 
you  have  no  possibility  of  directly  negotiating  with 
the  Powers.  Such  negotiations  in  your  name  are  all 
the  more  impossible  for  me.  Only  a  central  govern- 
ment authority,  supported  by  the  army  and  the  people, 
may  have  suiflScient  weight  with  the  enemy.  I  also 
hold  that  Russia's  interest  lies  in  the  conclusion  of  a 
speedy  general  peace." 

The  conversation  ended  by  a  telephonic  dismissal 
of  General  Dukhonin  from  the  post  of  Commander-in- 
Chief,  with  the  order  to  carry  on  his  duties  pending  the 
arrival  to  the  Stavka  of  his  successor,  Ensign  Krylenko. 

At  the  same  time  the  Soviet  of  People's  Commis- 
saries issued  a  proclamation  to  the  soldiers,  which  I 
reproduce  in  extenso : 

Soldiers,  Pea«e  is  in  your  hands.  You  will  not  let  counter- 
revolutionary Generals  demolish  the  great  task  of  peace,  you 
will  surround  them  with  a  guard  to  avoid  a  lynching  unworthy 
of  a  revoluntionary  army ;  and  to  prevent  these  Generals  from 
escaping  the  judgement  which  awaits  them,  you  will  maintain 
the  strictest  revolutionary  and  mihtary  order.  Let  those  who 
are  in  the  trenches  elect  plenipotentiaries  for  opening  immediate 
formal  armistice  negotiations.  The  Soviet  of  People's  Com- 
missaries invests  you  with  the  right  to  do  so.  Inform  us 
by  all  means  in  your  power  of  the  progress  of  such  negotiations. 
The  Soviet  of  People's  Commissaries  is  only  empowered  to 
sign  the  final  armistice  treaty.  Soldiers,  the  task  of  peace  is 
in  your  hands.  Watchfulness,  self-restraint,  energy,  and  peace 
will  be  won.    (22nd  November.) 

The  above  was  one  of  the  first  State  documents 
composed  by  the  new  Commander-in-Chief.  The  follow- 
ing series  of  his  numerous  orders  present  the   same 

X 


306     PROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

mixture  of  demagogy  and  falsehood,  instigation  and 
hjrpocrisy,  and  at  times,  sheer  insanity. 

Ensign  Krylenko,  known  as  Comrade  Abram,  became 
notorious  at  the  time  of  the  Revolution  of  1906  at 
election  meetings  to  the  first  Duma.  He  was 
then  a  secondary  schoolboy,  and  distinguished  him- 
self by  his  fierce  Bolshevist  attacks  against  the 
Cadets,  particularly  against  MilynkofE.  Subsequently  he 
finished  a  course  at  Petrograd  University,  was  school- 
master in  Poland,  where,  it  is  said,  he  adhered  to  the 
Russification  policy.  He  was  an  ensign  in  the  army 
at  the  outbreak  of  the  Revolution,  and  from  the  spring 
of  1917  Krylenko  made  pacifist  propaganda  in  the 
army  committees.  Both  his  actions  and  speeches  are 
full  of  hysterics  and  demagogic  psychosis,  but  obviously 
he  could  not  fail  to  reahse  the  bloody  sequel  to  his 
orders  and  speeches.  The  extermination  of  the  com- 
manding staff  had  been  planned  by  him  long  ago,  for 
had  not  Ensign  Krylenko  openly  declared  in  the  summer 
of  1917  at  a  meeting  of  the  Soviet  of  Workmen's  and 
Soldiers'  Deputies  :  ''  We  purge  the  officers'  stafi  from 
below."  This  cynical  avowal  made  by  an  officer  of 
the  Russian  Army  remained  unreproved.  Now  Krylenko 
himself  had  become  a  member  of  the  Government  and 
could  proceed  from  above  with  the  democratisation  of 
the  army,  which  amounted  to  the  extermination  of 
the  officers  and  the  annihilation  of  the  whole  army 
organisation. 

His  views  upon  the  subject  are  best  judged  by  a 
consideration  of  those  whom  he  included  in  this  process 
of  purging  and  extermination  and  others  whom  he 
promoted.  At  the  head  of  the  plenipotentiaries  delegated 
upon  the  26th  of  November  to  negotiate  with  the 
Germans  he  placed  a  Hussar  lieutenant,  Shneur,  a 
swindler,  whose  services  had  been  rejected  even  by  the 


BOLSHEVIST  POWER  i07 

Tsarist  secret  police.  The  other  two  delegates  were 
absolutely  unknown  individuals,  a  doctor  and  a 
volunteer,  both  with  un-Russian  names. 

Upon  the  28th  of  November  Krylenko,  in  a  special 
Army  Order,  announced  that  the  Germans  had  consented 
to  an  armistice,  and  that  the  meeting  of  plenipoten- 
tiaries was  fixed  for  the  1st  of  December.  **  Any  one 
concealing  or  opposing  the  propagation  of  this  Order 
shall  be  delivered  to  the  judgement  of  local  regimental 
tribunals  without  the  usual  formalities.  (That  is  to 
say,  it  gave  the  right  of  murder  pure  and  simple.)  I  pro- 
pose the  immediate  cessation  of  sniping,  and  fraternisa- 
tion^ upon  all  fronts.  Every  one  at  his  post.  Only 
the  strong  can  hold  his  own.  Hurrah  for  the  coming 
peace !  " 

Thus  did  the  Soviet  announce  the  beginning  of 
separate  negotiations,  the  mere  possibility  of  which 
they  had  refuted  as  a  bourgeois  calunmy.  But  day 
by  day  the  new  masters  shed  one  "  superstition  "  after 
another.  And  in  the  first  place  they  fell  to  trampling 
and  destroying  the  results  of  the  three  years'  heroic 
military  efforts  of  the  Russian  people. 

In  reply  to  Krylenko's  Armistice  Order,  there  ap- 
peared in  the  press  a  statement  of  the  doyen  of  the 
diplomatic  corps,  the  British  Ambassador,  Sir  George 
Buchanan.  Trotsky's  letter  was  received  by  the  Allied 
diplomatists  after  the  Commander-in-Chief  had  received 
the  Armistice  Order.  The  Allies  were  faced  by  an 
accomplished  fact.  The  Ambassador  could  not  reply 
to  Notes  sent  by  a  Government  unrecognised  by  the 
British  Government.  "  Moreover,  a  Government,  which 
like  that  of  Great  Britain  holds  its  authority  direct 
from  the  people,  has  no  right  to  decide  questions  of 

^  Here  the  paper  Pravda  added  the  comment:    "Doubtless  this  only 
refers  to  unorganised  attempts  at  fraternisation.'* 


308     FEOM  LIBEETY  TO  BEEST-LITOVSK       ca. 

such  vital  importance  without  ascertaining  whether  its 
impending  decision  will  obtain  the  approval  of  its 
electors." 

This  statement  was  printed  in  the  Izvestia  (30th 
of  November)  with  the  following  official  comments : 
"  The  Soviet  of  People's  Commissaries  addressed  its 
proposal  to  the  German  military  authorities  quite 
independently  of  any  consent  or  disagreement  on  the 
part  of  the  Allied  Governments.  The  policy  of  the 
Soviet  is  perfectly  plain.  Considering  themselves  as 
not  bound  by  any  of  the  former  Governments'  formal 
obligations,  the  Soviet  authorities  in  their  struggle 
for  peace  are  influenced  solely  by  principles  of 
democracy  and  the  interests  of  the  world's  working 
class." 

The  Izvestia  had  by  this  become  the  mouthpiece  of 
the  new  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs,  Trotsky-Bronstein. 
Simultaneously  he  issued  a  proclamation  to  the  peoples 
of  the  beUigerent  countries.  He  pointed  out  that  not 
only  did  not  the  Soviet  authorities  stand  in  need  of  the 
consent  of  the  "  capitalist "  diplomacy,  but  that  "  gener- 
ally the  Eussian  Army  and  the  Eussian  people  did  not 
wish  to  wait  any  longer.  We  start  negotiations  on  the 
1st  of  December.  If  the  Allied  peoples  do  not  send 
their  representatives,  we  shall  begin  negotiations  by 
ourselves.  We  desire  a  general  peace.  But  if  the  bour- 
geoisie of  the  Allied  countries  compels  us  to  conclude 
a  separate  peace,  the  responsibility  will  fall  entirely 
upon  them." 

The  Stavka  was  the  last  obstacle  upon  the  Bolsheviks' 
way  to  this  shameful  and  disastrous*  separate  peace. 
Not  only  the  Commander-in-Chief,  General  Dukhonin, 
but  the  Commissary  and  all  the  Army  Committee 
attached  to  him,  and  which  during  the  first  Eevolution 
were  considered  as  the  main  source  of  the  army's  insub- 


BOLSHEVIST  POWER  309 

ordinate  state  of  mind,  absolutely  refused  to  recognise 
Krylenko  or  to  submit  to  his  orders.  "  The  All- Army 
Committee,  supported  by  the  resolutions  of  army  and 
frontal  committees,  deemed  it  indispensable  by  all  means 
to  safeguard  the  Stavka  until  the  creation  of  a  uni- 
versally acknowledged  Government,  which  the  Soviet 
of  People's  Commissaries  cannot  be  recognised  as  re- 
presenting. The  All- Army  Committee  certainly  cannot 
recognise  you  as  a  Commander-in-Chief,  therefore  your 
arrival  at  the  Stavka  becomes  perfectly  unnecessary. 
If,  however,  you  wish  to  come  as  a  private  individual, 
we  have  nothing  against  it."  .  .  .  Krylenko  replied  to 
this  naive  document,  so  full  of  childlike  confidence, 
by  dissolving  the  All- Army  Committee.  (Among  other 
things  this  document  guaranteed  Krylenko's  personal 
inviolability  in  the  event  of  his  arrival  as  a  private 
citizen.)  Only  recently  he  had  passionately  advocated 
the  sacredness,  inviolability,  and  democratic  character 
of  these  elected  institutions ;  but  then  he  stood  in  need 
of  them  in  order  to  attain  power,  whereas  now,  when 
the  committee  made  a  polite  attempt  to  set  aaide  the 
uncalled-for  Commander-in-Chief,  his  reply  was  quite 
simple — dissolution. 

A  regular  offensive  was  organised  against  the  im- 
submissive  Stavka,  in  which,  however,  Krylenko  incurred 
not  the  slightest  risk.  There  was  no  one  to  defend  the 
Stavka.  The  frenzied  soldier  masses  already  sided  with 
the  Bolsheviks.  Those  of  the  soldiers  who  had  not 
yet  lost  their  heads  were  powerless  to  counterbalance 
the  general  psychosis.  As  to  the  Generals  and  officers 
who  had  remained  at  their  post,  they  were  quickly 
disposed  of. 

This  was  how  Ensign  Krylenko  himself  announced 
his  heroic  deed  to  "  the  soldiers  of  the  Revolutionary 
Army  and|Navy  " : 


310     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

Comrades,  I  have  this  day  entered  Mohilev  at  the  head  of 
revolutionary  troops.  The  Stavka  was  surrounded  from  all 
sides.  The  Stavka  has  surrendered  without  fighting.  The  last 
obstacle  to  peace  has  fallen.  I  cannot  pass  over  in  silence  the 
unfortunate  fact  of  the  lynching  of  the  late  Commander-in- 
Chief,  General  Dukhonin.  The  hatred  of  the  people  has  boiled 
over.  Despite  all  the  endeavours  to  save  him,  he  was  dragged 
out  of  the  railway-car  and  assassinated.  General  Komiloff's 
escape  on  the  eve  of  the  fall  of  the  Stavka  accounted  for  this 
excess.  Comrades !  I  cannot  tolerate  any  blemishes  upon  the 
banner  of  the  Revolution,  and  such  deeds  should  be  severely 
condemned.  Be  worthy  of  your  newly  won  liberty.  Cast  no 
blemish  upon  the  people's  power.  The  revolutionary  people 
are  terrible  in  war,  but  should  be  gentle  after  victory.  Com- 
rades, with  the  fall  of  the  Stavka  the  struggle  for  peace  acquires 
fresh  power.    (1st  December.) 

Thus  did  the  Bolshevik  Commissary  describe  the 
tragic  end  of  a  Russian  General,  whose  sole  guilt  was 
his  loyalty  to  Russia  and  the  Allies  unto  the  end. 

And  here  is  a  description  of  the  same  event  given  by 
an  eye-witness,  the  military  correspondent  of  one  of  the 
most  widespread  Russian  papers,  EussTcoe  Shvo?- 

General  Dukhonin  expected  to  be  arrested,  possibly  judged, 
but  as  an  officer  and  gallant  man  believed  in  his  antagonist's 
nobility,  and  fell  a  victim  to  his  trust.  He  did  not  wish  to 
abandon  the  Stavka,  deeming  it  his  duty  to  remain  at  his  post 
to  the  end.  He  organised  no  armed  resistance  whatever  to  the 
Bolsheviks;  on  the  contrary,  took  all  precautions  to  avoid 
bloodshed,  and  withdrew  from  the  Stavka  the  shock-battalion, 
the  only  unit  willing  to  defend  this  last  stronghold  of  the  Russian 
General  Staff  by  force  of  arms. 

Everything  had  been  done  to  pacify  the  conqueror.  But 
the  conqueror  marched  forward,  wrathful  and  impetuous. 
No  poUtical  opponents,  but  avengers  armed  to  the  teeth,  with 
artillery  and  armoured  cars,  were  on  their  way  to  defenceless 
Mohilev. 

^  Bu€skoe  Shvo,  6th  December.     Article  by  Alexander  Eouoff. 


BOLSHEVIST  POWER  311 

Krylenko  arrived  accompanied  by  sailors  and  Red  Guards. 
The  soldiers  eyed  their  new  chief  curiously ;  he  was  so  small, 
so  wiry,  so  unlike  their  former  commanders. 

Krylenko  drove  from  the  station  to  Headquarters,  and 
during  his  absence  Dukhonin  was  brought  to  the  station  in  a 
motor-car. 

The  General  looked  pale  and  agitated,  but  his  handsome, 
well-groomed  head  was  held  erect  as  of  old.  The  sailors  took 
him  straight  into  Krylenko*s  railway-car.  The  crowd  of  soldiers, 
not  yet  a  large  one,  became  excited. 

"  Hand  him  over  to  us  !  "  shouted  several  voices. 

The  shouts  came  mainly  from  the  Red  Guards.  One  of  them, 
wearing  a  wolf-skin  cap  with  the  fur  bristling  out,  climbed  on 
the  carriage-step  and  addressed  the  crowd  : 

"  Comrades.  Where  is  Kerensky  ?  Where  is  Komiloff  ? 
They  have  not  been  properly  guarded,  the  same  will  happen  to 
Dukhonin.  Dukhonin  will  also  escape.  They  say  he  must  be 
judged  ?  What  judgement  ?  Who  was  judged  ?  According 
to  their  judgement  all  traitors  are  found  not  guilty." 

"  We'll  have  Dukhonin !  "  roared  the  mob.  "  We  know 
how  to  guard  him." 

It  was  as  if  an  electric  current  had  run  through  the  crowd. 
I  gazed  into  their  faces  and  did  not  recognise  them.  A  moment 
ago  I  had  seen  calm,  good-natured,  dull  faces,  chewing  sun-flower 
seeds  and  staring  with  nothing  but  curiosity  in  their  eyes.  Now 
the  faces  were  darkened  and  distorted.  The  men  looked  like 
hungry  wolves. 

The  mob  pressed  against  the  door,  thrust  itself  inside  the  car. 
They  shouted,  "  Death  to  Dukhonin.     Kill  him." 

Krylenko,  who  had  himself  incited  the  soldiers  to  lynch-law, 
who  encouraged  the  Red  Guards'  wolfish  ferocity,  endeavoured 
to  prevent  the  crime  by  speech.     But  by  speech  only. 

Dukhonin  could  have  been  saved.  Ensign  Krylenko  had  a 
numerous  suit.  Not  all  the  sailors  were  inclined  to  the  lynching. 
Dukhonin  might  have  been  locked  up  in  the  car  and  the  train 
started.  But  apparently  Krylenko  counted  the  cost.  Passions 
were  excited  to  such  a  pitch  that  any  intervention  on  his  part 
might  mean  death  to  him  also.  He  only  clutched  at  his  head 
and  sat  for  a  long  time  with  his  face  buried  in  his  hands. 


312     FEOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

The  Red  Guards  dragged  Duklionin  out  of  the  car.  He 
raised  his  hand,  signifying  his  wish  to  speak.  But  just  then  a 
sailor  sprang  upon  the  step  and  fired  at  his  throat. 

The  mob  raised  the  war-cry  of  victory,  "  Hurrah-ah !  " 
Bayonets,  swords,  rifle-butts,  heels — all  were  set  to  work.  The 
savage,  frenzied  mob  tore  the  General's  corpse  to  pieces,  never 
ceasing  its  cry  of  hurrah  !  hurrah  !  hurrah  !  With  this  sacred 
war-cry  upon  their  lips  our  heroes  died  for  their  motherland, 
while  here  savages  were  performing  a  bestial  execution  and 
uttering  the  same  words  in  blasphemy,  forgetting  that  they  were 
victorious  not  over  the  Germans,  but  over  an  unarmed  and 
defenceless  Russian  man. 

Having  committed  their  hideous  task,  the  mob  ebbed  away. 
In  place  of  General  Dukhonin  I  saw  only  a  blackened  bloody 
mass. 

That  was  not  merely  the  murder  of  General  Dukhonin. 
With  him  a  final  blow  was  struck  at  discipline,  wounded 
from  the  outset  of  the  Revolution,  and  at  the  whole 
Russian  Army.  From  that  moment  Russia,  dishonoured 
and  bound  hand  and  foot,  was  laid  as  a  booty  at  Ger- 
many's feet.  Conditions  of  surrender,  the  duration  and 
forms  of  negotiations — all  these  were  but  secondary  de- 
tails. The  substance  of  the  situation  lay  in  the  fact, 
that  owing  to  the  combined  efforts  of  a  faction  of 
Russian  Marxists  calling  themselves  Bolsheviks,  and  their 
Allies — the  Germans — ^Russia  was  conquered  from  the 
interior  and  brought  out  of  the  ranks  of  the  belligerent 
Powers. 

The  subsequent  history  of  the  peace  negotiations, 
which  lasted  from  the  first  peace  decree  published  upon 
the  14th  November  to  the  signing  of  the  Brest-Litovsk 
peace  upon  the  3rd  of  March,  is  an  obscure  and  dis- 
gusting tale  of  how  a  gang  of  men,  unauthorised  by  the 
country,  and  the  majority  of  whom  were  until  then 
unknown  to  Russia  even  by  name,  negotiated  with  the 
Imperial  German  Government.    They  camouflaged  their 


BOLSHEVIST  POWER  318 

treason  with  pompous  Socialistic  mottoes,  they  diverted 
the  mob  by  sharpening  its  lowest  instincts  of  greed  and 
hatred,  meanwhile  hastily  disbanding  the  army  in  order 
that  no  one  could  prevent  them  from  selling  Russia. 

Not  all  the  details  of  the  negotiations  appeared  in 
the  press :  far  from  it.  Having  repudiated  the  Tsarist 
secret  diplomacy,  the  Bolsheviks  promptly  restored  it 
for  their  own  use.  Neither  the  exact  principles  of  the 
armistice,  nor  the  full  text  of  the  treaty  were  com- 
municated to  the  Russian  people.  It  was  rather  a 
matter  of  conjecture  than  of  knowledge.^ 

For  three  years  the  Russian  people  bore  the  burden 
of  terrible  military  tension,  and  sacrificed  several  million 
lives  for  the  Allied  cause.  Now  everything  was  blotted 
out.  Maddened  and  helpless,  it  had  surrendered  to  the 
mercy  of  its  foe.  One  could  not  even  call  him  a  vic- 
torious enemy.  In  a  military  sense  Russia  was  not 
defeated.  Towards  the  spring  of  1917  the  Russian  Army, 
enriched  by  the  war  experience  of  its  leaders,  was 
numerically  as  well  as  technically  far  superior  to  the 
one  with  which  Russia  entered  the  war  in  1914.  But 
the  new  wine  of  liberty  had  intoxicated  the  Russian 
soldier  and  made  him  unfit  for  fighting.  Socialist 
speeches  has  killed  his  martial  spirit,  and  the  Bolsheviks 
had  only  to  complete  the  work  begun  by  the  preachers 
of  a  democratic  peace,  and  to  liquidate  the  remnants  of 
the  army. 

That  was  a  terrible  sight.  Most  terrible  of  all  to 
thinking  Russians  was  the  blindness  of  the  people.  It 
trampled  its  own  innumerable  war  sacrifices  down  in 
the  mud.  Accepting  traitors  as  the  true  peace-makers, 
it  raised  them  upon  a  shield  and  executed  patriots  who 

*  In  October  1918,  near  Moscow,  the  Soviet  arrested  Mrs.  Rennet,  a 
British  subject,  and  accused  her  of  stealing  the  secret  clauses  of  the  Breet- 
Idtovsk  Treaty.  She  was  subsequently  released  and  returned  to  England, 
where  she  gave  me  an  account  of  her  experience. 


314     FEOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

resented  the  shame  and  madness  of  the  peace  negotia- 
tions. The  Bolshevist  formula — ^peace  at  any  price — 
was  taken  up  by  the  masses  and  became  their  criterion 
for  exalting  or  degrading  various  parties  and  organi- 
sations. Officers  paid  the  heaviest  penalty.  Every 
soldier,  every  workman  suspected  them  of  opposition 
to  the  peaceful  aspirations  of  the  Bolsheviks  and  of 
secret  sympathies  for  Kornilofi.  Soldiers'  Committees 
subjected  officers  to  humiliating  cross-questioning,  and 
ordered  them  to  sign  declarations  of  loyalty  to  the 
Soviet  of  People's  Commissaries.  In  the  event  of 
refusal  the  officers  were  subjected  to  derision  and  blows, 
and  frequently  shot. 

Towards  the  middle  of  December  the  Bolsheviks 
published  the  Order  that  the  officers'  staff  should  be  an 
elected  one.  Soldiers'  Committees  were  to  proceed  with 
the  elections.  Officers,  who  were  not  elected,  were  to 
remain  in  the  same  units  as  privates.  All  ranks  and 
titles  as  well  as  decorations  were  abolished.  This  Order 
started  a  veritable  orgy  of  derision.  Generals  were 
converted  into  cooks  or  grooms,  their  orderlies  and 
junior  clerks  became  commanders  of  divisions,  almost 
of  armies.  In  one  division  a  woman  commander  was 
elected.  Generals  who  had  been  unable  to  escape  from 
the  Stavka  were  compelled  to  execute  the  orders  of 
drunken  soldiers  elected  to  high  posts  in  their  stead. 

The  army  was  transformed  into  a  brigand's  camp. 
The  soldiers  divided  and  sold  horses,  waggons,  clothes, 
bread,  food,  and,  lastly,  guns  and  machine-guns.  The 
purchasers  were  frequently  Germans.  Some  of  the 
machine-guns  and  rifles  were  carried  off  by  the  soldiers 
to  their  homes. 

•In  the  face  of  such  conditions  the  Central  Powers 
could  obviously  dictate  any  terms'  of  peace.  Yet  they 
did  not  immediately  lose  the  habit  of  reckoning  with 


m  BOLSHEVIST  POWER  316 

the  Russian  Army  or  of  considering  Russia  as  a  dan- 
gerous and  powerful  opponent,  and  therefore  they  acted 
with  a  certain  cautiousness. 

The  negotiations  lasted  for  nearly  three  months. 
Perhaps  the  German  Diplomats  and  Generals  experi- 
enced some  perplexity  as  to  whom  they  were  to  conclude 
a  peace  with  ?  What  weight  can  there  be  in  the  signa- 
ture of  these  absolutely  unknown  individuals  ?  Can 
they  deliver  aught  but  forged  letters  of  exchange  ? 
Might  not  greater  advantage  be  expected  from  a  down- 
right conquest  of  Russia  ? 

All  that  took  place  during  the  peace  negotiations 
was  so  absolutely  out  of  conformity  with  the  dignity  of 
Russia,  whom  every  foreigner,  enemy,  or  friend  alike 
had  treated  with  the  respect  due  to  a  great  Power,  that 
even  a  member  of  the  first  delegation,  the  Internation- 
alist S.  Mstislavsky,  a  Social-Revolutionary  of  the  Left, 
was  oppressed  by  what  he  witnessed  at  Brest-Litovsk. 

An  enterprising  journalist,  earning  a  fair  amount  of 
money  during  the  war  by  writing  military  correspondence 
simultaneously  in  the  Government  Messenger  and  in 
semi-defeatist  Left  papers,  and  a  man  of  very  bad 
reputation,  Mstislavsky  was  included  through  the 
insistence  of  the  Social  Revolutionaries  of  the  Left, 
with  whom  he  identified  himself  in  the  first  peace 
delegation  which  started  for  Brest  upon  the  18th 
November.  He  gave  an  account  of  his  impressions  in 
a  curious  pamphlet  entitled  The  Brest  Negotiations} 

According  to  him  the  delegation  was  assembled  in 
haste  (literally  "  on  the  go ").  The  only  members 
thoroughly  versed  in  the  state  of  affairs  were  the  three 
Bolshevist  representatives  who  had  received  definite 
instructions  from  the  Soviet  of  People's  Conmiissaries. 
The  remaining  six  members  of  the  political  section 

"*  Published  at  Petrograd  in  February  1918. 


316     FEOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       oh. 

as  well  as  the  officers  attached  to  the  delegation  had 
not  even  a  precise  knowledge  as  to  the  limit  of  the 
delegation's  powers. 

The  above  statement  was  all  the  more  interesting, 
as  all  the  nine  plenipotentiaries,  besides  the  officers 
included  as  advisers,  were  enumerated  in  the  official 
agenda  as  members  of  the  AU-Russian  Executive 
Committee  of  the  Soviet  of  Peasants',  Workmen's, 
and  Soldiers'  Deputies.  Obviously,  even  this  exalted 
rank  did  not  admit  its  members  to  the  mysteries  of 
secret  diplomacy  which  the  Bolsheviks  would  not 
reveal  to  their  comrades  of  the  Executive  Committee, 
even  when  sending  them  to  diplomatic  negotiations 
with  the  Germans. 

The  final  aim  of  these  negotiations  is  thus  defined 
by  Mstislavsky : 

"An  insistent  repetition  of  the  program  demands 
of  the  Russian  Revolutionary  Democracy  was  expected 
to  appeal  to  the  peoples  over  the  heads  of  German 
Generals.  And  not  only  to  the  peoples  of  Germany, 
Austria,  and  Bulgaria,  but  also  to  our  own." 

The  author  did  not  explain  why  the  representatives 
of  an  Executive  Committee  sitting  at  Petrograd  should 
find  it  necessary  to  appeal  to  the  Russian  people  from 
Brest,  and  with  the  assistance  of  Germans,  when  they 
possessed  an  enormous  mechanism  of  propaganda  in 
Russia. 

But  he  gives  a  detailed  and  picturesque  account  of 
a  festive  dinner,  and  of  the  contrast  between  the  German 
delegates  with  their  military  mien  and  pose  of  men  of 
the  world,  and  the  Russian  delegation.  The  latter's 
composition  transgressed  all  diplomatic  traditions,  as 
it  comprised  a  soldier,  a  sailor,  a  peasant,  a  workman, 
and  even  one  woman  (Bitzenko,  a  Social-Revolutionary 
of  the  Left). 


in  BOLSHEVIST  POWER  317 

"  In  allotting  the  places  at  the  dinner-table,  the 
Germans  acted  in  strict  accordance  with  the  revolu- 
tionary table  of  ranks  and  classes.  The  delegation  was 
seated  according  to  revolutionary  rank  in  direct  violation 
of  ordinary  precedence.  The  sailor  Olich,  as  member 
of  the  political  delegation,  was  placed  above  Admiral 
Altfater,  etc." 

This  was  at  dinner.  During  the  negotiations,  how- 
ever, the  Germans  and  Austrians  paid  scant  respect 
to  the  political  members,  and  clearly  emphasised  their 
contempt  of  "  revolutionary  rite."  Mstislavsky  con- 
soled himself  by  the  thought  that  after  all  he  and  his 
comrades  were  fulfilling  their  duty  as  Internationalists, 
because  "  the  plenipotentiaries  of  Revolutionary  Russia 
were  obliged  to  warn  unequivocally  and  in  terms  of 
absolute  certainty,  that  a  military  armistice  for  the 
Russian  Revolution  represented  an  act  of  revolutionary 
offensive,  an  act  not  liquidating,  but  enhancing,  the 
struggle."  In  other  words,  he  persuaded  his  readers  that 
they  went  to  Brest  to  sign  an  armistice  with  the  Kaiser's 
Generals  solely  in  the  interests  of  a  world-wide  revolu- 
tion. Certainly,  under  such  conditions,  and  inspired  by 
such  aims,  the  plenipotentiary  representatives  of  the 
Soviet  were  least  of  all  concerned  with  the  main,  i.e. 
the  military,  problems  of  the  armistice. 

"  No  military  deliberations  concerning  the  possible 
terms  of  the  armistice  took  place  before  leaving  Peters- 
burg. The  main  body  of  the  military  delegation  joined 
us  at  Pskov  and  Dvinsk.  The  sum  total  of  our  military 
demands  has  not  been  formulated.  There  exists  not 
the  slightest  possibility  of  commencing  the  immediate 
task  entrusted  to  the  delegation." 

The  attitude  adopted  by  the  opposite  side  towards 
a  delegation  of  such  a  standard  of  competence  may  be 
easily  imagined.    "  Despite  all  the  esteem  and  attention 


318     PROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       os. 

of  which  the  delegation  was  the  object  throughout  its 
stay  at  Brest,  every  contact  with  the  Germans  left  me 
with  a  feeling  of  profound,  withering  humiliation.  .  .  . 
The  enemy  officers,  beginning  with  General  Hoffmann, 
held  the  Russian  Army  in  profound  respect.  ...  As 
soon,  however,  as  matters  touched  upon  the  Revolution 
there  appeared  deceit,  intimately  concealed  under  a 
mask  of  respectful  courtesy,  but  all  the  more  unbearable 
and  oppressing — ^it  was  palpable  in  the  words  and  in 
the  eyes  of  the  Germans.  And  the  consciousness  of 
this  deceit,  the  consciousness  of  our  powerlessness  to 
overcome  it  by  our  truth,  was  degrading." 

The  result  of  these  negotiations,  whose  humiliation 
was  felt  even  by  a  delegation  of  such  calibre,  was  the 
signing  of  the  first  Brest-Litovsk  Treaty.  While 
appending  his  signature  to  this  base  document,  Msti- 
slavsky  consoled  himself  with  the  hope  of  a  future 
International  Socialist  Conference.  "  Inasmuch  as  we 
acted  in  the  name  of  the  Russian  Army  at  the  first 
Brest  Conference,  so  shall  we  at  the  second  (Inter- 
national Socialist),  upon  the  border  of  peace  negotiations, 
speak  only  in  the  name  of  the  Internationale." 

Such  was  Russia's  humihating  position  during  these 
negotiations  that  General  Skalon,  a  member  of  the 
second  delegation,  left  the  room  and  shot  himself  after 
the  very  first  meeting. 

Yet  with  their  customary  impudence  the  People's 
Commissaries  declared,  both  in  their  speeches  and  in 
the  press,  that  they  were  working  for  a  universal 
democratic  peace.  That  the  peace  was  a  separate  one 
was  the  fault  not  of  the  Soviet,  but  of  the  Allies. 

''  The  responsibility  for  the  separate  armistice  rests 
entirely  upon  those  Governments,  which  have  not  up 
to  now  declared  their  desire  for  peace,  which  still 
continue  to  conceal  their  war-aims  from  their  own  and 


BOLSHEVIST  POWER  319 

foreign  peoples,"  wrote  the  Commissary  for  Foreign 
Affairs,  Trotsky,  upon  the  13th  December.  Five  days 
later  the  conclusion  of  a  twenty-eight  days'  armistice, 
imtil  the  18th  January,  was  announced. 

Separate  negotiations  became  a  fact.  The  Bolsheviks 
stood  in  need  of  them,  because  they  were  in  haste  to 
replace  the  external  war  by  an  internal  civil  one. 

The  cessation  of  bloodshed  upon  the  external  front  signifies 
the  end  of  the  hecatombs  raised  to  the  glory  of  international 
imperialism.  Such  is  not  the  case  upon  the  inner  front.  Here 
the  revolutionary  troops  are  fighting  against  their  direct  class 
enemies,  against  the  landowners  and  capitalists,  who  have 
assembled  imder  their  banner  all  counter-revolutionary  elements 
— officers  dismissed  from  their  posts,  Cadets,  storm-troops,  the 
upper  Cossack  class.  Victory  in  this  war  for  Ufe  or  death 
between  the  new  and  the  old  Russia  is  a  question  of  self- 
preservation  for  the  Socialist  Revolution  in  Russia.  (Izvestia, 
24th  December  1917.) 

This  article  appeared,  as  if  premeditated,  on 
Christmas  Eve,  upon  the  day  when,  year  after  year, 
according  to  tradition,  Eussian  journalists  wrote  articles 
upon  the  subject — peace  on  earth,  good- will  to  men. 

It  demonstrated  with  sufficient  clearness  that  it 
was  not  pacifist  ideals  which  inspired  the  People's 
Commissaries  to  conclude  a  precipitate  peace  with 
Germany,  but  their  desire  to  have  their  hands  free  for 
another  war — the  war  against  the  Russian  people. 

The  Bolsheviks  evinced  not  a  trace  of  that  abhorrence 
from  violence  which  characterised  both  the  successive 
Provisional  Governments  and  their  supporters,  whether 
Radical  or  Socialist.  The  Bolsheviks  violated  both 
body  and  soul. 

Liberty,  respect  for  personality,  the  press,  the 
right  of  vote — ^in  a  word,  everything  considered  to  be 
the  indispensable  characteristic  of  a  free  legal  State, 


320     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

was  smashed  by  the  Bolsheviks  with  the  furious  rapture 
of  conquerors,  with  the  conviction  that  their  Koran 
alone  contained  the  absolute  truth. 

Their  doctrine  excluded  parliamentarism.  It  was 
to  be  replaced  by  the  Soviets.  Of  whom  these  Soviets 
were  composed,  how  the  members  were  chosen,  how 
and  by  whom  the  Soviet  decrees  were  executed,  it  would 
be  both  easy  and  difficult  to  relate.  Chaotic  elections 
to  the  Soviet  at  the  approximate  calculation  of  one 
delegate  to  1000  workmen,  took  place  at  the  time  of 
the  March  Revolution.  However,  both  the  procedure 
and  the  character  of  the  elections  held  much  of  the 
accidental  and  arbitrary,  and  the  Soviets  of  the  Revolu- 
tion's early  period  should  be  regarded  as  irregular 
institutions. 

At  the  time  of  the  November  Revolution  the  second 
All-Russian  Congress  of  Soviets  held  its  meetings. 
The  Provisional  Government  of  Workmen  and  Peasants, 
also  calling  itself  the  Soviet  of  People's  Cormnissaries, 
was  created  in  its  name.  The  control  of  their  actions 
belongs  to  the  Congress  of  Soviets  and  its  Central 
Executive  Committee.  Therefore  some  decrees  of  the 
Soviet  authorities  emanated  direct  from  the  Central 
Executive  Committee,  and  whenever  the  Bolshevist 
leaders  intended  to  pass  any  particularly  hazardous 
measures  they  always  previously  passed  them  through 
the  Central  Executive  Committee,  which  was  their 
submissive  and  obedient  tool.  In  extraordinary  cir- 
cumstances, such  as  the  dispersal  of  the  Constituent 
Assembly  or  the  Brest  peace,  the  Bolsheviks  called 
together  a  Congress  of  Soviets,  which  for  them  became 
means  of  propaganda  and  government.  Later,  already 
in  the  summer  of  1918  a  similar  Congress  of  Soviets 
(the  fifth)  adopted  the  Soviet  Constitution,  wherein 
were  clearly  stated  its  theoretical  principles. 


BOLSHEVIST  POWER  821 

The  fundamental  task  of  the  Constitution  of  the  All-Russian 
Socialist  Federative  Soviet  Republic,  established  for  the  present 
transitionary  period,  comprises  the  establishment,  in  the  form 
of  a  powerful  Soviet  authority,  of  a  dictatorship  of  the  proletariat 
both  urban  and  rural,  inclusive  of  the  village  poor,  for  the 
purpose  of  a  final  suppression  of  the  bourgeoisie^  of  an  annihila- 
tion of  exploitation  of  man  by  man,  and  the  introduction  of 
Socialism  under  which  there  are  no  class  distinctions  and  the 
State  has  no  power.  The  class  spirit  of  the  Soviet  power  per- 
meates every  point  of  this  constitution.  All  power  belongs  fully 
and  exclusively  to  the  labouring  masses  and  to  their  authorised 
representatives,  delegated  to  the  Soviet  of  Workmen's,  Soldiers', 
and  Pej^sants*  Deputies. 

Only  those  engaged  in  manual  labour  are  included 
under  the  description  of  labouring  masses.  Intellectual 
work  gives  no  rights  whatever. 

Commercial  people,  the  clergy,  the  intelligentsia 
were  deprived  of  their  right  to  vote  in  the  same  manner 
as  formerly  bad  election  laws  deprived  workmen  and 
peasants  of  a  representation.  It  was  the  same  injustice, 
only  turned  upside  down,  and  fraught  with  a  still 
greater  disadvantage  to  the  State,  because  the  Soviet 
system  spurned  the  most  educated,  the  most  thoughtful 
members  of  the  population  who  were  most  adapted  to 
State  work. 

But  this  was  the  scheme.  In  reality  it  is  not  the 
class  which  rules,  but  a  party.  Central  authority  is 
in  the  hands  of  a  small  band  of  intelligents,  while  the 
local  Soviets  are  purely  party  organisations.  By  means 
of  selection,  terrorism,  pressure  upon  elections,  and 
simple  extermination  of  their  enemies,  the  Bolsheviks 
have  ousted  all  dissenters  from  the  Soviets.  When 
naive  workmen  attempt  to  elect  others  than  Bolsheviks 
to  this  or  the  other  local  Soviet,  such  an  inconvenient 
organisation  is  simply  dispersed  by  the  Red  Guards. 
This  dictatorship  of  the  proletariat  has  resulted,  by 


322     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       oh. 

the  way,  in  the  fact  that  the  working-class,  never 
numerous  in  Russia,  has  almost  ceased  to  exist,  as  the 
factories  are  either  at  a  standstill  or  closed.  In  place 
of  tens  of  thousands  of  workmen  there  now  remain  only 
hundreds.  They  receive  high  wages,  work  little,  and 
represent  a  new  variety  of  the  innumerable  Soviet 
officials. 

The  democratic  principle  of  universal  suffrage  is 
violated  not  merely  by  the  fact  that  only  a  certain 
section  of  the  community  is  admitted  to  participate  in 
the  elections,  but  also  by  the  elections  themselves 
being  not  direct  but  in  a  series  of  delegated  selections. 
Prom  the  village  Soviet  up  to  the  regional,  the  elections 
rise  in  four  degrees,  with  the  final  result,  that  the  Russian 
peasants  are  represented  by  emigres  ill-acquainted  with 
the  Russian  language,  and  still  less  so  with  the  needs  of 
the  Russian  people. 

Other  violations  of  liberty,  such  as  the  authorised 
flood  of  one  type  of  propaganda  and  the  suppression  of 
free  criticism,  the  public  control  in  all  enterprise  need 
not  be  specified.  Meantime,  the  Soviet  competence  is 
limitless,  and  they  represent  the  supreme  power. 
Former  laws  are  abolished.  The  new  decrees  create  a 
veritable  chaos  in  the  domain  of  personal  and  possessive 
right,  a  state  of  things  particularly  convenient  to  the 
obscure  elements  affiliated  to  the  Soviets  from  the 
outset.  To  enhance  the  general  iniquity,  a  mysterious 
"  Extraordinary  Commission  for  fighting  Counter- 
Revolution,  Profiteering,  and  Sabotage "  is  working 
parallel  to  the  Soviet.  The  foundation  of  these 
inquisitorial  camarillas  was  already  laid  in  September, 
when  the  Revolutionary  Democracy,  scared  by  the 
Komiloff  affair,  organised  its  extraordinary  investigation 
commission.  During  the  Bolshevist  regime  these 
"  chresvychaikas  "    ("  extraordinaries  ")   became   inde- 


BOLSHEVIST  POWER  323 

pendent  institutions  from  whence  originated  the  warfare 
against  the  population,  executions,  arrests,  perquisitions, 
plunder,  etc.  At  times  the  Soviet  of  People's  Com- 
missaries uses  the  "  chresvychaika  "  as  a  convenient 
instrument  for  the  extermination  of  its  enemies,  at 
others  they  are  in  a  state  of  conflict  with  each  other. 

Neither  the  ofiicially  published  Soviet  Constitution 
nor  any  of  the  judicial  decrees  make  any  mention  of 
the  "  Extraordinary  Commissions  for  fighting  Counter- 
Revolution."  It  goes  without  saying  that  their  activity 
can  neither  be  criticised  nor  made  public.  Their  staff 
is  not  always  known.  These  tribunals  of  the  Middle 
Ages,  the  originators  of  the  most  arbitrary  repressions, 
form  in  company  with  the  Chinese  and  the  Letts  one 
of  the  main  supports  of  the  Soviet  power. 

Possibly  the  Soviet  Republic  reflected  itself  in 
Lenin's  dry,  schematic  brain  as  the  harmonious  edifice 
of  a  communistic  paradise.  In  reality,  it  merely  repre- 
sents a  series  of  self-centred  organisations,  taking  no 
account  either  of  one  another,  or  of  the  Soviet  of 
People's  Commissaries,  and  least  of  all  of  the  will  and 
interests  of  the  community. 

According  to  the  number  of  Soviet  members  in 
Russia,  so  is  the  number  of  autocrats  possessing  the 
power  to  dispose  of  the  property,  the  labour,  the  life, 
and  honour  of  every  citizen  and  every  citizeness. 
For  performing  such  autocratic  work  these  committee- 
men receive  good  wages,  the  privilege  of  driving  about 
in  motor-cars,  of  seizing  as  large  supplies  of  food  as 
they  desire,  and  of  plundering,  if  so  inclined.  As  neither 
free  press  nor  court  of  justice  any  longer  exist,  their 
activities  are  of  course  uncontrolled.  It  happens, 
however,  that  they  are  sometimes  obliged  to  pay  a 
heavy  penalty  for  superfluous  rapacity,  and  glut  of 
possession,  for  the  Communist  Commissaries  endeavour 


324    FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK    oh.  xn 

to  exterminate  property  as  an  institution.  As  a  matter 
of  fact,  profiteering  is  sentenced  more  heavily  than 
murder  by  the  Bolshevist  Commissaries. 

But  before  establishing  the  Soviet  regime  all  the 
political  institutions  created  both  by  the  old  and  the 
new  regime  had  to  be  destroyed.  The  first  few  months 
of  Bolshevist  rule  were  dedicated  to  this  process,  which 
was  conducted  with  an  energy  verging  upon  genius. 


CHAPTER  XIII 

THE   CONSTITUENT  ASSEMBLY 

The  part  played  by  the  old  zemstvo — ^Universal  suffrage — ^The  dispersion 
of  the  Petrograd  Municipal  Council  —  Parliamentary  crkiiniam  — 
Elections  to  the  Constituent  Assembly  and  their  results — ^The  first 
broil  in  the  Taurida  Palace — Arrest  of  the  members  of  the  Constituent 
Assembly — ^The  Cadets  as  enemies  of  the  people — ^Discrediting  the 
Constituent  Assembly — The  first  and  last  sitting — Dispersion — 
Murder  of  A.  I.  ShingarefiE  and  F.  F.  Kokoshkin. 

The  chief  watchword  of  the  Bolsheviks  was  the 
immediate  seizure  of  power  by  the  proletariat.  All 
the  Social-Democrats  spoke  of  the  dictatorship  of  the 
proletariat,  but  as  Lenin  pointed  out  very  truly,  the 
other  parties  were  in  no  haste  to  introduce  it,  considering 
it  premature,  while  the  immediate  object  of  Lenin  and 
his  followers  was  to  seize  power  forthwith. 

On  the  9th  November,  Lenin,  together  with  Trotsky, 
attained  this  object,  fulfilling  one  of  the  fimdamental 
commandments  of  Marxism.  Now  they,  i.e.  the  Soviets, 
had  to  consolidate  their  position.  Therefore  the  war- 
cry  of  the  day  was,  "  All  power  to  the  Soviets." 

For  the  sake  of  establishing  the  authority  of  the 
Soviets,  all  other  forms  of  self-government  on  which 
the  social  life  of  Russia  was  founded  were  abolished  as 
an  efiete  regime  supported  by  the  bourgeoisie. 

Both  local  government  in  all  its  forms  and  also  the 
Constituent  Assembly  were  classed  among  such  efEete 
institutions,  although  prior  to  this  the  Bolsheviks  had 

325 


326     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

given  themselves  out  to  be  the  only  true  defenders  of 
the  latter. 

In    Russia,    with   its   vast   distances   and    highly- 
centralised    system    of    autocratic    government,    the 
zemstvo   and  municipal  institutions  played   a   great 
part  in  the  development  of  local  public  life.     They 
were  created  in  1864,  in  the  so-called  age  of  great 
reforms,  in  the  reign  of  Alexander  II.    Roads,  national 
education,    free    medical    aid,    which   had   been   well 
organised  in  Russia   much    earlier  than   in  Western 
Europe,  assistance  to  farmers,  fixe  insurance — all  this 
had    been    managed    by    the    elective    zemstvo    and 
municipal  institutions.     Moreover,  in  the  absence  of  a 
parliament  and  of  the  political  life  connected  with  it, 
local  self-government  had  been  a  school  for  training 
experienced  public  men,  where  forces  were  grouped  and 
habits  formed  for  wider  imperial  work.     The  bureau- 
cratic regime  did  not  love  the  zemstvo  men  for  their 
independence,  for  their  way  of  looking  for  support  to 
their  constituents,  and  not  fawning  on  ofl&cial  chiefs. 
The  Ministers  of  the  autocracy  kept  the  zemstvo  men 
under  supervision,  and  oppressed  and  persecuted  them. 
Alexander   III.    was   especially   jealous   of   even   the 
shadow  of  the  love  of  freedom  and  independent  political 
activity :    he  even  amended  the  laws  passed  by  his 
father  concerning  local  self-government  by  curtailing 
both  the  rights  of  the  latter  and  also  the  suffrage.    But 
notwithstanding  these  reactionary  efforts,  the  Russian 
zemstvo  created  in  its  environment  an  influential  and 
energetic  radical   company   of   men    who  fought   for 
political  liberty.    They  played  an  important  part  in  the 
Revolution  of  1904-5,  many  of  them  were  elected  to 
the    Duma,    where    they    continued    to    develop    and 
introduce  ideas  of  right  and  liberty  connected  with 
representative  government.     Under  the  Tsar's  regime 


THE  CONSTITUENT  ASSEMBLY  327 

their  activity  had  been  rather  abstract  in  character,  as 
Nicholas  11. ,  having  signed  a  promise  in  October  1905 
^ix)  give  political  liberty,  was  so  short-sighted  that, 
instead  of  finding  support  in  national  representation,  he 
tenaciously  fought  against  it,  preventing  the  intro- 
duction of  the  most  necessary  reforms. 

One  of  the  first  tasks  of  the  Provisional  Government 
was  to  draw  up  new  laws  for  local  self-government  and 
to  introduce  them  as  soon  as  possible.  In  the  summer 
of  1917  elections  were  held  all  over  Russia  on  the  basis 
of  this  new  democratic  law.  Every  citizen,  irrespec- 
tive of  sex,  had  the  right  to  vote  on  reaching  the 
age  of  twenty  years.  The  electors  showed  a  strong 
Left  or  Radical  tendency  in  voting,  and  everywhere 
Socialists  were  in  the  majority.  The  Cadets  got  one- 
third  of  the  urban  votes.  In  the  district  and  provincial 
zemstvos,  where  the  voters  were  mostly  peasants, 
comparatively  few  of  the  intelligentsia  candidates  were 
successful. 

These  new  organs  of  local  self-government,  full  of 
new  men,  many  of  whom  had  got  in,  not  because  they 
were  acquainted  with  local  affairs,  but  simply  because 
their  party  had  to  have  a  certain  number  of  candidates 
on  their  party  lists,  were  not  particularly  successful  in 
the  practical  management  of  the  complicated  municipal 
affairs.  Their  activity  was  an  additional  illustration 
of  the  difiGicuhies  which  inevitably  await  a  Socialistic 
majority  when  it  has  to  put  its  theories  into  practice. 

But  in  any  case  they  were  the  lawfully  elected 
representatives  of  the  population.  They  acted  in 
accordance  with  a  clearly  defined,  established  law ; 
they  were  subject  both  to  the  superintendence  of  the 
Government  and  to  the  open  criticism  of  public  opinion. 
They  had  the  right  to  consider  themselves  part  of 
the   Government  machine  created    by  Revolutionary 


328     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

Democracy ;  and  when,  in  November,  the  Bolsheviks 
overthrew  Kerensky's  Cabinet,  the  new  organs  of  self- 
government  opposed  the  Soviet  authorities  and  tried  to 
defend  their  independence.  But  the  Bolsheviks,  like 
the  Tsarist  bureaucrats  before  them,  were  intolerant 
of  all  independence.  As  early  as  January  1918  the 
zemstvos  and  municipal  councils  were  everyivhere 
closed  and  replaced  by  Soviets. 

How  this  was  done  may  be  seen  from  the  story  of 
the  short  struggle  between  the  Petrograd  Municipal 
Council  and  the  Petrograd  Soviet.  A  Bolshevist 
struggle  always  resolves  itself  into  a  question  of 
physical  force,  and  the  Petrograd  Municipal  Council 
was  guarded  only  by  a  body  of  Boy  Scouts.  These 
boys,  with  great  importance,  asked  the  members  of 
the  Council  for  their  tickets,  ran  errands  for  us  all 
over  the  town,  and  in  general  were  both  a  guard  of 
honour  and  a  liaison  service.  Of  course  no  one  expected 
any  military  protection  from  them.  And  indeed  the 
Municipal  Council  neither  expected  nor  sought  protection 
from  any  one.  It  stood  outside  any  physical  struggle, 
yet  considered  itself  bound  to  defend  the  interests  of 
the  population  to  the  end,  to  guard  that  expensive 
and  complicated  economic  apparatus  which  had  been 
entrusted  to  it.  The  electric  trams,  water  supply, 
lighting,  schools,  hospitals,  and  lastly,  the  food  supply 
— all  these  first  requirements  of  the  capital,  which  then 
contained  2^  million  inhabitants— were  in  the  hands 
of  the  Municipal  Council.  Unfortunately,  the  pro- 
clamations of  the  Municipality,  drawn  up  by  the  Socialist 
Centre  in  agreement  with  the  Cadets,  found  sympathisers 
only  among  the  intelligentsia  and  a  small  portion  of 
the  working  classes,  while  the  masses  already  looked 
upon  the  members  of  the  Council  as  counter-revolu- 
tionaries. 


THE  CONSTITUENT  ASSEMBLY  329 

The  struggle  between  the  Petrograd  Municipal 
Council,  elected  according  to  an  exact  and  clear 
suffrage  law,  and  the  Petrograd  Soviet,  elected  by  some 
unknown  persons  and  unknown  procedure,  was  not 
very  prolonged.  The  question  was  decided  not  by 
right,  but  by  bayonets,  which  were  undoubtedly  in 
the  hands  of  Lenin  and  Trotsky.  The  open  and  im- 
placable opposition  of  the  Council,  its  really  energetic 
defence  of  all  the  victims  of  the  Bolshevist  insur- 
rection, the  military  Cadets,  the  Women's  Battalion, 
hundreds  of  people  who  were  imprisoned  no  one  knew 
what  for — all  this  irritated  the  Smolny.  The  time  had 
come  to  sweep  aside  this  obstacle  also,  the  more  so 
as,  according  to  Lenin's  theory,  the  Soviets  were  to 
be  the  sole  organs  of  authority,  administration,  and 
government. 

The  sittings  took  place  every  day,  but  of  course  the 
debates  were  on  politics  and  not  municipal  business. 
Civil  war  raged  around.  The  Bed  Guards  kept  appearing 
in  the  Town  Hall  and  then  disappearing. 

No  work  could  be  done  under  such  conditions.  The 
only  thing  to  be  done  was  to  pass  motions  of  protest, 
so  as  to  give  vent  to  the  indignation  felt  both  by  the 
Council  and  by  those  around.  The  last  protest  of 
the  Council  was  the  declaration  protesting  against 
peace  negotiations  begun  at  Brest-Litovsk  by  the 
Bolsheviks,  and  the  assertion  that  they  would  never 
be  acknowledged  by  Russia.  During  this  sitting  a 
crowd  of  workmen  appeared  in  the  gallery  of  the  Town 
Hall.  They  were  noisy,  passed  remarks  on  the  speeches 
of  the  members,  and  shouted  : 

"  You  have  chattered  long  enough !  We  will  soon 
chuck  all  of  you  out !  " 

'  The  Socialist  members  of  the  Municipal  Council 
tried  to  reason  with  the  workmen,  saying  : 


330     PROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       oh, 

"  Comrades,  you  have  been  deceived  !  Comrades, 
you  are  betrayed  !  " 

"  What  sort  of  comrades  are  we  of  yours  ?  "  replied 
the  gallery.  "You  are  bourgeois,  counter-revolu- 
tionaries. We  will  sweep  all  of  you  away  with  a  dirty 
broom." 

'  There  was  anger  in  the  voices  and  the  eyes  of  the 
workmen.  It  was  clear  that  the  Bolsheviks  had  managed 
to  build  up  a  dividing  wall  between  the  workmen  and 
the  Socialists  of  the  Centre. 

The  day  after  this  insulting  and  trying  scene  the 
Mayor  and  several  members  of  the  Council  were 
arrested.  The  Izvestia  printed  a  decree  dissolving  the 
municipaUty  because  it  "  had  lost  the  right  of  repre- 
senting the  Petrograd  population,  having  become  com- 
pletely antagonistic  to  its  tendencies  and  wishes.  .  .  . 
The  results  of  the  election  to  the  Constituent  Assembly 
conjSrm  this.  The  Municipal  Council  has  shown 
counter-revolutionary  opposition  to  the  will  of  the 
soldiers,  workmen,  and  peasants,  and  has  taken  to 
obstruction."    (1st  December.) 

The  next  day  the  sailors  and  Red  Guards  with  rifles  at 
the  ready  burst  into  the  hall  where  the  Municipal  Council 
was  sitting,  just  as  if  they  were  attacking  a  strongly 
armed  enemy.  The  SociaUst  members  began  exhorting 
these  new  pretorians,  but  already  the  soldiers  were 
deaf  to  the  speeches  of  their  late  orators.  The  Muni- 
cipality had  to  yield  to  force  and  to  disperse,  giving  up 
the  Town  Hall  to  the  Bolsheviks.  After  that,  hoping 
that  Lenin  and  Trotsky  would  not  be  in  power  very 
long,  the  Council  still  continued  to  meet  clandes- 
tinely, almost  like  conspirators.  These  meetings  were 
accompanied  by  a  certain  risk,  but  naturally  were  of 
no  serious  value,  as  the  Bolsheviks  had  practically 
seized  the  Municipal  Treasury  and  undertakings,  and 


xni  THE  CONSTITUENT  ASSEMBLY  331 

the  Council  they  heA  dispersed  had  nothing  to  do 
but  talk. 

The  same  short  and  unequal  struggle  took  place  in 
Moscow  and  in  all  other  towns  taken  by  the  Bolsheviks. 
The  zemstvo  boards  were  also  dispersed.  The  People's 
Commissaries  abolished  all  forms  of  self-government  and 
replaced  them  by  Soviets.  As  the  right  of  all  the  popula- 
tion to  decide  questions  of  imperial  importance  was  to 
have  been  exercised  in  the  most  authoritative  form  by 
the  Constituent  Assembly,  therefore  for  the  Bolsheviks 
it  was  an  obstacle  to  the  establishment  of  their  party 
authority,  and  so  they  swept  it  aside. 

When  Tsarism  was  overthrown  by  the  March 
Revolution,  all  parties,  all  influential  currents  of 
Russian  political  thought  were  united  in  the  universal 
acknowledgement  of  the  sovereign  rights  of  the 
Constituent  Assembly,  which  was  to  decide  the 
fundamental  questions  arising  out  of  the  recon- 
struction of  Russia.  Will  Russia  be  a  Republic  or 
a  Monarchy?  What  rights  and  relations  must  be 
established  between  the  numerous  nationalities  inhabit- 
ing the  Russian  State  ?  How  to  settle  the  agrarian  and 
other  social  questions  ?  All  this  was  to  have  been 
answered  authoritatively  by  a  lawful  Constituent 
Assembly.  Its  claim  was  acknowledged  both  by  the 
Right  and  the  Left,  by  Rodzianko  and  by  Chheidze, 
and  (at  least  in  words)  by  Trotsky  also. 

One  of  the  first  tasks  of  the  Provisional  Government 
was  to  create  an  All-Russian  Election  Committee  for 
the  Constituent  Assembly.  The  representatives  of  all 
parties  and  all  nationalities  took  part  in  it.  Prominent 
savants  and  lawyers  were  employed  on  this  work,  which 
then  seemed  uncommonly  important  and  responsible. 
The  President,  F.  F.  Kokoshkin,  a  Moscow  professor,  a 
brilliant  and  widely-read  man,  was  one  of  the  idealistic 


332     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       oh. 

leaders  of  the  Cadet  party.  Even  the  political 
opponents  of  the  Cadets  acknowledged  that  F.  F. 
Kokoshkin  combined  logical  exactitude  of  thought  with 
definiteness  of  political  convictions  and  an  intelligent 
comprehension  of  differing  points  of  view. 

The  Commission  had  no  easy  task  to  perform. 
There  was  no  serious  divergence  in  fundamental  prin- 
ciples. The  Socialists  and  Cadets  both  supported 
universal  suffrage,  based  on  proportional  representation. 
The  disputes  were  only  about  the  age  limit,  the  property 
qualification,  domicile  and  soldiers'  votes. 

The  Cadets  proposed  an  age  limit  of  twenty-five 
years,  a  year's  residence  in  one  place,  and  limitations 
for  soldiers.  But  the  more  radical  elements  were 
victorious.  The  most  democratic  suffrage  law  in  the 
world  was  drawn  up,  giving  every  citizen  of  either  sex 
who  had  reached  the  age  of  twenty  years  the  right  of 
participating  in  the  settlement  of  the  most  important 
problems  of  State. 

It  was  necessary  to  organise  and  hold  elections  in  a 
country  with  an  illiterate,  scanty  population,  which 
spoke  different  languages,  and  had  hitherto  taken  no 
part  in  political  life.  The  delimitation  of  the  con- 
stituencies, the  order  of  voting,  the  guarantee  of  its 
legality  and  correctness,  the  drafting  of  electoral  rolls 
hitherto  non-existent — all  this  of  course  required  effort 
and  time. 

Now  we  think,  with  a  bitter  smile,  of  the  seriousness, 
honesty,  and  thought  with  which  the  best  Russian 
lawyers  performed  this  enormous  task  in  the  feverish 
atmosphere  of  the  Revolution.  Their  conscientiousness 
bordered  on  the  simplicity  of  Don  Quixote.  Even 
then  pessimists  predicted  that  all  this  was  futile,  and 
that  anarchy  would  sweep  away  all  juridical  schemes 
and  democratic  projects.      But    at    those  times  the 


THE  CONSTITUENT  ASSEMBLY  333 

enormous  majority  of  politicians  of  all  shades  sincerely 
considered  the  Constituent  Assembly  as  the  sole  hope  of 
the  young  Democracy  of  Russia. 

Meanwhile  the  Bolsheviks  were  already  playing  a 
double  game,  acting  a  double  lie,  slandering  their 
political  opponents  (especially  the  Cadets),  accusing 
them  of  obstructing  the  Constituent  Assembly,  and 
representing  themselves  as  the  faithful  champions  of 
the  latter. 

In  his  pamphlet,  **  Political  Parties  in  Russia  and 
Problems  of  the  Proletariat,"  from  which  I  quoted  in 
detail  in  Chapter  III.,  Lenin  says  that  the  Cadets,  in 
answer  to  the  question :  "  Is  it  necessary  to  convene 
the  Constituent  Assembly  ?  "  replied,  "  Yes,  it  is  ;  but 
no  date  should  be  fixed.  Let  the  question  be  discussed 
as  long  as  possible  by  professors  of  law,  first  of  all 
because,  as  Bebel  said,  lawyers  are  the  most  reactionary 
men  in  the  world,  and,  secondly,  the  experience  of  all 
revolutions  has  proved  that  the  cause  of  national  liberty 
is  ruined  as  soon  as  it  is  entrusted  to  professors."  Ac- 
cording to  Lenin,  only  the  Bolsheviks  said,  "  It  is 
necessary  to  convene  the  Constitutional  Assembly,  and  as 
soon  as  possible.  But  the  guarantee  of  its  success  and 
convocation  is  one  and  the  same  :  namely,  the  increase 
of  the  number  and  strength  of  the  Soviets,  the  organisa- 
tion and  arming  of  the  working-classes." 

Before  demonstratively  leaving  the  Council  of  the 
Republic,  on  the  eve  of  their  couj)  d^etat  he  had  already 
prepared  for,  Trotsky  read  a  declaration  containing  the 
following : 

The  Government  cannot  but  be  responsible  to  the  Constituent 
Assembly.  Therefore  the  bourgeois  classes,  who  direct  the 
policy  of  the  Provisional  Government,  have  made  it  their  object 
to  obstruct  the  convocation  of  the  Constituent  Assembly.  At 
present  this  is  the  chief  aim  of  the  Centre  parties,  which  guides 


334     PROM  LIBERTY  TO  BRE8T-LIT0VSK       ch. 

all  their  policy,  both  home  and  foreign.    Hail  to  the  Constituent 
Assembly ! 

Thus  spoke  the  Bolsheviks,  while  they  were  in  the 
Opposition.  When  they  became  the  Government,  they 
made  an  abrupt  change  of  front,  notwithstanding  that 
their  first  decree,  issued  on  the  10th  November,  begins 
as  follows :  "To  form  a  Provisional  Workmen's  and 
Peasants'  Government,  to  be  called  th.e  Soviet  of  People's 
Commissaries,  for  the  purpose  of  governing  the  country 
until  the  convocation  of  the  Constituent  Assembly." 

The  elections  to  the  Constitutional  Assembly  were 
not  put  off,  but,  on  the  contrary,  a  special  ukase  con- 
firmed the  date  which  had  been  fixed  by  the  Pro- 
visional Government,  i.e.  the  25th  November. 

On  this  day  the  elections  began ;  but  they  were 
held  at  different  times  in  different  parts  of  Russia,  as 
owing  to  the  general  disorganisation  of  life  it  was 
impossible  to  complete  the  technical  preparations.  The 
Bolsheviks  created  such  a  wave  of  disorder  and  law- 
lessness that  many  began  to  doubt  whether  they  ought 
to  take  part  in  the  elections  when  there  was  no  press, 
no  freedom  of  meetings,  no  possibility  of  canvassing, 
no  personal  security,  and  no  law.  But  the  Electoral 
Commission  of  the  All-Russian  Constituent  Assembly 
insisted  on  the  election  not  being  postponed.  The  fol- 
lowing proclamation,  signed  by  V.  Nabokoff,^  President 
of  the  Commission,  was  addressed  to  the  people  : 

The  attempt  to  seize  power  has  disorganised  communications, 
created  anarchy  and  terror,  and  interrupted  the  business  of 
the  Commission.  Nevertheless,  it  is  necessary  to  hold  the 
elections  wherever  there  is  the  slightest  possibility  of  doing  so. 
The  gravest  responsibility  towards  the  country  will  be  incurred 
by  all  who  dare  to  make  an  attempt  to  corrupt  the  elections 


1  F.  P.  Kokoshkin  had  resigned  that  post  several  days  before. 


THE  CONSTITUENT  ASSEMBLY  335 

to  the  Constitutent  Assembly,  on  wUch  the  whole  country  is 
finng  Its  hopes.    (22nd  November.) 

The  Izvestia  responded  to  the  challenge  by  printing 
Its  own  proclamation  on  its  first  page  : 

The  hourgeoMi,  the  landed  gentry,  and  Kerensky's  Govern- 
ment have  for  e.ght  months  been  doing  all  they  could  to  delay 
the  elections  to  the  Constituent  Assembly.  They  have  been 
persistently  and  doggedly  preparing  to  obstruct  it,  because 
they  knew  that  m  the  agrarian  question  the  Constituent  Assembly 
would  be  on  the  side  of  the  people.  ...  Now  the  elections  to 
the  Constituent  Assembly  are  secure,  and  must  take  place  at 
the  date  fixed.    (24th  November.)  laKe  place  at 

AnA  in  the  Petrograd  Soviet,  Volodarsky,  an  in- 
fluenial  Bolshevik,  said:    "We  put  the  question  of 
the  elections  as  a  matter  to  be  fought  out.    The  masses 
never  suffer  from  parUamentary  crkinism,  and  if  the 
Constituent   Assembly   goes   against   the   wiU   of  the 
people,  the  question  of  a  new  insurrection  will  arise 
We  do  not  make  a  fetish  of  the  Constituent  Assembly' 
If  we  have  a  majority  in  the  Constituent  Assembly  we 
mU  manage  to  make  it  the  last  parUamentary  meeting. 
We  wiU  establish  a  Republic  of  Soviets." 

The    expression    "parliamentary    orUmism"    was 
often  repeated  m  Soviet  circles  and  showed  their  real 
attitude  not  only  towards  the  Constituent  Assembly 
but  to  parbamentary  politics  in  general. 

But  this  was  too  strong  even  for  yesterday's  friends 
and  near  neighbours  of  the  Bolsheviks. 

The  Ncrvavi  ZMzn  wrote  :  "  It  is  pretty  difficult  to 
argue  on  the  essence  of  any  matter  with  public  men  of 
the  type  of  Volodarsky,  men  who  suffer  from  aU  forms 
oi  cret%nism  except  the  parliamentary  variety  The 
only  argument  to  convince  them  is  the  bayonet. 
Pobticians  of  this  kind  can  only  be  shown  that  their 


336     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

hopes    of    a    defenceless    Constituent    Assembly    are 
premature  and  frivolous."  ^ 

The  elections  took  place  under  most  unusual  condi- 
tions, inadmissible  in  any  elections.  There  was  no 
authority  to  supervise  the  legality  of  the  elections. 
The  institutions  which  carried  out  the  process  of  election, 
such,  for  instance,  as  election  committees  and  municipal 
corporations,  did  not  acknowledge  the  authority  of  the 
Soviets.  And  the  Soviet  authorities  did  not  acknow- 
ledge the  laws  acknowledged  by  the  aforesaid  institu- 
tions. There  was  no  Press.  The  lists  of  candidates 
could  only  be  printed  here  and  there  at  intervals.  But 
printing  offices,  premises  of  party  committees,  and 
meetings  were  all  liable  to  have  the  Reds  come  in  at 
any  moment  and  pogrom  them.  In  many  towns  there 
was  shooting  in  the  streets.  The  prominent  men  of 
all  parties  except  the  Bolsheviks  and  Left  Social- 
Revolutionaries  had  to  hide  instead  of  talking  to  their 
constituents.  Chernoff  and  Avksentieff,  Tsereteli,  and 
Kerensky,  Mme.  Breshko-Breshkovskaia,  and  Chheidze, 
all  popular  Socialists  whose  names  were  on  the  lists, 
did  not  show  themselves  at  all,  justly  fearing  Bolshevist 
attacks. 

Those  who  took  the  least  trouble  to  hide  were  the 
Cadets,  perhaps  because  in  general  they  were  not 
used  to  conspiring.  But  they  paid  dearly  for  their 
excess  of  boldness. 

It  is  impossible  to  enumerate  all  the  outrages  and 
the  lawlessness  that  took  place  in  connection  with  the 
elections. 

It  was  one  huge  mockery  of  Democracy  and  its 
principles.     One  need  not  be  a  scrupulous  jurist  to 

*  The  author  seems  to  have  foretold  Volodarsky's  fate.  The  latter  was 
killed  in  the  summer  of  1918,  when  he  was  Press  Commissary  and  treated  the 
Press  with  a  contumely  exceeding  that  of  the  darkest  periods  of  autocratic 
reaction. 


I 


THE  CONSTITUENT  ASSEMBLY  337 

acknowledge  that  the  elections  to  the  All-Russian 
Constituent  Assembly,  so  impatiently  looked  forward 
to — if  not  by  the  whole  Russian  people,  then  at  least 
by  all  the  literate  and  thinking  part—proved  a  real  and 
tragic  failure. 

The  Social  -  Revolutionaries  got  the  majority  at 
the  elections.  Then  came  a  few  representatives  of 
various  other  Socialistic  groups.  The  Cadets  were 
completely  beaten,  getting  only  15  seats  out  of  600. 
Their  candidates  were  elected  only  in  large  towns 
which  formed  separate  electoral  units.  In  all  other 
districts  the  mass  of  the  peasantry  completely  swamped 
the  urban  electors. 

In  order  to  show  the  altered  mood  of  the  Petrograd 
electors,  I  will  give  the  statistics  of  the  elections  to 
the  Municipal  Council,  which  took  place  on  the  2nd 
September,  and  the  elections  to  the  Constituent 
Assembly,  which  took  place  on  the  25th  November. 

At  the  Municipal  elections  in  September  the  Social- 
Revolutionaries  polled  205,000  votes,  the  Bolsheviks 
183,000,  and  the  Cadets  114,000.  The  remaining  votes 
were  split  up  among  uninfluential  Socialistic  parties. 
Thus,  for  example,  the  Menshevik  Social-Democrats  got 
23,000  votes  out  of  a  total  of  503,000. 

At  the  Constituent  Assembly  elections  942,000 
votes  were  recorded.  Of  this  number,  the  Bolsheviks 
got  424,000,  the  Cadets  got  246, 000,^  the  Social- 
Revolutionaries  got  only  152,000,  and  the  Mensheviks, 
17,000.  Of  the  votes  given  to  the  Bolsheviks,  63,000 
belonged  to  soldiers. 

^  So  little  did  the  Socialists  understand  the  catastrophe  which  had  over- 
taken the  Russian  Revolution,  that  the  moderate  Socialistic  paper  Dien 
wrote :  "  The  Cadets  owe  their  success  to  Bolshevism.  Bolshevism  has 
discredited  democracy  in  the  eyes  of  the  masses.  For  if  this  be  Revolution 
and  Socialism,  if  this  be  Revolutionary  Democracy — then  long  live  the 
Cadets  1  A  strong  poison  needs  a  strong  antidote :  let  Milyukofif  stand 
against  Lenin." 

Z 


338     FROM  LIBEETY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

But  while  the  Bolsheviks  were  solid  and  disciplined, 
the  other  Socialists  were  split  up  into  a  number  of 
fractions.  The  largest  Social-Revolutionary  party  had 
representatives  of  all  its  numerous  fractions  on  its 
Petrograd  list  of  candidates.  The  same  list  contained 
Social  -  Revolutionaries  of  national  defencist  views, 
like  Kerensky  and  Avksentieff  ;  the  impudent  dema- 
gogue Zimmerwaldist,  and  defeatist  V.  Chernoff ;  the 
hysterical  Maria  Spiridonova,  who,  together  with  the  Left 
Social-Revolutionaries,  had  gone  over  openly  to  the 
Bolsheviks,  and  lastly  the  former  employee  of  the 
Tsarist  Secret  Service,  Kamkoff,  also  a  Left  Social- 
Revolutionary  who  was  on  good  terms  with  the 
Bolsheviks.  These  persons  represented  different 
political  and  social  opinions,  and  what  is  more  important, 
different  standards  of  morals.  But  the  poor  elector 
whose  sympathies  were  with  the  Social-Revolutionary 
party  had  to  vote  for  them  wholesale,  both  for  the 
honourable  a^d  dishonourable  Social-Revolutionaries.^ 

The  level  of  the  political  intelligence  of  the  Social- 
Revolutionary  Petrograd  candidates  for  the  Constituent 
Assembly  may,  in  some  degree,  be  determined  by  the 
following  anecdote,  related  in  the  Social-Revolutionary 
Dielo  Naroda,  ''  Cause  of  the  People  "  : 

The  Left  Social -Revolutionaries  took  the  Soviet 
of  Peasant  Delegates  into  their  own  hands.  There, 
with  Maria  Spiridonova  in  the  Chair,  an  election  meeting 
was  being  held.  The  Socialists  who  had  gathered 
round  the  Committee  of  the  Salvation  of  the  Motherland 
had  brought  their  electioneering  literature  with  them. 
Maria  Spiridonova  got  angry  and  demanded  that  all 
the    pamphlets    and   leaflets    of    heterodox    Socialists 

^  According  to  the  Russian  proportional  representation  law,  each  party 
has  to  present  its  list  of  candidates,  and  the  voter  cannot  alter  one  single  name 
in  the  list.  This  is  a  great  defect  of  the  system,  as  the  central  committees  of 
the  parties  thus  dominate  the  will  of  the  electors. 


THE  CONSTITUENT  ASSEMBLY  339 

should  be  confiscated  and  stored  in  one  room,  at  the 
door  of  which  she  placed  a  sentry  with  a  rifle,  in  order 
that  the  harmful  books  should  not  get  into  the  hands 
of  the  peasants. 

This  unfortunate  revolutionary,  who  had  at  one 
time  herself  been  persecuted  by  the  Tsarist  gendarmes, 
lost  her  head  on  getting  into  power,  and  began  to  treat 
her  political  opponents  in  the  good  old  police  way. 
And  she  had  not  even  the  excuse  that  these  were 
harmful  bourgeois  pamphlets,  as  they  were  the  publica- 
tions of  the  Socialist  Centre. 

This  instance  shows  how  the  November  Revolution 
changed  the  morals  of  the  Russian  Revolution  and 
brought  into  Russian  life  an  utter  contempt  for  liberty 
and  right.  No  one  knew  when  the  meetings  of  the 
Constituent  Assembly  were  to  begin.  The  Provisional 
Government  issued  a  decree  in  September  stating  that 
the  elections  would  be  held  on  the  25th  November, 
and  the  Assembly  would  be  opened  on  the  11th 
December. 

On  the  29th  November,  in  a  special  decree,  P. 
Maliantovitch,  Minister  of  Justice,  and  S.  Prokopovitch, 
Acting  Minister  of  Justice,  confirmed  the  same  in  the 
name  of  the  Provisional  Government. 

But  it  was  not  the  intention  of  the  People's  Com- 
missaries to  hurry  with  the  convocation  of  the  Assembly. 
When  the  counting  of  the  votes  began  to  show  that 
they  were  not  going  to  have  a  majority,  they  tried  in 
every  way  to  discredit  the  Constituent  Assembly.  The 
Bolshevik  Press,  i.e.  the  Izvestia,  Pravda,  and  Znamia 
Truda,  carried  on  a  furious  campaign.  The  Election 
Committee  was  arrested.  A  guard  was  placed  at  the 
doors  of  the  Taurida  Palace,  where  the  sittings  were  to 
take  place.  Uritsky,  an  apothecary,  was  appointed 
Commandant  of  the  Taurida  Palace ;   the  members  of 


340     FKOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LlTOVSK       ch. 

the  Constituent  Assembly  were  obliged  to  get  special 
permits  of  admission  to  the  Palace  from  this  Soviet 
guard. 

The  legislators  elected  to  carry  out  the  will  of  the 
nation  were  deprived  of  all  possibility  of  exercising  any 
will  whatever,  of  enjoying  their  rights  and  fulfilling 
their  duties. 

Nevertheless,  the  members  of  the  Constituent 
Assembly  made  an  attempt  to  meet  on  the  day  fixed 
by  the  Provisional  Government.  This  is  how  it  was 
described  in  the  Soviet  communique : 

In  the  afternoon  of  the  11th  December  a  crowd  of  about 
a  thousand  people  collected  at  the  entrance  to  the  Taurida 
Palace.  The  crowd  swept  aside  the  guard  and  part  of  them 
burst  through  to  the  Taurida  Palace,  though  the  number  of 
such  was  very  small.  Among  the  latter  were  twenty  members 
of  the  Constituent  Assembly.  This  crowd  poured  into  the 
meeting-hall  in  a  mixed  mass,  occupjdng  less  than  one-tenth  of 
the  seats,  etc. 

The  Pravda  wrote  more  definitely  : 

On  the  evening  of  the  11th  December  some  score  or  so  of 
people,  caUing  themselves  delegates,  but  without  presenting 
their  documents,  and  accompanied  by  armed  former  Horse 
Guards,  military  cadets,  and  several  thousand  bourgeois  and 
saboteur  Government  employees,  burst  into  the  Taurida  Palace. 

Thus  did  the  Bolshevist  Press  greet  the  first  appear- 
ance of  the  members  of  the  Assembly  in  the  Taurida 
Palace.  The  Social-Revolutionaries,  foreseeing  obstruc- 
tion on  Uritsky's  part,  did  indeed  organise  something 
like  a  demonstration,  hoping  that  at  least  by  this 
means  they  might  force  the  Bolsheviks  to  open  the 
doors  of  the  Taurida  Palace,  and  that  the  delegates 
might  hold  a  private  meeting.  They  had  no  other 
object  in  view,  as  it  was  impossible  to  start  work, 


THE  CONSTITUENT  ASSEMBLY  341 

owing  to  the  absence  of  a  quorum.  But  even  this 
modest  desire  could  not  be  satisfied.  The  members  of 
the  Constituent  Assembly  managed  somehow  to  get 
into  the  Palace,  but  there  all  was  in  such  a  turmoil 
that  it  was  impossible  even  to  discuss  anything.  On 
the  13th  December  the  members  of  the  Social-Revolu- 
tionary party  met  in  the  library  of  the  Duma.  A 
young  officer,  the  commander  of  the  Red  Guard,  made 
his  appearance  and  ordered  them  to  disperse. 

"  We  consider  it  not  only  our  right,  but  our  duty 
to  remain  here,"  answered  the  members  of  the  Con- 
stituent Assembly.  But  the  officer  insisted,  while  his 
soldiers  showed  an  evident  desire  to  take  the  elected 
representatives  of  the  Russian  people  by  the  scruff  of 
the  neck  and  simply  throw  them  out  of  the  Taurida 
Palace. 

One  of  the  members  of  the  Constituent  Assembly, 
a  peasant,  said  indignantly  to  the  soldiers  and  sailors  : 

"  We  have  come  here  to  get  land,  and  we  find 
bayonets.  Whom  are  you  serving — the  people  or  the 
oppressors  ?  " 

"  We  have  our  orders.  We  must  preserve  discipline,'' 
moodily  answered  a  sailor. 

It  was  clear  that  by  their  clever  propaganda  the 
Bolsheviks  had  discredited  the  Constituent  Assembly. 
All  efforts  on  the  part  of  the  Socialist  Centre  to 
re-establish  the  confidence  of  the  masses  in  the 
democratically  elected  representatives  proved  futile. 

The  League  for  the  Protection  of  the  Constituent 
Assembly,  working  secretly  in  Petrograd,  issued  a 
proclamation  to  the  army  : 

We  appeal  to  you,  defenders  of  our  country,  soldiers  of  the 
whole  Russian  Army.  Stand  shoulder  to  shoulder  in  defence 
of  the  People's  Constituent  Assembly.  Announce  that  you 
place  yourself  at  its  disposal.    Send  delegations,  send  mandates 


342     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

and  resolutions.    Loudly  announce  to  the  whole  of  Russia  and 
to  all  the  world — ^AU  power  to  the  Constituent  Assembly  ! 

It  was  hard,  it  even  made  one  blush,  to  read  this 
childish  babble,  this  attempt  to  counteract  Bolshevist 
bayonets  by  feeble  resolutions.  The  author  of  this 
appeal  forgot  that  there  was  no  longer  any  army ;  that 
Dukhonin,  the  Commander-in-Chief,  was  Idlled;  that 
the  Committee  had  demolished  the  organisations ;  that 
the  soldiers  had  turned  from  being  defenders  of  their 
country  into  a  terrible  mob  in  which  the  voices  of 
madmen  and  criminals  silenced  the  reproaches  and 
warnings  of  frightened,  decent  people.  It  goes  without 
saying  that  the  soldiers  were  indifferent  to  such  appeals. 

Simultaneously  with  the  open  persecution  of  the 
Constituent  Assembly  an  open  persecution  of  the  Cadet 
party  was  also  begun.  The  impulse  was  given  by 
chance,  but  the  persecution  was  not,  of  course,  a  matter 
of  chance.  Having  driven  the  Social  Centre  from  the 
arena,  the  Bolsheviks  found  themselves  face  to  face 
with  the  Cadets,  round  whom  all  the  radical,  non- 
Socialistic  elements  had  rallied. 

The  pretext  was  found  in  searching  Countess  Panin's 
house  for  the  persons  who  had  inspired  and  guided  the 
strike  of  Civil  Service  employees. 

The  Bolsheviks  chanced  to  find  one  of  the  vouchers 
signed  by  the  Countess  Sophia  Panin,  and  issued  an 
order  for  her  arrest,  accusing  this  woman,  who  had 
spent  millions  of  her  personal  money  on  the  people's 
cause,  of  embezzling  Rs.  93,000. 

When  the  Red  Guards  came  to  her  house  they 
happened  to  find  some  members  of  the  Constituent 
Assembly  there — A.  I.  Shingareff  and  F.  F.  Kokoshkin. 
Both  had  just  come  up  to  Petrograd  in  order  to  take 
part  in  the  inauguration  of  the  Constituent  Assembly 
on  the  11th  December,  and  had  stayed  at  Countess 


THE  CONSTITUENT  ASSEMBLY  343 

Panin's,  where  the  meetings  of  the  Executive  Committee 
of  the  Cadet  party  took  place. 

The  commissaries  who  were  making  the  search  were 
lotli  to  let  such  important  prey  out  of  their  hands. 
They  telephoned  to  the  Soviet  for  directions.  The 
answer  was  simple  :  "  Arrest  them."  All  three  were 
taken  off  to  the  Smolny.  In  the  evening  Countess  S. 
Panin  was  taken  to  the  Viborg  Prison,  and  the  former 
Ministers  were  taken  to  St.  Peter  and  Paul's  Fortress, 
where  the  Ministers  who  had  been  arrested  at  the 
Winter  Palace  were  still  imprisoned. 

The  same  day  the  Soviet  of  People's  Commissaries 
issued  a  short,  but  solemn  decree  : 

On  the  Arrest  of  the  Leaders  of  the  Civil  War 

AGAINST    THE    KeVOLUTION 

The  members  of  the  leading  institutions  of  the  Cadet  party, 
as  a  party  of  the  enemies  of  the  people,  are  liable  to  be  arrested 
and  brought  up  for  trial  by  Revolutionary  tribunals.  The 
local  Soviets  are  charged  with  the  duty  of  special  supervision 
over  the  Cadet  party  in  view  of  its  connection  with  the  Korniloff- 
Kaledin  war  on  the  Revolution. 

In  a  more  detailed  official  communication  the 
Soviet  of  People's  Commissaries  supplemented  its 
accusations  against  the  Cadets.  I  shall  quote  it  in 
detail,  because  all  the  argumentation  is  so  characteristic 
both  of  the  way  the  Bolsheviks  treat  the  truth  and  of 
their  methods  of  influencing  the  masses.  The  Bolsheviks 
act  systematically.  They  establish  certain  propositions, 
most  frequently  clothing  them  in  short  and  catchy  war- 
cries  such  as,  "  Peace  to  cottages  and  war  on  palaces," 
''  Down  with  capitalist  Ministers,"  etc.,  and  then  they 
ceaselessly  repeat  and  paraphrase  these  war-cries, 
attracting  attention  to  them  by  the  very  repetition 


344     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

and,  as  it  were,  hammering  them  into  the  minds  of  the 
masses.    In  this  respect  they  can  teach  us  something. 

While  they  were  pressing  on  as  an  Opposition  they 
only  required  war-cries.  In  order  to  consolidate  their 
power  they  were  obUged  to  modify  these  war-cries 
gradually  and,  above  all,  to  give  more  and  more  food 
to  the  hatred  they  had  aroused  in  the  masses.  In  this 
respect  the  Cadet  party  was  a  tit-bit.  Distrust  and 
animosity  to  the  Cadets  had  been  sown  by  all  the 
preceding  Socialist  agitation.  Menshevik  and  Social- 
Revolutionary  orators  grew  black  in  the  face  trying  to 
prove  that  Milyukoff  was  an  Imperialist,  that  the  Cadets 
were  bourgeois  flunkeys,  etc.  Sometimes  they  even 
went  so  far  as  to  declare  that  it  was  better  to  be  under 
the  Kaiser  than  under  Milyukoff.  Many  understood 
very  well  that  they  were  talking  nonsense,  but  they  felt 
bound  to  vituperate  the  party  which  placed  the  interests 
of  the  State  and  the  nation  as  a 'whole  above  the 
interests  of  the  workmen,  the  peasants,  or  any  other 
class,  and  insisted  on  the  necessity  of  continuing  the 
war  until  Germany  was  defeated. 

The  Soviet  proclamation  to  all  who  laboured  and 
were  exploited  had  been  drawn  up  in  haste,  and 
was  not  distinguished  by  the  usual  smoothness  of  the 
Bolshevist  lie.     It  began  thus  : 

The  Bourgeoisie,  led  by  the  Cadet  party,  got  all  its  forces 
ready  for  the  convocation  of  the  Constituent  Assembly  in  order 
to  start  a  counter-revolution. 

Then  followed  an  enumeration  of  military  conflicts  with 
Komiloff,  Kaledin,  Dutofi,  and  other  White  Guards  who, 
the  Bolsheviks  pretended,  had  declared  that  "  the  in- 
surrection had  been  begun  at  the  direct  demand  of  the 
Cadet  party." 

*'  Thus  a  regular  Civil  War  has  been  started  on  the 


xni  THE  CONSTITUENT  ASSEMBLY  345 

initiative  and  under  the  guidance  of  the  Cadet  party. 
The  Central  Committee  of  this  organisation  is  at  present 
the  political  headquarters  of  all  the  counter-revolu- 
tionary forces  of  the  country.  This  work,  which  is  a 
direct  menace  to  the  cause  of  peace  and  all  conquests 
of  the  Eevolution,  is  carried  on  under  the  cover  of  the 
Constituent  Assembly.'* 

Then  follows  the  foregoing  story  of  how  the  bour- 
geoisie burst  into  the  Taurida  Palace.  The  Cadets 
wanted  to  make  the  Constituent  Assembly  into  "  a  legal 
cover  for  a  Cadet-Kaledin  counter-Revolutionary  insur- 
rection. The  voice  of  several  bourgeois  delegates  was  to 
be  represented  as  that  of  the  Constituent  Assembly.*' 

The  Soviet  of  People's  Commissaries  informs  the 
masses  of  this  conspiracy  : 

It  will  take  all  measures  necessary,  fuUy  recognising  the 
enormous  responsibility  which  must  lie  on  the  Soviet  authorities 
for  the  fate  of  the  people  and  the  Revolution.  The  Soviet  of 
the  People's  Commissaries  declares  the  Cadet  party,  as  an 
organisation  of  counter-revolutionary  insurrection,  to  be  enemies 
of  the  people.  .  .  .  The  Political  leaders  of  the  counter-Revolu- 
tionary Civil  War  will  be  arrested.  The  bourgeois  insurrection 
will  be  put  down  at  any  cost.  .  .  .  Down  with  the  bourgeoisie  I 
The  foes  of  the  people,  landlords,  and  capitaUsts  ought  not  ,to 
have  any  place  in  the  Constituent  Assembly. 

Having  declared  a  party  which  had  just  in  the  capital 
got  240,000  votes  to  be  enemies  of  the  people,  the 
Bolsheviks  gave  the  Provincial  Soviets  a  free  hand  in 
dealing  with  the  local  Cadet  leaders  and  electors,  and 
the  Soviets  took  full  advantage  of  this.  But  the  Central 
Committee  continued  to  live  a  semi-public  life.  Meet- 
ings were  held  almost  every  day.  It  is  true  the  venue 
was  often  changed,  as  the  club  of  the  party  was  closed 
and  all  the  furniture,  including  the  property  of  the 
servants  and  housekeeper,  had  been  looted  and  carried 


346     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

away  by  the  Red  Guards.  Prominent  Cadets  sometimes 
did  not  pass  the  night  at  home  for  fear  of  being  arrested, 
but  they  spoke  at  great  public  meetings.  The  Cadet 
newspaper,  Rech,  was  sometimes  closed  and  sometimes 
appeared  under  another  name,  but  all  the  time  in- 
variably attacked  the  Bolsheviks.  In  it  appeared  the 
protests  of  various  organisations  against  Bolshevist 
oppression ;  among  others,  the  protest  of  the  Cadets 
against  the  arrest  of  the  members  of  the  Constituent 
Assembly : 

Contemptuously  sweeping  aside  the  slanderous  accusation 
that  our  party  is  inimical  to  the  people,  the  Committee  of  the 
party  consider  that  outlawing  any  one  is  a  return  to  mediaeval 
barbarity.  .  .  .  The  party  declares  that  no  persecutions,  no 
threats,  no  oppression  will  make  it  turn  aside  from  the  path  it 
has  taken  ever  since  the  old  regime,  or  will  force  it  to  cease  its 
struggle  for  the  rights,  liberties,  and  welfare  of  the  people. 

The  Cadets  were  mistaken.  The  Bolshevist  gendar- 
merie turned  out  to  be  infinitely  more  implacable  than 
the  Tsarist  gendarmes  had  been,  and  the  old  path  of 
struggle — a  struggle  of  ideas  and  principles — was  soon 
barred.  It  was  replaced  by  stark  physical  force.  But 
to  do  the  Bolsheviks  justice,  they  forced  their  way  not 
by  means  of  bayonets,  but  by  war-cries.  The  resolutions 
passed  by  them  at  meetings  and  Soldiers'  Committees 
helped  them  to  make  the  Constituent  Assembly  power- 
less and  futile.    Here  is  one  of  these  resolutions  : 

We,  soldiers  of  the  Izmailovsky  and  Petrograd  regiments, 
declare  that  the  policy  of  the  Cadets  is  also  the  poUcy  of  Kerensky, 
Korniloff,  and  Kaledin,  entailing  the  enslavement  of  the  Russian 
people,  and  perpetual  wars  and  exploitation  of  workmen's  labour. 
We  soldiers,  who  are  defending  with  our  blood  the  interests  of 
the  labouring  people  all  the  world  over,  will  not  permit  our 
hard-won  revolutionary  rights  to  be  violated  by  Milyukoff  and 
Co.,  who  want,  by  means  of  false  elections  to  the  Constituent 


THE  CONSTITUENT  ASSEMBLY  347 

Assembly,  to  get  their  illegal  regulations  passed  in  order  to 
enslave  anew  the  rights  of  Russian  citizens.  .  .  . 

Away  with  the  policy  of  the  Cadets  in  the  Constituent 
Assembly.  We  demand  that  reactionaries  and  counter-revolu- 
tionaries, all  the  MilyukofE  gang,  should  not  be  admitted  to  the 
Constituent  Assembly  where  the  liberty  and  Revolution  of  the 
Russian  people  must  be  consolidated,  and  not  the  Counter- 
Revolution  and  Sabotage  of  the  Milyukoff  gang,  whose  place  is 
in  St.  Peter  and  Paul's  fortress. 

The  soldiers  who  passed  this  resolution  did  not  under- 
stand even  half  of  what  the  expert  Bolshevist  agitator 
had  palmed  off  on  them.  The  very  word  "  Cadet," 
which  had  its  origin  from  the  initials  "  C  "  and  "  D  '* 
(Constitutional-Democrats),  was  taken  by  the  masses 
to  mean  officers  and  military  cadets.  One  thing  the 
soldiers  were  quick  to  understand  correctly,  and  that 
was  that  Lenin  was  against  the  war,  and  Kerensky, 
Milyukoff,  Kaledin,  and  the  Cadets  wanted  to  fight  the 
Germans.  If  their  demand  should  be  supported  by  the 
Constituent  Assembly,  then  perhaps  it  would  again  be 
necessary  to  go  to  war.  The  Bolsheviks  cleverly  took 
advantage  of  this  pusillanimity  of  the  soldiers.  Of  all 
the  parties  the  Cadets,  with  Milyukoi!  at  the  head,  were 
most  insistent  in  their  demands  for  "  war  to  the  end." 
Therefore  the  Bolsheviks  nick -named  the  Constituent 
Assembly  "  the  Cadet  Assembly,"  although  there  were 
only  fifteen  Cadets  in  it,  and  all  the  rest  of  the  delegates 
were  Socialists.  This  was  the  lie  on  which  the  Bol- 
sheviks founded  their  power  over  the  mob,  and  at  the 
same  time  justified  the  reprisals  against  the  theoretically 
immune  national  representatives. 

The  Bolsheviks  kept  declaring  that  the  Constituent 
Assembly  was  not  the  supreme  organ  of  the  national 
will.  The  electors,  politically  undeveloped  and  unaccus- 
tomed  to   appreciate    and  guard  the  inviolability  of 


348     FKOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK 

political  elections,  readily  accepted  the  Bolshevist  theory, 
that  as  they  had  elected  the  delegates  they  had  also 
the  right  at  any  moment  to  withdraw  their  confidence 
from  the  latter.  Universal  suffrage,  which  Russian  de- 
mocracy, both  Socialist  and  Radical,  had  sentimentally 
dreamed  of  for  several  decades,  lost  all  its  glamour  in 
the  eyes  of  the  very  masses  for  whose  sake  the  Russian 
champions  of  political  liberty  had  won  it  at  the  cost  of 
such  sacrifice. 

The  Petrograd  Soviet  no  longer  promised  bread,  as 
the  food  supply  was  palpably  decreasing  day  by  day. 
Instead  of  that,  promises  of  peace,  shamelessly  inter- 
mingled with  calls  to  start  a  civil  war,  were  regularly 
repeated. 

''  Hail  to  the  universal  Democratic  Peace  !  Hail  to 
the  International  Labour  Revolution !  Long  live  the 
Soviet  power,  opening  the  way  to  the  Peace  of  Nations  ! 
Down  with  those  who  want  compromises  !  Down  with 
the  traitors  to  the  Ukrainian  Rada  !  "  ^ 

This  last  cry  was  a  sort  of  justification  of  the  war 
started  by  the  Bolsheviks  on  the  Ukraine,  and  therefore 
all  the  more  outrageous  was  the  next  war-cry  :  "  Long 
live  the  Liberty  and  Brotherhood  of  the  Peoples  of 
Russia !  " 

The  Soviet  called  f or  a  "  fraternal  union  of  revolu- 
tionary workmen,  peasants,  soldiers,  sailors,  and  labour- 
ing Cossacks,"  but  required  them  to  carry  on  a  ruthless 
war  against  all  who  did  not  acknowledge  the  authority 
of  the  Soviets. 

The  Constituent  Assembly  must  acknowledge  the  authority 
of  the  Soviets  and  the  decrees  on  the  land,  peace,  workmen's 
control,  etc.  The  Cadets  are  enemies  of  the  people.  There  is 
no  place  in  the  Constituent  Assembly  for  the  enemies  of  the 
people.    The  people  ought  to  recall  the  flunkeys  of  Russia  from 

^  Parliament. 


THE  CONSTITUENT  ASSEMBLY  349 

the  Constituent  Assembly.    Shame  on  the  Avksentevistes  and 
Chemovistes ! 

On  the  day  after  the  demonstration  in  which  banners 
with  such  devices  were  carried,  an  order  was  issued  for 
the  arrest  of  Avksentief!  and  ChemofE.  They  managed 
to  escape,  but  the  Socialist  Centre,  which  so  short  a 
time  before  was  the  centre  of  authority,  was  broken  and 
disorganised. 

The  majority  of  the  soldiers  very  soon  learned  the 
formula  that  suited  them,  namely  :  "  We  do  not  want 
to  shed  our  brethren's  blood,"  and,  remaining  neutral, 
enjoyed  all  the  advantages  of  the  soldiers'  position,  but 
showed  no  desire  to  take  part  in  the  civil  war  to  which 
they  were  at  bottom  thoroughly  indifferent.  In  vain 
did  the  Socialist  opposition  call  upon  the  Petrograd 
garrison  to  make  a  demonstration  in  favour  of  the 
Constituent  Assembly,  which  was  to  be  opened  on  the 
18th  January.  It  was  proposed  to  hold  a  peaceful  de- 
monstration, and  indeed  it  could  be  no  other,  as  the 
defenders  of  the  Constituent  Assembly  had  no  arms. 
Some  one  or  other  was  carrying  on  hazy  negotiations 
with  the  ofl&cers,  persuading  them  to  "  stand  up  for  the 
Constituent  Assembly."  The  officers  asked  plainly,  "  Is 
it  necessary  to  be  prepared  for  armed  resistance  ?  "  The 
answer  was,  "  It  is  proposed  to  have  a  peaceful  demon- 
stration ;  but,  of  course,  anything  might  happen  ..." 
The  other  party,  the  Bolsheviks,  made  far  more  definite 
preparations  for  this  day.  They  got  out  2000  sailors 
from  Cronstadt  and,  arming  them  with  machine-guns, 
ordered  them  to  occupy  the  Taurida  Palace.  Only 
those  who  had  permits  from  Uritsky  were  admitted. 
The  members  of  the  Constituent  Assembly  justly  con- 
sidered such  a  permit  derogatory  to  them,  but  they  were 
obliged  to  submit. 

Two  days  before  the  opening  day  an  attempt  was 


350     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

made  to  assassinate  Lenin  under  very  strange  circum- 
stances, which  made  people  think  that  it  was  a  simu- 
lated attack.  Some  one  shot  at  his  motor-car  and 
missed ;  but  this  shot  gave  the  opportunity  the  Bol- 
sheviks wanted.  They  talked  loudly  of  the  Terror. 
At  a  meeting  of  the  Soviet  (16th  January)  Zinoviei!, 
who  had  replaced  Trotsky  while  the  latter  was  en- 
grossed in  Brest-Litovsk  diplomacy,  made  the  following 
declaration  : 

Only  one  accusation  will  be  brought  against  the  Soviet 
authorities — that  of  being  too  lenient  with  their  opponents. 

The  same  spirit  was  shown  by  Bonch-Bruyevich, 
Secretary  of  the  Soviet  Government  and  People's  Com- 
missary, who  under  the  Tsarist  regime  had  acquired  a 
certain  degree  of  fame  by  his  articles  and  researches  in 
defence  of  religious  liberty.  Under  the  Bolsheviks  he 
came  out  as  an  enemy  to  all  liberty,  and  advised  the 
soldiers  to  allow  no  agitation  in  favour  of  the  Con- 
stituent Assembly  in  the  barracks. 

The  following  motion  was  passed  at  this  meeting : 
"  On  the  day  the  Constituent  Assembly  is  opened  it  is 
proposed  to  hold  a  demonstration  in  honour  of  the 
Constituent  Assembly,  the  watchword  of  this  demon- 
stration being  '  Down  with  the  Soviet  authority ! ' 
Saboteurs,  bourgeois,  and  their  minions  will  take  part  in 
this  demonstration."  In  view  of  this  the  workmen  and 
soldiers  were  requested  not  to  leave  their  works  or 
barracks,  and  the  Soviet  authorities  promised  to  put 
down  most  ruthlessly  the  movement  directed  against 
itself. 

Such  promises  they  knew  how  to  keep. 

On  the  18th  January  the  first  and  last  sitting  of  the 
Constituent  Assembly  took  place. 

On  the  same  day  the  demonstration  took  place,  in 


THE  CONSTITUENT  ASSEMBLY  351 

spite  of  all  obstacles  and  threats — a  demonstration  made 
in  answer  to  the  appeal  of  the  Committee  of  the  Defence 
of  the  Constituent  Assembly.  In  the  centre  of  the  town, 
on  the  Liteiny,  near  the  Field  of  Mars,  and  on  the  out- 
skirts of  the  town,  a  considerable  crowd  of  demonstrators 
collected.  The  bulk  of  them  belonged  to  the  educated 
classes :  there  were  many  women,  schoolboys  and 
students,  clerks  and  officials.  There  were  also  some 
workmen.  Again  red  revolutionary  banners  were  car- 
ried, which  such  a  short  time  ago  had  waved  victoriously 
in  all  the  streets  of  Petrograd.  But  now  the  Red  Guards 
took  away  these  banners'  of  Liberty  and  tore  them  into 
shreds.  Both  sides  were  boiling  with  hatred  against 
each  other,  and  the  rifles  went  off  of  themselves.  A 
volley  was  fired  on  the  Liteinaia,  injuring  not  only  the 
demonstrators,  but  likewise  chance  passers-by,  children 
and  women.  Gorbachevskaia,  a  young  girl-student  who 
was  carrying  the  red  banner  of  the  Social-Revolution- 
aries, was  shot  down,  a  similar  fate  overtaking  Loginov, 
a  Social  -  Revolutionary  peasant  member  of  the  Con- 
stituent Assembly,  and  several  other  persons.  The  ob- 
stinate demonstrators  would  disperse  when  fired  on,  and 
then  again  walk  on  in  a  crowd,  carrying  their  cherished 
banners  with  the  device,  ''  Hail  to  the  Constituent 
Assembly !  "  And  in  the  very  hour  while  the  rifle-fire 
was  rattling,  in  the  Taurida  Palace,  surrounded  by 
machine-gims  and  guarded  by  inimical  sailors,  the  elected 
representatives  of  Russia  began  their  vast  and  onerous 
task  of  reconstructing  the  State  on  new,  free,  and 
democratic  principles. 

The  Revolution  had  cleared  a  way  for  them  for 
constructive  work,  and  had  thrown  among  the  masses 
Socialistic  ideas,  or  rather  Socialistic  appetites,  because 
it  was  difficult  for  semi-illiterate  people  to  grasp  Social- 
istic ideology.    The  people  had  given  their  votes,  their 


352     FEOM  LIBERTY  TO  BEEST-LITOVSK       ch. 

confidence,  their  fate  to  the  representatives  of  the 
Socialist  parties.  All  other  political  groups  were  set 
aside.  It  might  have  seemed  that  the  Eevolutionary 
Democracy,  which  since  March  1917  had  reigned  in  the 
Taurida  Palace,  might  now  celebrate  its  complete  vic- 
tory. But  this  day  was  no  holiday — rather  a  day  of 
mourning.  Incautious  words,  a  theory  not  fully  worked 
out,  irresponsible  promises — all  that  the  Revolutionary 
Democracy  had  lived  for  during  the  months  of  its 
spiritual  dominion  over  the  masses — had  borne  poison- 
ous fruit.  Like  dragons'  teeth  cast  into  the  earth  by 
the  hand  of  the  sorceress  did  the  evil  spirits  of  hate 
and  anarchy  arise  out  of  the  earth,  and  there  was  no 
escaping  them. 

A  series  of  scandalous  scenes  took  place  in  the  Con- 
stituent Assembly.  Quarrels  arose  about  everything  : 
about  the  right  of  entry ;  about  who  should  open  the 
session.  The  Soviet  of  People's  Commissaries  con- 
sidered itself  privileged,  and  wanted  to  determine  the 
procedure.  The  Social-Revolutionaries,  who  were  in  the 
majority,  wanted  the  chairman  to  be  elected  from  their 
party.  Two  chairmen  were  elected  simultaneously. 
There  was  a  struggle,  and  Sverdloff,  the  nominee  of  the 
Soviet,  was  victorious.  This  took  place  to  the  accom- 
paniment of  a  clamour  of  shouts  and  shrill  cries,  the 
public  taking  a  lively  part  in  all  this.  With  their  caps 
on  their  heads,  rifles  in  their  hands,  and  cigarettes 
between  their  lips,  the  soldiers  and  sailors  strolled  all 
over  the  Palace,  even  in  the  hall  where  the  members 
were  sitting :  they  occupied  the  gallery,  the  passages 
between  the  members'  seats,  and  behaved  themselves 
not  Uke  a  guard  in  a  legislative  assembly,  but  like  ill- 
disciplined  warders  in  a  prison.  When  the  delegates 
wanted  to  enter  the  hall,  at  first  the  sailors  would  not 
let  them  in.     One  of  the  delegates  said  indignantly : 


XIII  THE  CONSTITUENT  ASSEMBLY  353 

"  How  dare  you  exclude  us  !  Don't  you  know  who 
we  are  ?  " 

The  young  sailor  answered  in  an  off-hand  manner  : 
"  I  know :  you  are  the  servants  of  the  People.  We 
will  give  you  orders  and  you  shall  obey  us." 

The  Bolsheviks  got  their  own  way.  The  All-Russian 
Constituent  Assembly  was  turned  into  a  barrack-room 
meeting,  where  it  was  not  the  voices  of  the  national 
representatives  that  predominated,  but  the  voices  of 
those  who  leant  on  their  rifles. 

After  Sverdloff  had  read  the  declaration  of  the 
Soviet,  a  president  was  elected.  The  Bolsheviks,  per- 
haps as  a  joke,  took  Maria  Spiridonova  for  their  candi- 
date. She  was  a  Left  Social -Revolutionary.  Her 
name  had  made  a  stir  not  only  in  Russia,  but  also 
abroad.  During  the  Revolution  of  1905  she  was  about 
twenty  when  she  killed  a  provincial  official  who  had 
been  very  brutal  in  suppressing  the  Revolution,  and 
M.  Spiridonova  won  fame  not  so  much  as  a  bold  terrorist 
as  by  those  insults  and  tortures  to  which  she  was  sub- 
jected by  the  gendarmes.  After  a  trying  period  in 
prison  she  was  tried  and  sentenced  to  hard  labour  in 
Siberia.  The  Revolution  set  her  free.  Her  one-time 
martyr's  halo  secured  her  a  prominent  place  in  her 
party.  But  all  her  speeches  and  actions  showed  an 
unbalanced  and  hysterical  nature.  Her  escapades  were 
at  first  found  amusing,  but  later  roused  indignation 
not  only  among  the  Radicals,  but  also  among  such 
Socialists  as  had  not  lost  their  heads.  Her  association 
with  an  unmasked  agent-pravoccUeurj  whom  she  made 
every  effort  to  save  from  trial,  was  especially  repulsive. 
In  the  Social-Revolutionary  party  she  occupied  a  far 
more  prominent  place  than  the  old  Revolutionary 
Breshko-Breshkovskaia,  Vera  Figner,  etc.,  with  whom 
Spiridonova    could    not,    of    course,    compete,    either 

2a 


354     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       oh. 

as  regards  ability,  education,  or  stability  of  moral 
principles. 

This  hysterical  woman,  this  mistress  of  a  Secret 
Police  employee,  was  the  person  whom  the  Bolsheviks 
wanted  to  make  President  of  the  Constituent  Assembly. 
They  did  not  succeed.  The  Bolsheviks,  even  including 
the  Left  Social  -  Revolutionaries  who  joined  them, 
were  in  the  minority.  Spiridonova  got  158  votes,  and 
Chemoff,  the  Social-Revolutionary  candidate,  got  244. 
But  even  this  signified  little,  and  was  of  no  prac- 
tical importance.  The  national  assembly  was  already 
doomed.  The  Bolsheviks  demanded  that  the  Con- 
stituent Assembly  should  confirm  the  decrees  and 
resolutions  of  the  Soviet  of  People's  Commissaries 
enumerated  in  Sverdlofi's  declaration.  These  were  not 
few  in  number.  They  were  in  substance  as  follows  : 
Russia  is  to  be  declared  a  Republic  of  Soviets,  who 
hold  all  power.  Society  is  to  be  organised  on  Socialistic 
principles.  Private  property  in  land  is  abolished  and 
replaced  by  nationalisation.  Workmen's  control  is 
established,  the  banks  become  the  property  of  the 
Workmen's  and  Peasants'  Government.  Universal 
compulsory  labour  is  introduced.  A  Socialistic  Red 
Army  is  to  be  formed  and  the  propertied  classes  are  to 
be  totally  disarmed.  All  loans  are  repudiated.  The 
Constituent  Assembly  is  to  put  the  stamp  of  its  approval 
on  all  the  decrees  and,  besides  that,  to  join  in  the  foreign 
policy  of  the  Soviet  authorities  in  cancelling  all  secret 
treaties  "  for  the  attainment,  by  revolutionary  measures 
and  at  any  cost,  of  a  democratic  peace  between  nations, 
without  annexations  or  indemnities,  on  the  basis  of  the 
free  self-determination  of  nations." 

But  this  was  not  all.  The  Soviet  of  People's  Com- 
missaries demanded — and  this  showed  their  haughty, 
deep-seated  contempt  of  the  people's  will — ^that  the 


THE  CONSTITUENT  ASSEMBLY  355 

Constituent  Assembly  (whose  sovereign  right  all  parties 
without  exception  had  proclaimed  and  acknowledged) 
should  renounce  its  rights  and  transfer  them  to  the 
Soviets.  I  quote  this  clause  in  its  entirety,  as  it  shows 
clearly  the  theoretical  attitude  of  the  Bolsheviks  to  the 
essence  of  Soviet  authority.  Their  theoretical  attitude, 
I  say,  for  in  practice  they  were  obliged  to  simplify 
everything,  making  the  bayonet  the  source  of  their 
authority. 

Having  been  elected  on  the  basis  of  party  lists  made  prior 
to  the  November  Revolution,  while  the  people  could  not,  as  a 
whole,  rise  up  against  their  exploiters,  did  not  know  the  full 
force  of  their  opposition  in  defending  the  privileges  of  their 
class,  and  had  not  practically  begun  to  construct  a  Socialistic 
Society,  the  Constituent  Assembly  would  consider  it  radically 
wrong,  even  from  a  formal  point  of  view,  to  place  itself  on  a 
level  with  the  authority  of  the  Soviets.  .  .  .  Power  must  belong 
exclusively  and  wholly  to  the  working-classes,  to  their  fully 
empowered  representatives — the  Soviets  of  Workmen's,  Soldiers, 
and  Peasants'  delegates.  Supporting  the  authority  of  the  Soviet 
and  the  decrees  of  the  Soviet  of  People's  Commissaries,  the 
Constituent  Assembly  acknowledges  that  its  objects  are, limited 
to  the  general  working  out  of  the  fundamental  principles  of  the 
SociaUstic  reconstruction  of  society.  At  the  same  time,  striving 
to  create  a  freer  and  more  voluntary — and  therefore  fuller  and 
firmer  union  of  the  working-classes  of  all  nationaUties  of  Russia, 
the  Constituent  Assembly  Umits  itself  to  establishing  the 
fundamental  principles  of  the  federation  of  the  Soviet  RepubUcs 
of  Russia,  allowing  the  workmen  and  peasants  of  each  nationaUty 
to  come  to  an  independent  decision  at  its  own  authoritative 
Soviet  Congress  as  to  whether  they  wish  to  join  in  the  Federal 
Government  and  other  federal  Soviet  institutions,  and  if  so, 
then  on  what  basis. 

The  position  of  the  Social-Revolutionaries,  to  whom 
this  ultimatum  was  presented,  was  not  an  easy  one. 
Much  in  the  Soviet  declarations  was  a  repetition  of 
their  programme  and  formulae.     The  Bolsheviks  had 


356     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

the  right  to  point  the  finger  of  scorn  at  the  Social- 
Revolutionaries,  who  did  not  applaud  the  clause  about 
the  nationalisation  of  land,  the  liberation  of  the  working- 
classes,  a  revolutionary  democratic  peace  without 
annexations  and  indemnities.  When  it  was  the  turn 
of  the  Social-Revolutionaries  to  explain  their  programme 
and  V.  Chernof!  began  to  read  his  declaration,  at  times 
he  seemed  to  be  repeating  the  declaration  of  the 
Bolsheviks  themselves.     They  shouted  to  him  : 

"  You  are  too  late !  We  have  already  passed  all 
this !  " 

And  they  were  right. 

But  V.  Chernoff  still  hoped  to  regain  his  lost 
popularity.  He  began  by  praising  Zimmerwald:  ''That 
mighty  protest  of  the  Socialists  of  all  countries  against 
the  fratricidal  butchery.  The  Russian  Revolution  was 
born  with  words  of  peace  on  its  lips,  and  the  Russian 
Revolution  cannot  but  remain  true  to  the  watchwords 
of  democratic  peace — ^without  victors  or  vanquished. 
...  All  the  land  must  become  the  property  of  the 
nation,  without  any  indemnity  to  former  owners.  .  .  . 
It  is  of  course  necessary  for  the  working-classes  to  take 
into  their  own  hands  the  management  of  all  the 
production  in  the  country,  and  after  a  period  of  control 
of  production,  to  pass  from  factory  autocracy  to  an 
era  of  compulsory  labour  in  all  branches  of  production." 

The  same  old  trite  Socialistic  speeches  ! 

But  still,  to  the  demand  for  submission  to  the 
Soviet,  Chernof!  answered  evasively,  and  haughtily  : 

"  I  cannot  conceive  how  the  lawful  will  of  the 
majority  of  the  population,  expressed  by  means  of 
votes  recorded  by  the  most  perfect  system  in  the 
world,  can  be  subjected  to  any  kind  of  obstruction 
(sabotage),  unless  that  of  madmen." 

His  speech,  like  the  speeches  of  two  other  former 


THE  CONSTITUENT  ASSEMBLY  357 

Socialist  Ministers — Prince  Tsereteli  and  M.  Skobeleflt 
— was  interrupted  by  hostile  cries.  After  the  Bolshevist 
coup  d'etat,  this  was  the  first  public  engagement  between 
the  Socialist  Centre  and  the  Left  wing.  The  Bolsheviks 
behaved  with  the  impudence  of  victors. 

"Hangman!!  Traitor!  You  would  down  soldiers 
and  workmen  !  Your  hands  are  bloody  !  "  they  shouted 
during  Tsereteli's  speech. 

This  evidently  touched  him  to  the  quick,  for  he 
began  to  assure  them  that  the  Constituent  Assembly 
would  abolish  capital  punishment.  The  Bolsheviks 
threw  another  accusation  in  his  face  : 

"Saboteur!" 

"Saboteur?  Well,  if  you  have  undertaken  to 
introduce  Socialism,  and  throw  the  blame  of  the  non- 
success  of  the  Socialistic  experiment  on  the  bourgeoisie, 
then  you  stand  self -condemned  as  unfit,"  he  replied ; 
but  it  was  too  refined  an  answer  and  was  above  the 
heads  of  his  audience. 

Poor  Tsereteli !  It  was  the  second  time  that  in  the 
fine  hall  of  the  Taurida  Palace  he  had  had  to  make  his 
farewell  speech  before  political  enemies  whose  hands 
were  raised  to  strike  him  down. 

Ten  years  before  he  had  parried  the  blows  which 
were  showered  on  him  by  Stolypin,  the  omnipotent 
Tsarist  Minister,  who  wanted  to  break,  not  only  the 
Revolution,  but  also  the  independence  of  the  young 
representative  regime.  Stolypin  ordered  all  members 
of  the  Social-Democrat  party  to  be  arrested.  Prince 
Tsereteli,  who  was  then  quite  a  young  man,  knew 
of  this,  but  instead  of  saving  himself  by  disappear- 
ing, as  his  friends  proposed,  he  mounted  the  rostrimi 
in  order  to  expound  his  views  for  the  last  time  boldly 
before  the  whole  of  Russia.  Then  his  fiery,  eloquent 
speech  breathed  a  proud  faith  in  the  righteousness  and 


358     FKOM  LIBEKTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

the  strength  of  the  Marxist  doctrines  and  in  the  saving 
significance  of  the  future  Revolution.  Even  those  who 
did  not  share  his  views  listened  to  him  with  involuntary 
respect. 

And  now  again  Tsereteli  is  a  representative  of  the 
people.  Again  he  stands  in  that  high  rostrum.  Again, 
as  before,  the  open  prison  doors  are  ready  to  receive 
the  bold  leader  of  the  Social-Democrats.  But  what  a 
change  !  The  Revolution — that  ennobling,  abstract 
Revolution  he  had  dreamed  of,  for  the  sake  of  which 
he  had  suffered  penal  servitude — was  shattered,  dis- 
figured, broken.  Now  it  was  not  the  Tsarist  but  the 
Socialistic  police  who  were  ready  to  take  him  to  prison, 
and  perhaps  to  execution. 

No  wonder  that  Tsereteli's  speech  breathed  bitter- 
ness and  impotence.  For  it  was  not  from  his  foes  but 
from  erstwhile  friends  that  he  had  to  defend  what  he 
still  styled  ''  the  democratic  conquests  of  the  Russian 
Revolution,"  what  might  be  simply  called  Russia's 
right  to  life  and  liberty.  The  tragedy  of  his  position 
was  increased  by  the  fact  that  he  could  not  help 
remembering  his  own  former  speeches.  Speaking  of 
peace,  he  said  :  "  You  may  cry,  '  Kaledinist !  '  to  every 
sentence  of  mine  " ;  and  perhaps  at  that  moment  the 
supporter  of  the  ruinous  policy  of  Army  Committees 
understood  how  the  Soviet  as  first  elected  had  cleared 
the  way  to  Brest-Litovsk. 

The  Bolsheviks  interrupted  all  the  speakers  and 
would  not  listen  to  them.  Their  plans  were  already 
made.  By  their  scandalous  behaviour  they  had  com- 
promised the  Constituent  Assembly  as  much  as  they 
could,  and  then  they  employed  the  favourite  method 
which  they  always  used  for  breaking  up  a  meeting — 
they  left  the  hall  after  having  entered  a  reasoned 
declaration  of  the  cause  of  their  withdrawal.     They 


THE  CONSTITUENT  ASSEMBLY  359 

announced  that  the  Constituent  Assembly,  in  refusing 
to  carry  out  the  will  of  the  Commissaries,  had  thrown 
down  the  glove  to  all  labouring  Russia. 

"  In  the  Constituent  Assembly,  Kerensky's,  Avksen- 
tieff's,  and  Chernoff 's  party  of  *  Right  Social-Revolu- 
tionaries have  got  the  majority.  This  party,  which 
calls  itself  Socialistic  and  Revolutionary,  is  guiding 
the  struggle  of  the  bourgeois  elements  against  the 
workmen's  and  peasants'  Revolution,  and  is  really 
a  bourgeois  party.  The  present  counter-revolutionary 
majority  in  the  Constituent  Assembly,  elected  by  out- 
of-date  party  lists,  is  a  Revolutionary  back  number." 

The  Social-Revolutionaries  interrupted  them  by 
laughter  or  by  indignant  cries  of  "  Lies  !  "  And  the 
soldiers  and  sailors  kept  thumping  the  butts  of  their 
rifles  on  the  floor  of  the  hall.  And  this  noise  announced 
more  plainly  than  any  declaration  that  the  Constituent 
Assembly  was  a  failure.  The  powerless  majority 
hastened  to  pass  several  resolutions.  The  Russian 
State  was  declared  to  be  a  Federal  Republic.  It  was 
declared  that  "  the  right  of  property  in  land  within 
the  limits  of  the  Russian  Republic  is  abolished  hence- 
forth and  for  ever."  Their  declaration  concerning  the 
war  was  hazy  and  ambiguous,  owing  to  an  attempt  to 
combine  obligations  to  the  Allies  with  Zimmerwald  : 

"  In  the  name  of  the  peoples  of  the  Russian  Republic, 
the  All-Russian  Constituent  Assembly,  expressing  the 
imimutable  will  of  the  people  to  terminate  the  war 
immediately,  and  to  conclude  a  just  and  universal  peace, 
proposes  to  the  Allied  Powers  that  the  exact  terms  of 
peace  should  be  determined  in  concert,  for  the  purpose 
of  presenting  these  conditions  to  the  Central  Powers." 

At  the  same  time,  "  regretting  that  the  negotiations 
with  Germany,  begun  without  any  preliminary  agree- 
ment with  the  Allied  democracies,  have  assumed  the 


360     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

character  of  negotiations  for  a  separate  peace,  the 
Constituent  Assembly  continues  to  preserve  the 
Armistice  established,  and  has  taken  upon  itself  the 
further  conduct  of  the  negotiations  with  the  hostile 
Powers,  in  order  that' while  defending  Russian  interests 
a  universal  democratic  peace  may  be  concluded  in 
accordance  with  the  will  of  the  people." 

All  these  three  declarations  were  passed  at  four 
o'clock  in  the  morning  without  any  debate.  The  voters 
could  hardly  hear  the  text  of  the  declarations.  The 
soldiers  and  sailors  who  crowded  near  the  delegates' 
benches  became  clamorous.  One  of  the  sailors  came 
up  to  the  President  and  announced  : 

''  I  have  been  ordered  to  inform  you  that  all  present 
are  to  leave  the  hall  as  the  Guards  are  tired." 

The  delegates  shouted :  ''  We  don't  need  any 
guard !  "  The  sailor  insisted,  and  made  Chernoff 
adjourn  the  meeting. 

The  Secretary  had  barely  time  to  read  out  the  above- 
mentioned  declarations  when,  hastened  by  the  soldiers' 
mockery,  and  partly  by  their  rifle-butts,  the  elected 
representatives  of  the  Russian  people  were  obliged  to 
quit  the  Taurida  Palace,  the  doors  of  which  closed  on 
them  for  ever. 

The  next  day  a  decree  was  published  dissolving  the 
Constituent  Assembly.  The  real  essence  of  the  decree 
was  as  follows : 

The  old  bourgeois  Parliamentarianism  is  effete  and  incom- 
patible with  the  aims  of  realising  Socialism.  It  is  not  general, 
national  institutions,  but  only  class  institutions,  such  as  the 
Soviets,^  that  can  overcome  the  resistance  of  the  propertied 
classes,  and  lay  the  foundations  of  Socialistic  society.  The 
part  of  the  Constituent  Assembly  left  after  the  withdrawal  of 
the  Bolsheviks  can  only  serve  as  a  cloak  for  the  attempts  of 
bourgeois  counter-revolutionaries  to  overthrow  the  power  of 


THE  CONSTITUENT  ASSEMBLY  361 

the  Soviets.    Therefore  the  Central  Executive  Committee  has 
resolved  that  the  Constituent  Assembly  be  dissolved. 

The  Soviet  of  People's  Commissaries  entrusted  this 
to  the  Central  Executive  Committee,  so  as  to  be  able  to 
assert  that  the  dissolution  of  the  Constituent  Assembly 
was  in  accordance  with  the  will  of  the  people,  which 
they  could  now  counterfeit  with  still  greater  impunity. 

This  destroyed  the  last  hope  not  only  of  the  Revolu- 
tionary Democracy,  but  also  of  all  who  still  dreamed 
that  it  was  possible  to  organise  the  new  regime  in  free 
Russia  by  peaceful  methods,  without  civil  war.  Now 
came  the  terrible  days  of  disappointments  and  calamities 
which,  in  a  greater  or  less  degree,  had  gradually  to  be 
experienced  by  all  classes  of  the  population,  but  first 
by  the  leading  circles  of  intellectuals,  who  at  once 
grasped  the  full  extent  of  the  political  catastrophe.  It 
was  a  real  tragedy  for  those  members  of  the  Provisional 
Government  who  were  imprisoned  in  the  Peter  and 
Paul  Fortress,  N.  M.  Kishkin,  A.  I.  Konovaloff,  M. 
I.  Terestchenko,  A.  V.  Kartasheff,  Paltchinsky,  M. 
Tretiakoff,  M.  Bernatsky,  and  Smirnoff.  In  the  begin- 
ning of  December  these  were  joined  by  three  members 
of  the  Constituent  Assembly,  A.  I.  Shingareff,  F.  F. 
Kokoshkin,  and  Prince  Dolgorukoff.  The  conditions  of 
their  imprisonment  were  truly  awful.  The  Russian 
educated  classes,  fighting  against  Tsarism,  were  not 
accustomed  to  dread  imprisonment.  Many  brutalities 
were  practised  in  the  Tsarist  prisons.  But  the  brutality 
and  lawlessness  of  Bolshevist  prisons  exceeded  anything 
that  had  been  known  under  the  Tsars.  In  the  fortress 
it  was  damp,  cold,  and  dark.  At  first  the  prisoners 
were  allowed  no  outdoor  exercise ;  then  they  were 
permitted  to  go  out,  but  for  a  very  short  time.  Food 
could  be  brought  to  them  from  home,  but  everything 
had   to   be   eaten   cold.      The   chief   thought   of   the 


362     FROM  LIBEETY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

imprisoned  Ministers  was  how  to  keep  warm.  However, 
all  these  physical  privations  could  not  be  compared  with 
their  moral  sufferings.  The  arrested  Ministers  were  in 
the  so-called  ''  Trubetskoy  Bastion,"  enwrapped  in 
heroic  legends  of  the  martyrs  of  Russian  liberty  who 
had  been  imprisoned  there  during  the  nineteenth  century. 
The  bastion  had  its  own  guards  with  a  sailor  at  the 
head,  so  that  the  fortress  was  under  two  masters. 
The  young  and  honest  sailor  behaved  with  great  decency 
towards  the  prisoners,  and  formed,  as  it  were,  their  own 
inner  guard.  This  was  absolutely  necessary,  as  the 
rowdy  garrison,  composed  of  shady,  if  not  criminal 
elements,  was  capable  of  any  crime.  At  its  head  was 
their  elected  commander,  an  orderly  named  Pavloff. 
This  coarse,  savage,  almost  illiterate  soldier  mocked 
the  prisoners  with  all  the  shamelessness  of  a  petty 
adventurer  who  was  maddened  by  the  prisoners'  mental 
and  moral  superiority. 

The  former  Minister  of  Public  Worship,  A.  V. 
Kartasheff,  an  inspired  philosopher,  who  had  the 
passionate  saintliness  of  an  early  Christian,  was  placed 
by  the  soldier  Pavloff  for  several  days  in  a  wet  cell, 
without  any  light,  bed,  or  food,  except  a  piece  of  bread. 
And  this  was  not  a  solitary  case.  The  arrested  poli- 
ticians lived  in  an  atmosphere  of  constant  degrading 
annoyances  and  mockery,  behind  which  ever  lurked  the 
terrible  phantom  of  a  bloody  death. 

Most  of  the  Ministers  were  Cadets,  i.e.  according 
to  the  terminology  of  the  Bolsheviks,  counter-revolu- 
tionaries, Kaledinists,  and  enemies  of  the  people.  The 
soldiers  considered  themselves  free  to  treat  them  as 
they  liked. 

More  than  once  threatening  shouts  were  heard  in 
the  corridors  :  "  Give  them  to  us  !  What  is  the  use  of 
being  on  ceremony  with  bourgeois  ?     We  will  show 


THE  CONSTITUENT  ASSEMBLY  363 

them  a  thing  or  two/'  These  were  the  same  cries  that 
were  heard  before  General  Dukhonin's  death. 

The  relatives,  the  numerous  friends,  and  political 
adherents  of  the  prisoners  were  in  constant  alarm  for 
their  lives.  Having  made  the  members  of  the  Pro- 
visional Government  prisoners,  the  People's  Commissaries 
brought  no  accusations  against  them,  did  not  put  them 
on  trial  before  any  court,  but  kept  them  as  hostages  in 
the  fortress  under  conditions  which  remind  one  of 
mediaeval  torture  chambers.  All  efforts  to  obtain  their 
release  proved  futile.  The  only  hope  was  the  Constituent 
Assembly.  The  Ministers  talked  of  it  when  they  met 
during  their  short  outings  in  the  prison  yard ;  they 
prepared  for  it,  hoping  to  render  an  account  of  the 
activity  of  the  Provisional  Government  to  the  nation's 
representatives.  KonovalofP,  who  had  replaced  Kerensky 
the  day  of  the  latter's  flight,  had  been  elected  to  the  Con- 
stituent Assembly.  He  was  entrusted  with  the  task  of 
preparing  for  the  Government's  appearance  in  the 
Taurida  Palace,  and  he  did  draft  a  speech.  It  seemed 
impossible  that  the  Supreme  Master  of  the  Land  of 
Eussia,  as  it  was  the  custom  to  call  the  Constituent 
Assembly,  would  not  release  from  prison  those  who  had 
so  diligently  cleared  the  way  for  national  representation. 

This  hope  and  the  friendly  relations  which  had 
arisen  among  the  prisoners  in  the  tragic  environment 
of  life  in  the  fortress  gave  them  strength  to  bear  the 
physical  and  moral  sufferings  and  privations.  Never- 
theless, the  health  of  the  prisoners  was  undermined, 
and  their  relatives,  with  the  aid  of  the  doctors,  managed 
to  get  some  of  the  Ministers  transferred  to  the  hospital. 

On  the  evening  of  the  day  when  the  Constituent 
Assembly  was  opened  two  Ministers  of  the  Provisional 
Government,  F.  F.  Kokoshkin  and  A.  I.  Shingareff, 
were  taken  from  the  fortress  to  the  Marie  Hospital. 


364     FEOM  LIBEETY  TO  BEEST-LITOVSK       ch. 

The  same  night  sailors  and  Eed  Guards  came  to  the 
hospital  and  brutally  murdered  both.  Kokoshkin  was 
killed  at  once,  probably  without  waking  from  sleep. 
ShingarefE  lingered  for  several  hours,  one  mass  of 
wounds,  those  in  his  head  and  stomach  causing  him 
tortures.  His  relatives  could  not  be  fetched,  as  by 
some  one's  mysterious  orders  that  night  all  the  telephones 
in  the  hospital  had  been  disconnected  with  the  Exchange. 
Shingareif  died  in  delirium,  speaking  of  his  children  with 
anxiety  and  alarm,  and  then  whispering  something 
about  his  murderers.  The  doctors  who  were  present 
said  that  he  seemed  to  be  murmuring  words  of  for- 
giveness. That  is  very  possible,  and  very  like  him. 
Shingareff  was  one  of  those  Eussian  intellectuals  who 
made  a  cult  of  self-sacrificing  service  and  love  for  the 
people. 

Imprisoned  in  the  Fortress,  and  expecting  death  at 
any  moment,  not  only  did  Shingareff  not  abandon  his 
faith  in  the  people,  but  with  the  incurable  obstinacy  of 
an  idealist  wrote  in  his  diary  : 

If  I  were  oftered  to  begin  everything  all  over  again  or  stop  it, 
I  would  not  hesitate  for  a  moment  to  begin  all  over  again,  not- 
withstanding all  the  horrors  the  country  has  gone  through. 
And  this  is  why.  The  Kevolution  was  inevitable,  because  the 
old  state  of  things  had  outlived  its  time.  The  equilibrium  had 
been  disturbed  a  long  while  ago,  and  the  foundations  of  the 
Russian  State,  which  we  so  aptly  termed  a  colossus  with  feet  of 
clay,  were  supported  by  the  ignorant  masses  of  the  people, 
deprived  of  any  connection  with  the  State,  frequently  deprived 
of  even  common  patriotism.  The  striking  disparity  between  the 
heads  of  society  and  the  lower  strata  at  its  base,  between  the 
leaders  of  the  State  in  its  past  forms,  as  well  as  the  leaders  of  the 
future,  and  the  mass  of  the  population — struck  me  while  I  was 
yet  a  young  man,  during  my  first  years  of  university  life.  It 
was  not  only  a  danger  to  the  existing  order  (which  would  not 
have  mattered  much),  but  it  was  a  great  danger  to  the  State. 


THE  CONSTITUENT  ASSEMBLY  365 

These  ideas  led  me  to  the  conclusion  that  it  was  necessary 
to  draw  the  higher  and  lower  strata  of  society  together,  to 
establish  a  firm  and  real  connection  between  them.  Then 
everything  seemed  useless  to  me — science,  art,  politics — unless 
they  had  that  object  in  view.  That  is  why  I  gave  up  my  previous 
plans  of  devoting  myself  to  science  (which  had  an  attraction  for 
me)  in  order  to  go  to  the  people  as  a  doctor. 

He  had  built  up  all  his  life  on  the  idealisation  of 
the  people,  on  defending  the  principles  of  the  widest 
democracy.  Both  he  and  Kokoshkin  were  real  spiritual 
champions,  who  cast  aside  all  that  was  personal,  all 
that  was  egotistical,  in  order  to  serve  the  abstract 
principles  of  Truth  and  Right.  And  their  murder,  so 
brutal  and  meaningless,  is  one  of  the  most  terrible  and 
repulsive  proofs  of  the  criminal  venom  with  which  the 
Bolshevist  Revolution  had  poisoned  the  national  soul. 

The  crime  remained  unpunished,  and  not  finally 
investigated.  There  is  reason  to  think  that  Lenin 
took  no  part  in  planning  it.  At  any  rate,  when,  on  the 
morning  after  the  murder,  the  friends  of  the  surviving 
Ministers  went  to  the  Smolny,  as  dark  threats  had  also 
been  uttered  against  the  latter,  Lenin  was  thunderstruck 
and  apparently  even  disturbed  by  the  news  of  the  crime. 
Articles  appeared  in  the  Izvestia,  condemning  the  murder 
— it  is  true,  from  a  special  Bolshevist  point  of  view,  but 
still,  condemning  it.  "  Apart  from  everything  else,  it 
is  bad  from  a  political  point  of  view.  This  is  a  fearful 
blow  aimed  at  the  Revolution,  at  the  Soviet  authorities. 
Such  crimes  are  capable  of  undermining  the  faith  of  the 
masses  in  the  Revolution,  and  the  Revolution  lives  and 
rests  only  on  the  sympathies  and  faith  of  the  masses." 

As  the  assassins  were  sailors  the  Naval  Commissary, 
Dybenko,  who  had  himself  taken  part  in  the  massacre 
of  officers  at  Petropavlovsk,  published  the  following 
order : 


366     FEOM  LIBEETY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

This  affair  must  be  tliorouglily  investigated.  The  honour 
of  the  Revolutionary  Fleet  must  not  bear  the  stain  of  an  accusa- 
tion of  Revolutionary  sailors  having  murdered  their  helpless 
enemies,  rendered  harmless  by  imprisonment.  I  call  upon  all 
who  took  part  in  the  murder — ^if  these  were  misguided  persons, 
and  not  counter-revolutionary  oppressors — to  appear  of  their 
own  accord  before  the  Revolutionary  tribunal. 

It  goes  without  saying  that  this  original  method  of 
discovering  the  criminals  led  to  nothing.  No  one  gave 
himself  up  of  his  own  accord,  though  several  persons 
were  arrested.  Among  the  latter  was  Private  Bassoff, 
who  had  accompanied  Shingaref!  and  Kokoshkin  from 
the  Fortress  to  the  Hospital,  and  then  had  brought  in 
the  murderers  and  held  the  lamp  over  the  beds  while 
the  scoundrels  were  shooting  their  sleeping  victims. 
Thus  one  of  the  accomplices  was  found.  But  it  was 
not  known  whether  they  had  acted  on  their  own  initia- 
tive or  had  been  instigated  by  others.  If  so,  by  whom  ? 
By  a  small  gang  ?  Or  by  some  more  responsible  organ- 
isation ?  There  is  cause  to  think  that  the  last  is  most 
probable.  The  local  district  Soviet  took  some  sort  of 
part  in  the  crime.  At  any  rate,  the  detachment  of 
sailors  and  Red  Guards,  before  bursting  into  the  Hospital, 
called  at  the  Soviet  for  some  reason  or  other.  But  the 
people  who  tried  to  discover  the  chief  criminals  were 
firmly  assured  that  the  principal  clues  led  to  the  "  Com- 
mission for  fighting  the  Counter-Revolution,  Sabotage, 
and  Profiteering."  Many  deeds  of  darkness  were  (and 
are)  perpetrated  in  this  institution. 

This  Commission  had  occupied  the  house  of  the  for- 
mer Prefecture  of  Petrograd,  2,  Gorokhovaia  Street,  and 
some  of  the  former  policemen,  spies  and  secret  agents 
had  entered  the  service  of  their  new  masters.  Appar- 
ently, German  agents  also  found  easy  access  to  this 
secret  office  of  the  Inquisition,  where  the  fanatical  and 


THE  CONSTITUENT  ASSEMBLY  367 

lunatic  political  formulae  of  the  Smolny  were  converted 
into  regular  crimes. 

Such  division  of  labour  had  the  effect  of  making 
Lenin's  position  easier,  removing  from  him,  as  it  were, 
part  of  the  responsibility  for  the  specially  bestial  acts  of 
the  Soviet. 

It  was  no  easy  matter  for  the  uninitiated  to  pene- 
trate into  the  secrets  of  Bolshevist  actions,  and,  especi- 
ally, to  imderstand  the  division  of  jurisdiction  between 
the  Soviet  of  People's  Commissaries  and  the  "Com- 
mission for  fighting  the  Counter-Re  volution,"  and  Lenin 
always  reserved  the  right  of  throwing  the  blame  on  the 
latter.  But  it  goes  without  saying  that  the  moral  re- 
sponsibility for  the  murder  of  Shingareff,  Kokoshkin,  and 
many  others  falls  wholly  on  the  Soviet. 

It  was  the  Soviet  which  roused  that  blind  fury  in 
the  soul  of  the  people,  egging  on  the  masses  against  the 
educated  classes,  and  foully  slandering  the  most  honour- 
able statesmen. 

Under  the  influence  of  their  furious,  lying  agitation, 
the  unfortunate,  uneducated,  embittered,  bewitched 
people  took  its  friends  for  its  foes,  and  its  bitterest 
enemies,  who  were  driving  Russia  to  ruin — for  its  friends. 

Possibly  the  sailors  who  shot  the  sleeping  arrested 
ministers  imagined  that  they  were  administering  Re- 
volutionary justice,  executing  coimter-revolutionaries. 
They  could  have  had  no  intention  of  robbing,  for  they 
took  nothing,  stole  nothing.  They  came,  murdered,  and 
then  vanished.  They  went  to  report  their  achievement 
to  some  one  who  had  sent  them. 

But  to  whom  ?  That  is  the  question.  Who  wanted 
the  death  of  these  two  men.  ?  Kokoshkin  was  a  scholar, 
for  whom  politics  were  what  military  service  is  to  a 
conscripted  soldier.  He  fulfilled  his  duty  honestly  and 
boldly,  but  loved  thought  better  than  action.     Shin- 


368     FEOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

gareff,  from  the  time  when  the  Bolsheviks  seized  power, 
fought  openly,  attacked,  exposed,  constantly  called  upon 
his  hearers  to  struggle  against  the  usurpers.  His  words 
about  the  German  mark  found  in  a  room  after  a  Bol- 
shevist raid,  his  constant  reminder  of  the  connexion  be- 
tween the  Bolsheviks  and  the  Germans,  lead  to  fearsome 
suspicions.  Who  knows  but  that  German  marks  had 
something  to  do  with  this  murder  ? 

Only  judicial  authorities,  independent,  accustomed 
to  the  support  of  the  law,  could  have  discovered  the 
real  culprits.  But  there  was  no  justice.  There  were 
only  Revolutionary  tribunals — caricatures  of  courts  of 
justice. 

The  murdered  men  were  members  of  the  Constituent 
Assembly.  Both  believed  in  Russian  democracy.  Both 
hated  oppression  and  lawlessness.  During  both  Tsarist 
despotism  and  revolutionary  demagogy  they  were  bold 
and  honest  champions  of  freedom.  They  bore,  and  even 
overcame,  the  persecutions  of  Stolypin  and  other  Tsarist 
ministers.  But  "  Left  "  despotism,  with  the  red  banner 
of  Socialism  waving  over  it,  proved  incomparably  harsher 
and  more  perfidious  than  the  old  regime.  The  friends 
and  political  adherents  of  the  murdered  men,  and  indeed 
all  thoughtful  and  honest  Russians,  felt  this  heavy 
sacrifice  to  the  Revolution  very  keenly.  The  death  of 
these  two  prominent  politicians  was  a  terrible  loss  to 
Russia.  At  that  time,  people  had  not  grown  accus- 
tomed to  crime.  But  even  the  details  of  the  murder 
committed  in  the  capital  bear  witness  to  the  powerless- 
ness  and  moral  degradation  already  permeating  the 
people.  For  if  the  indignation  roused  by  the  murder 
had  been  active,  then  the  Soviet  of  People's  Commis- 
saries would  have  been  forced,  if  not  to  lay  down  its 
power,  then  at  least  to  discover  and  punish  the  culprits. 

But  the  conscience  of  the  mob  had  already  been 


THE  CONSTITUENT  ASSEMBLY  369 

poisoned.  Already  the  passion  for  destruction  which 
follows  upon  a  revolution  was  assuming  more  and  more 
terrible  and  criminal  forms.  That  is  why  there  was  no 
difficulty  in  dispersing  the  Constituent  Assembly,  or  in 
persecuting  and  murdering  the  people's  representatives 
with  impunity. 

By  their  work  of  destruction  the  Bolsheviks  seemed, 
as  it  were,  to  pander  to  the  secret  desires  of  the  masses 
roused  by  revolutionary  licence.  And  the  Bolsheviks 
proved  past-masters  of  destruction,  and  of  defending 
their  work  of  destruction  by  words  that  were  lying  and 
cynical,  but  intoxicating  to  the  mob. 

In  the  end  of  January,  when  reporting  to  the  Third 
Congress  of  Soviets  on  the  dispersion  of  the  Constituent 
Assembly,  Lenin  said  haughtily  : 

"  Yes,  we  are  oppressors."  . 

Trotsky  supported  him. 

"  We  have  trodden  underfoot  the  principles  of 
Democracy  for  the  sake  of  the  loftier  principles  of 
Social  Revolution.  We  are  against  oppression,  but  we 
will  not  yield  our  power  without  a  ruthless  struggle." 

And  the  sailor  Zhelezniakov,  who  took  part  in  the 
dispersion  of  the  Constituent  Assembly,  formulated  his 
political  creed  of  Bolshevism  in  still  simpler  terms : 

"  We  will  not  exchange  our  rifles  for  a  voting- 
paper." 

At  least  this  was  candid,  and  more  sincere  than 
the  first  watchword  of  the  Bolsheviks :  "  Hail  to  the 
Constituent  Assembly !  " 


2b 


CHAPTER  XIV 

BOLSHEVIST  GOVERNMENT 

Economic  Phantasies — Expropriate  the  expropriators — ^A  Blow  at  the 
World  Bourgeoisie — ^The  Budget  of  the  Bolsheviks — The  Workmen's 
Control — Contribution — ^Lenin's  Speech — The  Abolition  of  Justice — 
Revolutionary  Tribunals — Judgement  pronounced  on  Countess  Panin 
and  General  BoldyrefiE — Indulgence  shown  to  a  Secret  Agent — 
Hostages  and  Executions  without  Trial — Struggle  with  the  Press — 
The  Press  and  Elections — Campaign  against  the  Church — ^The  Clergy 
and  the  Intelligentsia — Holy  Processions. 

The  Bolslieviks,  wlio  generally  speaking  are  very  con- 
secutive in  theory,  have  applied  ''  higher  principles  of 
social  revolution  "  to  all  branches  of  Ufe,  to  economics, 
to  justice,  to  the  Press,  and  even  to  the  Church. 

It  was  not  difficult  to  abolish  political  freedom  in 
the  interest  of  a  class,  and  actually  for  the  alleged  rule  of 
the  proletariat,  seeing  that  the  old  regime  had  died,  and 
the  new  representative  one  was  not  yet  formed.  Much 
more  difficult  and  unrealisable  was  their  effort  to  rebuild 
the  complicated  system  of  national  economics,  which 
was  previously  based  on  personal  property  and  private 
initiative,  subjected  to,  but  not  restricted  by  state  laws. 
In  economics,  as  in  politics,  the  Bolsheviks  aimed  at 
absolute  submission  of  individuality  to  the  State.  And 
according  to  their  scheme  the  State  acquires  such  ab- 
solute power  over  the  property  and  life  of  everybody  as 
not  only  the  Romanoffs,  but  even  the  despots  of  ancient 
Assyria  or  Egjrpt  never  dared  to  dream  of.    In  this 

370 


BOLSHEVIST  GOVERNMENT  371 

respect  the  Bolsheviks  are  more  insatiable  than  all  the 
Imperialists  of  the  world.  Starting  from  the  Marxist 
principle  that  only  the  State  has  the  right  to  dispose  of 
every  man's  work,  seeing  that  any  other  labour  organisa- 
tion gives  birth  to  capitalistic  exploitation,  the  Bolsheviks 
desired  to  make  the  Soviet  power  the  only  employer. 
To  this  end  they  nationalised  the  banks,  industry  and 
trade.  All  State  loans  were  cancelled.  All  payments 
on  coupons  were  stopped.  The  land  and  the  factories 
became  the  property  of  the  workers.  The  houses  were 
confiscated.  Additional  inmates  were  installed  by  force 
in  private  homes,  and  even  the  furniture  in  them 
nationalised.  The  latter  measures,  however,  are  of 
secondary  importance ;  they  are  meant  partly  for  the 
greater  humiliation  of  the  bourgeois,  and  partly  with  a 
view  to  general  compulsory  equalisation.  First,  we  must 
distinguish  among  the  economic  Soviet  measures  that 
which  is  done  for  the  purpose  of  carrying  out  new 
Socialistic  principles  from  what  is  done  for  the  weaken- 
ing and  in  some  cases  simply  for  the  ruining  of  the 
"  bourgeois,"  including  the  intelligentsia.  The  second 
category  requires  no  criticism  by  logic.  It  must  rather 
be  examined  from  the  standpoint  of  morals,  as  in  it 
we  see  only  the  fury  of  civil  war  sown  by  the  Bol- 
sheviks. The  Soviet  leaders  yield  easily  to  wrath, 
as,  like  all  despots,  they  feel  that  their  power  cannot 
last  long.  Their  weakness  is  organic,  internal,  because 
their  theory  is  unrealisable  and  they  are  unable  to  create 
new  forms  of  production.  Economics  have  their  laws, 
which  are  stronger  than  the  will  of  despots,  even  of 
Socialists.  It  is  quite  possible  to  take  away  personal 
property  from  those  who  have  it.  But  to  distribute 
the  confiscated  property  justly  and  equably  among  all 
the  inhabitants  proved  to  be  impossible.  Still  more 
impossible  was  their  system  of  state  direction  of  labour, 


372     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

that  is,  their  particular  form  of  State  serfdom.  The  old 
serf  system  died  in  Russia  because  it  proved  inefficient 
not  only  morally,  but  also  economically.  Now  the  Bol- 
sheviks have  made  an  experiment  in.  State  serfdom  in 
one  part  of  Russia,  and  have  failed.  One  of  the  reasons 
of  their  failure  is  the  fact  that  under  their  system 
labour  bears  a  still  more  acute  and  more  compulsory 
character  than  under  that  of  capitalism.  And  yet 
theoretically  the  Soviet  power  is  considered  to  be  the 
dictatorship  of  the  proletariat,  a  dictatorship  of  men 
of  physical  labour.  And  who  can  compel  dictators  to 
work  ? 

Seeing  that  there  are  undoubtedly  learned  men 
among  the  leaders  of  Bolshevism  who  are  well  informed 
on  economic  questions,  and  that  Lenin  himself  began 
his  career  with  scientific  economic  researches,  they 
certainly  can  see  the  weakness  and  instability  of  their 
economic  prospects,  and  they  name  in  advance  the 
culprits  of  their  unavoidable  bankruptcy.  It  is, 
certainly,  the  bourgeoisie  and  its  creatures  who  are 
guilty  by  "  sabotaging  "  the  Soviet  Power's  measures. 
Prince  Tsereteli  was  right  in  saying  in  the  Constituent 
Assembly  that  this  accusation  is  a  proof  of  the  poverty 
of  Socialism.  But  it  was  in  the  first  March  Revolu- 
tion that  the  apparatus  of  capitalism  was  shaken,  the 
economic  commanding  staff  weakened,  all  employers, 
directors,  engineers,  discredited,  and  all  discipline,  with- 
out which  no  productive,  collective  labour  is  possible, 
destroyed. 

That  the  modern  capitalistic  regime  has  engendered 
and  is  fostering  social  diseases  and  injustices  is  a  plain 
truth,  against  which  no  thinking,  honest  man  will  seek 
to  argue.  The  question  is,  how  can  mankind  be  cured  of 
these  ailments,  how  to  create  a  commonwealth  founded 
on  justice  and  humanity.   What  has  happened  in  Russia 


BOLSHEVIST  GOVERNMENT  373 

shows  that  Socialism  does  not  hold  the  keys  to  this 
paradise,  and  that  a  different  morality,  different  methods, 
a  different  attitude  to  human  mentality  and  to  every 
man  individually  are  required  to  create  a  new  mankind. 

The  extreme  wing  of  the  Socialists  completed  and 
deepened  what  had  been  done,  if  not  under  the  guidance, 
then  at  any  rate  with  the  encouragement  and  approval 
of  the  Socialistic  Centre.  They  carried  the  system  to 
an  extreme,  and  thereby  fully  revealed  its  defects. 

The  incitements  against  the  bourgeoisie  were  a 
necessary  part  of  their  work,  because  in  this  way  the 
class-consciousness  was  elucidated,  according  to  the 
favourite  expression  of  the  Marxists.  Civil  war  was  an 
inevitable  consequence  of  this  acute  antagonism  of 
interests  of  one  class  against  another. 

Having  carried  through  the  coup  d'etat,  the 
Bolsheviks  through  the  Commissary  of  Labour,  Shliap- 
nikoff,  addressed  an  appeal  to  the  workmen,  calling 
on  them  to  put  the  Revolution  and  its  conquests  on  a 
firm  basis. 

The  propertied  classes  are  endeavouring  to  create  anarchy 
and  the  ruin  of  industry  by  provoking  the  workmen  to  excesses 
and  violence  over  the  question  of  foremen,  technicians,  and 
engineers.  They  hope  thereby  to  achieve  the  complete  and 
final  ruin  of  all  businesses  and  eventually  to  close  the  doors 
of  all  the  mills  and  factories.  The  revolutionary  Commission 
of  Labour  asks  you,  our  worker-comrades,  to  abstain  from 
all  acts  of  violence  and  excess.  By  a  joint  and  creative 
work  of  the  labour  masses  and  proletariat  organisations,  the 
Commission  of  Labour  will  know  how  to  surmount  all  the 
obstacles  in  its  way.  The  new  revolutionary  Government  will 
apply  the  most  drastic  measures  against  all  industrials  and  those 
who  continue  to  sabotage  industry,  and  thereby  prevent  the 
carrying  out  of  the  tasks  and  aims  of  the  great  proletarian  and 
peasant  Revolution.  Executions  without  trial  and  other 
arbitrary  acts  will  only  damage  the  cause  of  Revolution.    The 


374     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

Commission  of  Labour  calls  on  you  for  self-control  and  revolu- 
tionary discipline.    (12tli  November.) 

Thus,  while  inciting  against  the  skilled  industrials, 
as  being  not  only  the  chief  enemies  of  the  revolutionary 
people,  but  also  lunatics,  who  have  themselves  ruined 
their  businesses  to  spite  the  workmen,  the  Bolsheviks 
hypocritically  took  refuge  in  a  spurious  warning  against 
violence. 

As  a  matter  of  fact  these  arbitrary  acts  not  only 
tallied  with  the  theory  of  class  hatred,  carried  to  the 
point  of  class  extermination,  but  at  the  same  time  led 
surely  to  one  of  the  goals  of  the  Marxist  movement  in 
general  and  its  Bolshevist  faction  in  particular.  The 
Socialists  had  always  clamoured  for  the  "  disorganisa- 
tion "  of  the  bourgeois  regime,  and  the  Bolsheviks  have 
accomplished  this  part  of  the  programme  with  success. 
This  was  a  necessary  stage  on  the  road  to  the  sub- 
stitution of  the  socialistic  regime  for  the  capitalistic. 
This  substitution  could  only  take  place  after  the  fire  of 
the  world  Revolution  had  destroyed  the  old  rotten 
props  of  the  bourgeoisie,  Russia's  example  must  carry 
away  the  proletariat  of  the  whole  world.  Seeing  that 
Russia  is  a  backward  country  with  a  small  and  un- 
organised middle  class,  it  will  be  easiest  of  all  to  make 
the  Revolution,  or  as  Lenin  said,  the  "  social  experi- 
ment "  in  Russia.  Even  if  it  is  not  possible  to  achieve 
final  success,  the  road  will  be  opened,  and  an  example 
shown.  As  Lenin  was  not  sure  of  the  duration  of  his 
power,  he  hastened  to  make  the  experiment  as  quickly 
as  possible,  without  at  all  guaranteeing  success,  or 
stopping  to  think  of  the  sufferings  of  the  people  over 
whom  he  had  seized  power.  With  regard  to  Russia 
he  acted  not  with  the  strict  firmness  of  a  surgeon  who 
wishes  to  save  the  patient,  but  with  the  cold  cruelty 


BOLSHEVIST  GOVERNMENT  375 

of  a  vivisector,  who  does  not  care  whether  the  rabbit 
dies  after  the  experiment  or  remains  crippled  for  life, 
dragging  out  a  miserable  existence. 

The  Bolsheviks  always  considered  their  acts  from 
the  international  point  of  view  and  endeavoured  not 
only  to  sweep  the  Russian  bourgeoisie  from  the  face  of 
the  earth,  but  also  to  carry  disorganisation  into  the 
capitalistic  regime  the  world  over. 

In  their  official  issues  published  in  Geneva  for 
circulation  in  Europe,  they  characterise  the  importance 
of  the  economic  decrees  of  the  Soviet  of  People's 
Commissaries  as  follows. 

In  the  preface  to  the  "  Decree  on  the  Nationalisa- 
tion of  the  Banks  "  they  say  : 

This  is  a  dagger -thrust  straight  into  the  heart  of  the 
capitalistic  economic  system.  It  is  well  known  that  in  our  time 
the  bank  is  the  real  centre  both  of  production  and  of  exchange 
in  every  country.  In  this  capacity  it  directs  world  policy,  and 
the  terrific  explosion  of  the  present  war  must  be  ascribed  pre- 
cisely to  this  concealed  power.  Hence  the  monopolisation  of 
the  banks  is  a  decisive  step  towards  the  downfall  of  contemporary 
Imperialism.  It  is  the  foundation  of  new  economic  relations, 
where  gold  will  cease  to  have  power. 

The  decree  for  the  stopping  of  the  payment  of 
coupons  is  accompanied  by  an  identical  note  : 

The  cessation  of  payment  of  coupons  and  dividends  is  closely 
connected  with  the  annulment  of  the  foreign  loans,  proclaimed 
by  the  government  of  the  Soviets.  Both  these  measures,  as 
also  the  nationalisation  of  the  banks,  are  directed  against  the 
very  foundations  of  capitalistic  finance,  against  its  system  of 
credit.  It  is  certainly  not  easy  by  one  blow  to  Uberate  economic 
life  from  this  complicated  network.  Capitalistic  finance  is 
continuing  in  Russia  and  against  Russia  its  underground  work. 
But  the  Soviets  have  shown  how  to  break  its  backbone,  and  its 
hour  of  downfall  is  near. 


376     FEOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

They  certainly  succeeded  in  breaking  the  backbone 
of  the  Eussian  financial  system.  Eussian  money  has 
lost  all  value  on  the  world  market.  Even  in  Eussia  it 
is  enormously  depreciated.  And  it  could  not  be  other- 
wise when  the  whole  Bolshevist  financial  system  is 
built  exclusively  on  the  printing  of  paper  money,  not 
guaranteed  by  any  kind  of  reserve. 

This  leads  to  a  hypertrophy  of  the  budget  of  the 
Soviet  of  People's  Commissaries.  As  they  have  created 
a  monstrous  bureaucratic  apparatus  through  trying  to 
turn  almost  every  one  into  officials,  their  budget  has 
reached  simply  comic  proportions.  With  the  general 
disorder  and  absence  of  records,  nobody  will  be  able  to 
fix  exactly  the  expenditure  of  the  Soviets.  In  summer 
1918,  however,  the  Pravda  published  a  speech  of  M. 
Gukovsky,  Commissary  for  Finances,  delivered  by  him 
at  the  Congress  of  the  Soviets,  in  which  he  pointed  out 
that  it  would  be  necessary  to  expend  during  the  first 
half-year  twenty -four  billion  roubles,  whereas  the 
revenues  would  not  exceed  one  billion,  and  even  that 
was  not  quite  certain.  Since  then  the  expenses  of  the 
Soviets  have  grown  still  more,  because  in  view  of  the 
rise  of  the  prices  of  food-stuffs,  living  has  become  very 
expensive,  and  it  is  necessary  to  raise  the  salaries  of  the 
officials.  Besides,  the  expenses  for  the  army  are  con- 
tinuously growing.  And  the  revenues  come  only  from 
forced  contributions  from  the  inhabitants,  and  chiefly 
from  the  printing  machine  of  the  State. 

The  socialisation  of  the  land  destroyed  the  possi- 
bility of  taxing  the  landowners.  There  are  no  trade 
profits  because  private  trade  is  stopped,  and  nationalised 
trade  brings  only  losses,  as  also  does  industry,  now 
transferred  to  the  hands  of  the  Soviet  workmen.  The 
Bolsheviks  did  not  risk  nationalising  all  industry  at 
once.    They  did  this  gradually,  and  in  most  cases  not 


J 


BOLSHEVIST  GOVERNMENT  377 

entirely  but  only  partially.  They  established,  however, 
the  workmen's  control.  The  details  of  this  are  set 
forth  in  a  long  decree  which  curiously  enough  contains 
a  clause  providing  for  the  right  of  the  proprietor  to 
lodge  a  complaint  against  the  decisions  of  the  workmen's 
Soviet.  In  fact,  however,  the  proprietor  is  quite 
powerless  before  the  will  of  the  undisciplined  workmen. 

During  the  first  period  of  the  Russian  Revolution, 
the  more  reasonable  Socialists,  and  also  in  part  the 
Radicals,  recognised  the  need  of  introducing  State  control 
over  industry.  The  road  to  this  was  already  prepared 
by  the  regulation  of  the  distribution  of  orders,  raw 
material,  produce,  and  transport,  which  had  become 
familiar  during  the  war  in  all  belligerent  countries, 
including  Russia. 

But  to  hand  over  the  whole  business  into  the  hands 
of  the  workmen  was  certainly  a  product  of  Socialistic 
rule. 

The  Russian  workmen  had  neither  any  experience 
nor  professional  organisation,  nor  even  elementary 
economic  knowledge.  Their  control  mostly  meant 
looting  and  rioting.  They  dismissed  engineers, 
technicians,  foremen,  and  generally  speaking  the  whole 
skilled  stafi.  On  railways  the  workmen  elected  points- 
men as  directors.  One  of  the  principles  of  the  Bolshevist 
reconstruction  of  life  was  the  right  of  the  whole  staff 
to  participate  in  all  matters  affecting  the  concern  or 
institution  in  question.  In  the  universities,  the  door- 
keepers and  floor-sweepers  took  their  seats  beside  the 
professors  to  decide  together  academic  questions.  In 
the  hospitals  the  lowest  menial  attendants  elected  or 
dismissed  doctors.  In  schools  the  maid-servants  were 
appointed  to  the  post  of  lady-superintendent.  This 
brought  such  chaos  into  life  that  finally  even  people 
who  were  willing  to  carry  out  their  functions  under  the 


378     FEOM  LIBEETY  TO  BEEST-LITOVSK       ch. 

Bolsheviks  were  involuntarily  compelled  to  practise 
sabotage. 

In  a  paper 'dated  October  1918,  that  is,  a  year  after 
the  Bolshevist  cowp  d'etat,  an  order  of  the  Bolshevist 
Commissary  of  Moscow  was  published  in  which  he 
complained  that  only  "  secret  saboteurs "  served  on 
railways,  and  as  a  result  of  this  there  were  2000  unloaded 
cars  accumulated  in  the  Moscow  railway  junction. 

The  fundamental  idea  of  the  dictatorship  of  the 
proletariat  regarding  the  right  of  physical  toilers  to 
dictate  their  will  to  all  the  rest,  and  especially  to  the 
brain  workers,  who  formerly  directed  and  organised 
the  working  energy  of  the  nation,  was  carried  out  by 
the  Bolsheviks  to  its  uttermost  limits. 

One  can  only  wonder  at  the  economic  flexibility  of 
the  Eussian  people,  who  still  manage  to  live  in  some 
way  in  spite  of  the  absurdities  of  the  economic  and 
administrative  phantasies  of  the  Soviet  dictators.  The 
reason  for  this  is  that  Eussia  is  an  agricultural  country, 
that  the  town  population  did  not  exceed  10  per  cent 
of  the  whole.  It  is  now  even  less.  Thus  in  Petrograd, 
for  instance,  there  were  2J  million  people  at  the  time  of 
the  Bolshevist  cowp  d'etat,  and  ten  months  later  only 
800,000  remained.  The  people  in  the  villages  remain 
unconcerned,  are  trying  to  lead  their  lives  independently 
of  Bolshevist  fancies,  and  when  pressed  too  hard  by 
the  commissaries  get  peace  by  paying  or  else  by  shooting 
them. 

The  result  of  the  workmen's  control  showed  itself 
very  rapidly  and  led  to  a  complete  ruin  of  production. 
The  workmen  proved  unable  to  conduct  any  com- 
plicated business ;  they  sold  the  raw  material  and 
shared  the  money  among  themselves.  The  Soviet  of 
People's  Commissaries  was  compelled  to  subsidise  even 
those  concerns  which  had  quite  a  short  time  previously 


BOLSHEVIST  GOVERNMENT  379 

given  good  profits.  This  demoralised  the  workmen  and 
turned  the  factory  committees  into  assemblies  of 
parasites. 

Lenin  and  his  adherents  kept  stubbornly  repeating 
to  the  masses  that  their  welfare  would  be  secured  as 
soon  as  they  took  from  the  bourgeoisie  all  it  had  filched 
from  them.  The  primary  axiom  that  labour  is  the 
essential  condition  of  life  is  set  aside  and  replaced  by 
the  tempting  dream  of  an  everlasting  repartition  of 
property.  The  land,  factories,  capital,  houses,  furniture, 
clothes — all  must  be  divided.  Then  will  come  an  end 
to  the  idleness  of  the  landowners,  capitalists,  engineers, 
directors,  and  all  other  counter-revolutionaries,  and  the 
peasants  and  workmen,  in  their  turn,  will  be  able  to 
become  idle. 

How  often  at  improvised  street  meetings  the  absurd 
words  were  heard :  "  We  shall  take  everything  from 
you,  we  shall  divide  all  and  each  will  get  100,000 
roubles." 

This  was  said  with  a  threat.  The  opponent,  more 
often  than  not  being  a  badly-dressed  intellectual,  with 
patched  boots,  who  perhaps  never  held  so  much  as  a 
1000  rouble  note  in  his  hands,  tried  in  vain  to  make  the 
dreamers  listen  to  reason :  "  But  where  will  you  get 
so  much  ?  Rich  people  are  not  so  numerous.  You  will 
begin  to  divide  and  end  by  plundering,  and  all  the  same 
there  will  not  be  enough  for  every  one." 

From  all  sides  angry  eyes  are  fixed  at  the  insolent 
bourgeois.  "  Not  enough,  you  say  ?  Probably  hidden 
away  in  all  the  trunks  ?  Don't  like  to  part  with  it  ? 
There'll  be  enough  for  us.  You've  drunk  enough  of  our 
blood." 

The  idea  of  requisitions,  for  which  there  was  a 
formula  in  the  Communist  Manifesto — expropriate  the 
expropriators — has  utterly  shaken  the  people's  wealth, 


380     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       oh. 

sapped  productivity,  disaccustomed  the  people  to  work, 
and  killed  the  basic  conceptions  of  right,  law,  and 
justice. 

The  plunder  was  not  restricted  to  landlords'  estates, 
private  capital,  and  factories.  Annexations  and 
indemnities,  which  the  Socialists  feared  so  much  in 
international  relations,  were  applied  to  the  widest 
extent  in  internal  life.  The  Soviets,  revolutionary 
committees,  extraordinary  commissions,  all  sought 
annexations  and  imposed  indemnities  on  the  inhabitants 
of  the  conquered  towns.  Such  was  the  system  of 
government.  When  the  naive  president  of  a  provincial 
Soviet  asked  for  money  from  the  Soviet  of  the  People's 
Commissaries  they  mostly  answered :  ''  Haven't  you 
got  any  rifles  ?  " 

The  picking  of  pockets  proceeded  with  an  extra- 
ordinary rapidity.  But  to  whom  and  where  the  money 
went — nobody  knows,  and  probably  never  will  know 
exactly.  In  any  case  the  members  of  the  committees 
and  the  commissaries  were  not  in  need  of  money. 

Plunder  became  a  custom.  People  boasted  of  it  as 
of  a  proud  achievement. 

If  on  the  one  hand  petty  pickpockets,  especially 
when  caught  red-handed,  were  ruthlessly  shot,  on  the 
other  hand  the  Soviet  leaders  and  their  Press  systematic- 
ally encouraged  plunder.  In  February  1918  Lenin 
uttered  in  the  Smolny  a  farewell  speech  to  agitators 
bound  to  the  provinces.  The  programme  stated  by  him 
is  marked  by  tempting  simplicity. 

"  We  have  before  us  two  strong  foes.  The  first  is  international 
capital.  There  is  no  doubt  that  so  far  it  is  stronger  than  the 
Soviet  Republic  and  that  their  existence  alongside  of  each 
other  is  impossible.  But  the  capitalists  are  already  sending  to 
us  their  commissaries,  and  will  perhaps  recognise  the  Soviet 
Power  and  even  the  annulment  of  the  loans."    Lenin  explained 


BOLSHEVIST  GOVERNMENT  881 

this  concession  on  the  part  of  the  capitalists  of  the  Allied 
countries  by  the  enthusiasm  with  which  the  legislative  work 
of  the  Soviets  was  met  by  the  workmen  of  the  whole  world. 
"  Our  position  is  absolutely  solid,  because  we  have  behind  us 
all  the  workmen  of  the  entire  world.  But  in  order  to  strengthen 
it,  we  must  struggle  with  the  second  foe — internal  ruin.  Neither 
the  Tsar's,  nor  Kerensky's  authority  could  organise  the  distribu- 
tion of  food-stuffs.  The  Soviet  Power  must  surmount  this  diffi- 
culty and  before  all  settle  the  economic  life  of  the  villages.  No 
one  will  help  you,  comrades.  The  whole  bourgeoisie,  officials, 
saboteurSy  go  against  you,  because  they  know  that  if  the  people, 
whose  common  property  was  hitherto  in  the  hands  of  capitalists 
and  village  tight-fists,  now  divide  all  among  themselves,  they 
will  clear  Russia  of  drones  and  weeds.  In  the  villages  the  rich 
peasants  will  be  against  the  Bolsheviks,  but  it  will  be  easy  for 
you  to  fight  there,  because  the  masses  will  be  with  you.  They 
will  see  that  not  punitive  expeditions  are  coming  to  them  from 
the  centre,  but  agitators,  bearing  light  into  the  village,  eager  to 
rally  all  those  who  work  for  themselves  and  do  not  try  to  live 
at  the  expense  of  others.  ...  A  struggle  will  blaze  up  between 
the  rich  and  the  working  peasants,  and  the  poor  ought  to  be 
helped  not  with  a  book,  but  with  experience  of  a  personal 
struggle.  .  .  .  External  war  is  ending.  That  is  unmistakable. 
Now  begins  internal  war.  The  bourgeoisie,  having  hidden  their 
plunder  in  trunks,  are  saying  quietly  to  themselves :  *  Never 
mind,  we  will  wait  a  little  longer !  The  people  must  make  them 
return  what  they  have  plundered.  You  must  do  this  on  the 
spot.  It  will  not  be  the  police  who  will  compel  them  to  do  this. 
It  is  for  the  people  to  do  this,  and  there  is  no  other  means  to 
fight  with  the  bourgeoisie.''    (Pravda,  February  19.) 

It  was  in  this  cold-blooded  and  well  thought  out  way 
that  Lenin  instructed  the  agitators  to  organise  a  general 
wholesale  plunder.  Like  all  Lenin's  acts  this  speech  is 
not  an  accidental  outbreak  of  wrath,  but  only  a  link  in 
his  consecutive,  systematic  heartless  work. 

It  is  natural  that  with  such  encouragement  of  whole- 
sale violence  the  Bolsheviks  were  bound  to  cancel 
justice. 


382     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

The  juridical  statutes  of  Russia,  created  in  1863,  in 
the  so-called  epoch  of  the  great  reforms  in  the  reign  of 
Alexander  II.  were  constructed  on  a  very  humane  and 
well-proportioned  plan.  Even  the  later  innovations 
which  aimed  at  restricting  the  independence  of  the 
courts  could  not  injure  the  main  foundations  of  Russian 
justice.  But  the  Bolsheviks  destroyed  it  by  a  single 
decree.  They  said  that  the  former  laws  were  created 
to  support  the  bourgeois  regime  and  to  protect  the 
institution  of  property.  The  old  courts  were  guided  by 
these  laws.  Hence  there  was  no  more  need  for  these 
courts.  There  was  no  need  of  any  juridical  standards. 
It  would  be  enough  to  have  revolutionary  tribunals, 
through  which  the  people  themselves  would  punish  or 
pardon.  On  November  24,  a  decree  was  issued  abolishing 
the  Senate,  the  Higher  Courts,  and  all  other  courts  of 
justice.  Their  fimctions  were  to  be  carried  out  by 
special  judges,  elected  through  the  Soviets. 

It  is  said  that  when  Shcheglovitoff,  one  of  the  most 
hated  of  the  Tsar's  Ministers,  who  by  his  contempt  for 
law  and  for  the  independence  of  the  judges,  demoralised 
the  Ministry  of  Justice  at  the  head  of  which  he  stood, 
read,  while  imprisoned  in  the  Peter  and  Paul  Fortress, 
the  decree  for  the  revolutionary  tribunals  he  sarcastically 
said :  "  And  yet  the  Cadets  repeatedly  charged  me  in 
the  Duma  with  turning  the  tribunal  into  a  weapon  of 
political  struggle.  How  far  the  Bolsheviks  have  left 
me  behind  ?  " 

He  was  right,  seeing  that  the  Bolsheviks  denied  the 
chief  factors  of  justice  recognised  in  modern  society,  the 
independence  of  the  courts  from  the  authorities  and 
politics,  and  the  guidance  of  the  judge  by  exact  and 
definitely  established  laws. 

Clause  five  of  the  decree  declared  that  the  tribunal 
was  to  be  guided  in  its  decisions  and  sentences  by  the 


BOLSHEVIST  GOVERNMENT  383 

old  laws  **  in  so  far  as  these  laws  were  not  cancelled  by 
the  Revolution,  and  do  not  contradict  the  revolutionary 
conscience  and  the  revolutionary  conception  of  right." 

In  a  note  to  this  clause  it  is  explained  how  to  dis- 
tinguish existing  laws  from  non-existing  ones,  seeing 
that  there  has  been  no  official  decree  for  the  cancelling 
of  all  the  laws. 

Cancelled  are  to  be  considered  all  laws  contradicting  the 
decrees  of  the  Central  Executive  Committee  of  the  Soviet  of 
Soldiers,  Workmen,  and  Peasants,  and  of  their  Government, 
or  the  niim'miim  programmes  of  the  Russian  Social  Democratic 
Party,  and  of  the  Party  of  Social-Revolutionaries. 

With  one  stroke  of  the  pen  the  programmes  of 
parties,  written  more  for  propaganda's  sake  than  for 
use,  obtained  the  force  of  law. 

What  new  jurists  were  called  on  to  see  that  the 
new  justice  should  be  carried  out  ?  In  a  detailed 
memorandum  for  the  organisation  of  Soviet  Justice^ 
we  find  the  following : 

Our  Republic  is  based  on  the  juridical  consciousness  of  the 
masses,  and  not  on  the  consciousness  of  the  class  of  oppressors. 
It  does  not  need  to  create  legal  principles  or  special  laws,  which 
would  fetter  the  masses.  On  the  contrary,  it  needs  a  law  coming 
directly  from  the  depths  of  the  people.  Neither  does  the  Repubhc 
require  a  class  of  skilful  and  cunning  jurists,  who,  under  the 
outward  guise  of  legality,  defend  the  narrow  interests  of  the 
propertied  minority.  It  requires  judges  who  know  how  correctly 
to  reflect  the  people's  juridical  conscience,  and  who  are  inter- 
preters not  of  their  own  conception  of  right,  but  only  of  that  of 
the  mass  of  the  people  themselves. 

Such  an  attempt  to  elucidate  the  direct  ideas  of 
justice  from  the  depth  of  the  people's  wisdom  was 

^  Uosuvre  aociaXe  et  politique  du  Gouvernement  Socialiste  de  Rusaie.  Recueil 
de  documents  et  d'actes.  G6ii6ve.  OflBcial  publication  of  the  Soviet  of  the 
People's  Commissaries. 


384     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

undertaken  even  before  the  Bolsheviks  came  into 
power. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  first  Revolution,  when 
Kerensky  was  Minister  of  Justice,  the  Tribunal  of  the 
Justices  of  Peace  (Police  Courts),  one  of  the  best 
Russian  juridical  institutions,  was  subjected  to  a 
radical  change.  Besides  the  judge,  elected  by  the 
Municipal  Council,  representatives  of  the  workmen's 
class  and  soldiers  elected  by  the  local  Soviets  appeared 
in  court.  Thus  the  attempt  to  add  representatives  of 
the  proletariat  class  to  deal  out  justice  was  made  at 
the  time  when  the  Revolutionary  Democracy  was  in 
power.  The  High  Courts  were  not  abolished  then,  but 
their  authority,  particularly  in  the  provinces,  was 
greatly  diminished.  The  jiiges  d' instruction  were  not 
able  to  draw  up  their  inquiries.  The  crowd  forced  its 
way  into  the  cells,  released  the  prisoners,  and  held  the 
court  officials  under  perpetual  threat  of  violence.  The 
sentences  could  not  be  served,  because  there  was  no 
police  or  administrative  authority  who  could  see  that 
it  was  carried  out. 

But  the  Bolsheviks  went  farther.  They  not  only 
abolished  the  old  courts,  but  replaced  them  with  new, 
the  political  meaning  of  which  is  quite  definitely  formu- 
lated in  the  decree : 

Revolutionary  tribunals  of  workmen  and  peasants  are 
instituted  for  fighting  with  the  forces  of  counter-revolution, 
for  the  adoption  of  all  measures  to  defend  the  Revolution  and 
its  conquests  against  them,  and  Hkewise  for  the  settlement  of 
special  cases  in  connection  with  fighting  against  speculation, 
profiteering,  and  sabotage^  and  other  misdeeds  of  merchants, 
industrials,  officials,  etc.  These  tribimals  consist  of  a  president 
and  six  members,  elected  by  the  Soviets. 

The  mixing  up  of  political  opponents  (counter- 
revolution) and  speculators  in  one  category  is  one  of 


XIV  BOLSHEVIST  GOVERNMENT  386 

the  methods  habitually  employed  by  the  Bolsheviks  to 
obscure  the  popular  mind,  and  to  lay  the  whole  guilt 
for  the  economic  ruin  on  the  opponents  of  the  Soviets. 
The  hungry  crowd,  frequently  without  waiting  for  any 
tribunals,  settled  in  its  own  way  the  cases  of  the  so-called 
speculators,  whose  only  fault  often  was  that  they  were 
found  in  possession  of  several  pounds  of  flour  or  sugar. 

The  revolutionary  tribunals  exercised  judgement 
not  so  much  upon  the  speculators  as  upon  counter- 
revolutionaries, that  is,  the  political  enemies  of  Bol- 
shevism. In  Petrograd  the  tribunal  started  working 
at  the  end  of  December.  One  of  the  first  cases  dealt 
with  was  that  of  Countess  Sophia  Panin,  who  was 
under  indictment  for  the  embezzlement  of  92,000 
roubles. 

The  Soviet  authorities  had  at  their  disposal  all  the 
buildings  of  the  law-courts  abolished  by  them,  but 
with  their  customary  longing  for  palaces  they  seized 
the  small  but  pretty  palace  of  the  Grand  Duke  Nikolai 
Nikolaievitch,  former  Commander-in-Chief  of  the 
Russian  Army,  and  installed  in  it  the  new  People's 
Tribimal.  All  the  entrances  were  occupied  by  sentries 
armed  with  rifles,  whose  duty  it  was  to  check  the 
passes,  as  nobody  was  allowed  to  enter  without  a  permit. 
And  yet  on  the  day  of  the  Countess  Sophia  Panin's 
trial  the  white  and  gold  hall  rapidly  filled  up.  The 
audience  consisted  of  friends  of  the  accused,  her 
colleagues  on  various  public  bodies,  journalists  and 
workmen  who  were  attached  to  her  through  visiting  the 
People's  Palace  she  built  for  the  workmen.  There  were 
also  many  lawyers.  The  Soviet  had  just  abolished  the 
Bar.  When  the  lawyers  met  to  discuss  the  situation,  the 
sailors  chased  them  away.  The  lawyers,  however,  had 
had  time  to  pass  a  protest  against  the  destruction  of 
Russian  justice,  and  decided  that  they  would  visit  as 

2c 


386     FKOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

far  as  possible  the  sittings  of  the  tribunal  in  order  to 
fight  by  all  means  against  it. 

The  trial  of  Countess  Panin  resembled  a  scene  from 
a  historic  drama.  She  was  an  aristocrat  by  birth  and 
position.  After  having  given  all  her  knowledge,  energy, 
intelligence,  and  means  to  the  interests  of  the  democ- 
racy, this  woman,  whose  working  life  and  whole 
ambition  aimed  only  at  the  education  of  her  own 
people  and  the  honour  and  freedom  of  Russia,  was 
accused  of  embezzling  State  money.  No  direct  charge 
of  counter-revolution  was  made  against  her ;  but  the 
Cadets,  to  whose  party  she  belonged,  were  proclaimed 
enemies  of  the  people.  Her  arrest  and  trial  increased 
her  popularity.  The  Petrograd  University  gave  her  an 
honorary  doctor's  degree.  A  series  of  protests,  signed 
by  organisations  and  individuals,  appeared  in  the  papers. 
The  prosecution  instituted  against  her  revived  in  the 
public  mind  her  twenty  years  of  benevolent  activity. 

This  woman,  on  whose  side  stood,  it  may  be  said 
without  exaggeration,  the  whole  of  honest  Russia,  was 
being  tried  by  a  group  of  nobodies,  elected  by  no  one 
knew  whom. 

At  the  judges'  table  sat  several  men  with  unintelligent 
surly  -  looking  countenances,  partly  in  soldiers'  tunics, 
and  partly  in  workmen's  clothes.  They  remained 
silent.  The  President,  also  a  workman,  tried  to  over- 
come his  confusion  so  as  not  to  lower  the  dignity  of 
the  revolutionary  tribunal.  But  there  was  no  real 
assurance  either  in  him  or  in  his  comrades.  What 
struck  me  was  that  there  was  no  air  of  triumph  in  these 
victorious  revolutionaries,  but  rather  they  seemed  to 
feel  guilty  and  ashamed.  It  was  the  same  look  as  the 
Red  Guards  had,  when  some  days  after  the  cowp  d'etat, 
they  disarmed  the  indomitable  Women's  Battalion. 
Evidently  the  general  and  outspoken  indignation  had 


BOLSHEVIST  GOVERNMENT  387 

at  first  a  depressing  effect,   even  on  the  Bolshevist 
Commissaries. 

The  trial  of  Countess  Panin  produced  the  impression 
that  not  she  but  the  Soviet  of  People's  Commissaries 
was  at  the  Bar.  All  that  was  said  in  favour  of  the 
accused  was  an  accusation  against  them.  Her  chief 
defender  was  a  workman.  With  sincere  emotion  he 
narrated  how,  thanks  to  the  accused,  his  whole  life 
became  changed.  He  had  lived  in  darkness  and  empti- 
ness until  he  met  Countess  Panin.  She  had  taught  him 
to  read.  It  was  in  her  People's  Palace  that  he  acquired 
general  human  interests;  he  there  began  to  think, 
began  to  live  for  the  sake  of  thought  and  truth,  felt 
that  joy  of  intellectual  effort  which  may  beautify  any 
life.  The  workman  finished  with  the  words  :  "  For  all 
that  you  did  for  me  and  many  of  us  I  bow  low  to  you." 

During  the  reading  of  the  protocol  and  the  indict- 
ment Countess  Panin  remained  calm  and  reserved. 
But  when  the  workman  bowed  to  her,  she  quickly 
covered  her  face  with  her  hands  to  conceal  her  emotion. 
The  prosecution  and  threats  did  not  shake  her.  But 
the  fervent  gratitude  which  burst  straight  from  the 
heart  of  one  of  her  many  pupils  and  living  witnesses  of 
her  work  touched  her  deeply.  On  the  prisoner's  bench 
she  experienced  that  moral  uplift  which  is  the  chief 
reward  of  a  social  worker,  and  supports  him  in  the 
heavy  days  of  trial. 

rJ^fln  answer  to  the  speech  of  the  workman  for  the 
defence,  another  workman  spoke  as  prosecutor.  I  have 
not  the  text  of  his  speech,  and  probably  no  one  has  it, 
seeing  that  in  this  strange  and  eccentric  court  there 
were  no  shorthand  writers,  nor  even  a  decent  secretariat. 
But  I  can  well  recall  the  impression  this  prosecutor 
made  on  me.  This  was  almost  the  first  Bolshevik 
idealist  I  had  heard  during  all  those  months  of  socialistic 


388     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

inebriation.  He  was  very  young,  scarcely  more  than 
twenty,  and  lie  spoke  with  that  fervent  belief  in  the 
righteousness  of  his  cause  which  was  burning  in  the 
speech  of  the  defence. 

"  You  say  that  citizen  Panin  is  a  noble  woman, 
and  has  done  much  good  for  the  people  ?  Well,  I  don't 
wish  to  dispute  this.  We  may  leave  her  to  be  noble- 
minded,  and  I  may  even  respect  her  for  that.  But  she 
is  acting  against  us,  and  for  that  we  must  destroy  her. 
We  are  bringing  forth  a  new  gospel.  We  will  be  swept 
away,  we  will  surely  be  swept  off  very  soon,  but  we 
shall  tell  these  tidings  to  the  world,  and  we  have  to 
remove  from  our  road  all  those  who  are  against  us, 
even  if  they  be  such  good  people  as  citizen  Panin  is, 
who  has  nevertheless  appropriated  the  people's  money, 
and  ought  to  be  made  to  suffer  for  that." 

Even  this  speech,  undoubtedly  full  of  Bolshevist 
enthusiasm,  had  no  effect  on  the  judges.  Their 
countenances  remained  sleepy  and  dull.  They  simply 
sat  and  waited  to  see  what  the  President  would  order 
them  to  sign.  And  the  President  waited  to  see  what 
the  obscure  lawyer  Stuchka,  now  Commissary  of  Justice, 
would  order  him  to  sign.  The  latter,  to  the  frank 
indignation  of  the  audience,  was  fussing  about  in  the 
hall,  and  finally  disappeared  into  the  judges'  room  to 
dictate  to  them  the  sentence  they  were  to  pass. 

"  Even  Shcheglovitoff  never  went  so  far  as  to  do 
this.  He  gave  his  orders  by  telephone,  but  never 
entered  the  consulting-room  of  the  judges,"  said  the 
lawyers  who  were  present  at  the  trial. 

The  prisoner  only  said  a  few  words.  She  announced 
that  she  certainly  did  not  count  herself  guilty,  as  she 
considered  herself  obliged  not  to  give  over  to  the 
Bolsheviks  the  people's  money  entrusted  to  her.  Then, 
turning  to  the  soldiers  sitting  at  the  judges'  table,  she 


BOLSHEVIST  GOVERNMENT  389 

added :  "  I  believe  that  you,  who  have  repeatedly  carried 
out  military  duty,  will  understand  me  better  than  any 
one.  I  was  the  sentry  on  guard,  watching  the  people's 
goods.  Could  I  abandon  them  without  waiting  for  the 
changing  of  the  guard  ?  The  Bolsheviks  were  for  us  not 
the  next  sentry,  but  bandits.'' 

But  the  soldiers  remained  as  before  surly  and 
resentful.  No  words,  however  fervent  and  sincere,  had 
any  effect  on  them.  They  knew  quite  well  that  it  was 
not  to  mete  out  justice  that  they  were  brought  to  the 
palace  of  their  former  Commander-in-Chief,  but  only  to 
pass  sentence.  They  were  indifferent  to  all  the  rest. 
The  sentence  was  decided  beforehand.  Countess  Panin 
was  to  remain  in  prison  until  she  gave  up  92,000  roubles.^ 
In  addition,  **  public  censure  "  was  pronounced  on  her. 
The  whole  audience  applauded  the  prisoner.  Public 
opinion  throughout  the  Press  condenmed  the  judges,  the 
sentence,  and  the  Soviet  Power  which  had  arranged  all 
the  tragic  comedy.  Even  Maxim  Gorki's  paper  Novaya 
Zhizn,  the  unalterable  enemy  of  the  Cadets,  wrote  as 
follows : 

We  beUeve  that  even  the  judges  who  passed  the  sentence 
never  had  any  doubt  whatever  as  to  whom  actually  public 
censure  will  fall  upon,  whether  on  S.  V.  Panina,  or  on  those 
who  cast  her  into  prison.  Let  it  not  be  said  that  the  prisoner 
had  the  sympathy  of  the  bourgeois  only.  No,  through  the 
mouth  of  the  workman  Ivanoff  (the  defender),  the  Uttle  band 
of  the  proletariat  intelligentsia  of  Russia  declared  that  work- 
men's aristocracy  who  knows  what  culture  is  and  has  learnt 
how  to  appreciate  its  agents  in  our  intellectually  poor  country. 

Two  days  later  another  trial  was  held  in  the  same 
palace  which  aroused  great  excitement  in  Petrograd. 
This  time  it  was  General  Boldyreff,  the  Commander  of 

^  Her  friends  paid  in  the  money  for  Countess  Panin.    She  was  released 
from  prison.    Now  she  is  conducting  political  work  together  with  other  Ri 
patriots  in  the  south  of  Russia,  for  the  regeneration  of  her  country. 


390     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       os. 

the  Fifth  Army  who  was  being  tried.  He  was  accused 
of  sabotaging  the  Soviet  Power,  of  crimes  committed 
against  the  Revolution  and  the  people,  which  consisted 
in  the  fact  that  the  General  did  not  answer  the  summons 
of  ensign  Krylenko,  did  not  recognise  his  authority,  and 
refused  to  give  him  troops  to  fight  with  Kerensky. 

General  Boldyreff  explained  that  he  acted  on  the 
decision  of  the  Army  Committee,  who  did  not  wish  to 
submit  to  the  demands  of  one  party. 

"  I  have  always  considered  that  the  army  exists  not 
for  parties,  but  for  the  defence  of  the  whole  country, 
and  as  the  Fifth  Army  was  defending  the  approaches 
to  Petrograd,  it  was  dangerous  to  move  it  from  its 
positions." 

This  happened  before  the  conclusion  of  peace.  The 
counsel  for  the  defence,  one  of  whom  was  a  soldier, 
member  of  the  Committee  of  the  Fifth  Army,  pointed 
out  the  military  merits  of  General  Boldyreff  to  the 
judges,  declaring  that  throughout  the  campaign  he 
shared  all  the  hardships  with  the  soldiers,  and  when  in 
combat  frequently  marched  at  the  head  of  his  unit. 
Moreover,  General  BoldyrefE  was  a  real  democrat,  a 
peasant's  son,  who  had  made  his  way  not  by  protection, 
but  by  his  own  work. 

The  defending  soldier  argued  that  if  they  tried 
General  Boldyreff,  then  the  whole  Army  Comimittee 
should  be  tried,  since  they  all  acted  in  complete  agree- 
ment. The  political  significance  of  the  trial  was  still 
more  clearly  emphasised  by  the  President's  question  to 
the  accused : 

"  If  the  Army  Committee  had  recognised  Krylenko 
as  Commander,  would  you  have  submitted  to  him  ?  " 

"  I  consider  imperative  upon  me  only  the  will  of  the 
Russian  people  expressed  through  the  Constituent 
Assembly,"  answered  the  General  in  a  firm  voice. 


BOLSHEVIST  GOVERNMENT  391 

He  was  sentenced  to  three  years'  imprisonment. 

A  great  outburst  of  anger  arose  in  the  hall.  All 
rose  to  their  feet  and  cries  were  heard  of :  *'  Shame ! 
Gendarmes !  This  is  worse  than  autocracy !  Poor 
Russia !  " 

The  defending  soldier  came  up  to  the  General  and 
saluting  him  said  :  "  Never  mind,  General,  you  will  be 
released  before  the  three  years  are  up/* 

All  caught  up  the  word  :  "  Before  !  long  before  !  "  ^ 

A  much  less  severe  sentence  was  passed  on  another 
prisoner,  for  whom  the  uniform  of  a  Russian  officer 
was  only  a  disguise,  concealing  a  most  dishonest  adven- 
turer. 

This  was  the  case  of  Colonel  Schneur.  The  indict- 
ment against  him  was  "  that  being  shamelessly  dis- 
graced through  his  criminal  relations  with  the  Depart- 
ment of  Police,  he,  Schneur,  became  the  executant  of 
important  and  responsible  orders  of  the  Soviet  authori- 
ties, thereby  knowingly  prejudicing  and  compromising 
them." 

The  name  of  Lieutenant  Schneur  appeared  for  the 
first  time  in  the  papers  in  November,  when  a  Soviet 
official  communiqm  was  published  to  the  effect  that  on 
13th  November  three  parlementaireSy  with  Lieutenant 
Schneur  at  their  head;  had  been  sent  over  to  the 
Germans.  Subsequently,  on  7th  December  a  scandalous 
disclosure  was  published  in  the  newspaper  Dien,  In  this 
well-informed  socialistic  organ,  L.  Lvoff  (a  well-known 
journalist)  conducted  a  campaign  of  bold  exposure, 
very  dangerous  to  him  and  his  paper,  daily  publishing 
a  series  of  scandalous  proceedings  characterising  the 
Bolshevist  agents. 

1  Fortunately  they  were  right.  General  Boldyreff  is  free,  and  together 
with  Admiral  Kolchak  has  organised  a  Russian  Army  in  Siberia,  which  is  now 
fighting  against  Trotsky  and  his  Red  soldiers. 


392     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch 

Schneur  also  found  his  way  into  this  unattractive 
portrait  gallery,  where  ruffians,  informers,  political 
traitors,  and  mere  blackguards  crowded  one  after  an- 
other. Lieutenant  Schneur,  who  had  been  put  out  of 
the  army  some  time  before  for  unseemly  acts,  at  once 
occupied  a  place  among  the  Soviet  notables.  After  his 
journey  to  the  Germans  as  a  parlementaire  he  got  an 
appointment  on  the  staff  of  the  Commander-in-Chief, 
Krylenko,  who,  before  all  army  ranks  were  cancelled, 
promoted  him  to  the  rank  of  colonel. 

And  suddenly  a  long  letter  appeared  in  the  Press, 
written  by  Schneur  in  1910  from  Paris  to  the  Depart- 
ment of  Police,  in  which  he  offered  his  services  as  a 
secret  agent.  He  boasted  in  this  letter  of  his  close 
relations  with  prominent  Russian  revolutionaries,  and 
assured  the  Tsar  police  that  he  could  at  any  time  occupy 
a  central  place  in  their  midst  in  order  to  keep  a  watch 
over  them.  ''  My  only  wish  is  to  inflict  a  decisive  blow 
on  the  Russian  Revolution."  This  application  did  not 
succeed.  The  Tsar's  Department  of  Police  rejected 
Schneur's  overtures.  But  fortune  still  awaited  him  in 
the  future.  Circumstances  changed  during  the  eight 
years.  In  his  speech  at  the  trial  Schneur  said  :  "  My 
life,  in  its  variety  and  brightness,  represents  a  cine- 
matograph ribbon  of  50,000  metres  long."  And  in  truth 
his  life  resembled  the  adventures  of  the  criminal  heroes 
who  flash  so  frequently  before  the  eyes  of  the  spectator 
in  a  cinema.  Schneur,  though  only  for  a  short  time, 
did  succeed  in  obtaining  a  central  position  among  the 
revolutionaries.  On  the  recommendation  of  Trotsky, 
Schneur  was  appointed  Chief  of  Staff  of  the  Supreme 
Commander-in-Chief.  There  were  many  such  shady 
heroes  as  he  was  in  the  suite,  but  for  some  reason  or 
other  the  Bolsheviks  were  more  severe  to  Schneur  than 
to  the  others,  and  he  was  arrested  and  tried. 


XIV  BOLSHEVIST  GOVERNMENT  393 

At  the  trial  Krylenko,  who  had  previously  befriended 
him  and  given  him  a  high  and  responsible  post,  gave 
now  a  very  disdainful  and  unfavourable  report  about 
his  former  subordinate. 

The  newspaper  Dien,  in  exposing  Lieutenant  Schneur, 
said  quite  plainly  that  this  gentleman,  who  was  so  un- 
successful in  the  offer  of  his  services  as  secret  police 
agent,  was  much  more  successful  when  he  offered  his 
services  to  the  German  Intelligence  Department.  And 
Krylenko  in  his  evidence  said  : 

"  Schneur  entered  into  unnecessary  negotiations  with 
the  German  Generals,  took  part  in  their  luncheon  parties 
and  attempted  to  make  speeches.  There  was  so  much 
doubt  as  to  Schneur 's  devotion  to  the  public  cause, 
that  suspicion  arose  as  to  his  possible  connection  with 
the  German  agents." 

These  suspicions  did  not  prevent  the  Commander-in- 
Chief  of  the  Russian  Army  from  promoting  Schneur 
Colonel — "  to  get  rid  of  him,  as  he  was  too  much  of  an 
annoyance  .  .  .,  but  every  one  regarded  this  as  humor- 
ous,'' and  eventually  from  taking  Colonel  Schneur  to 
the  Headquarters  and  make  him  Chief  of  Staff. 

This  disgraceful  evidence  of  Krylenko  is  one  of  the 
many  proofs  of  his  criminal  attitude  to  the  Russian 
Army.  Its  organisation,  leaders,  fate,  and  honour  were 
for  him  only  objects  of  derision.  In  this  mockery  there 
were  features  that  touch  the  limits  of  insanity. 

When  at  Headquarters  it  was  discovered  that 
Schneur  had  been  in  communication  with  the  secret 
police,  he  was  arrested  and  about  to  be  tried,  which 
means  to  be  shot.  Eventually  they  changed  their  mind. 
Dukhonin  and  other  honest  officers  they  at  once  sub- 
jected to  the  cruel  fate,  without  thinking  twice.  But 
Schneur,  a  spy,  traitor  and  'provocateur,  awoke  in  them 
pity. 


394     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

The  revolutionary  tribunal  likewise  pitied  him  ajid 
passed  on  him  a  very  lenient  sentence :  ''To  deprive 
Schneur  of  his  civil  rights  and  of  public  confidence  and 
to  expel,  him  beyond  the  boundaries  of  the  Russian 
Federal  Republic  for  ever !  " 

Nearly  every  one  of  the  tribunal's  sittings  was  marked 
by  conflicts  between  the  judges  and  the  public  who 
formed  the  audience.  The  return  to  the  wildest  forms 
of  trial,  deprived  of  guarantees,  without  laws,  without 
regular  procedure  or  inquiry,  even  without  the  presen- 
tation to  the  prisoner  of  the  indictment  against  him, 
naturally  awoke  general  protest.  Public  indignation 
found  its  expression  in  the  speeches  of  attorneys  and 
lawyers  and  in  the  outcries  of  members  in  the  audience. 
More  than  once  the  angry  and  outraged  President  ordered 
the  soldiers  to  clear  the  hall.  The  locks  in  the  rifles 
were  then  heard  to  click,  and  it  seemed  that  in  addition 
to  moral  violence  against  law  and  right,  physical  violence 
would  be  conmiitted  against  the  protesting  audience. 

In  the  winter  of  1918  the  chiefs  of  Bolshevism  still 
refrained  from  wholesale  murders.  At  least  it  was  so  in 
Moscow  and  Petrograd.  But  in  the  provinces  the  wildest 
cruelties,  the  wickedest  and  most  senseless  crimes  were 
committed  in  the  name  of  the  revolutionary  tribunal. 
The  papers  were  full  of  such  reports.  I  take  the  first 
paper  that  comes  into  my  hand,  the  Socialist  Revolu- 
tionary Volia  Strany,  which  contains  a  report  from  the 
village  of  Sosnovka  in  the  Saratov  Province. 

A  shoemaker  refused  to  let  a  band  of  soldiers  into  his 
house  in  the  night.  They  tried  to  break  in.  The  shoe- 
maker shot  at  them.  The  military  tribunal  then 
sentenced  hiTn  to  capital  punishment  by  cutting  off 
his  head.  The  sentenced  man  asked  to  see  a  priest. 
This  was  refused  to  him.  But  his  wife  and  two  little 
daughters  were  brought  to  him.     The  scene  of  farewell 


XIV  BOLSHEVIST  GOVERNMENT  395 

was  heart-rending.  The  most  awful  thing  was  that  the 
execution  took  place  in  the  presence  of  the  family.  As 
there  were  no  experienced  executioners  then,  it  took  ten 
whole  minutes  for  one  of  the  soldiers  to  cut  the  head 
off.  At  last  he  finished  1  The  wife  went  mad.  A 
whole  series  of  similar  cases  of  the  most  brutal  applica- 
tion of  force  instead  of  law  could  be  cited. 

In  addition  to  military  tribunals,  the  taking  of 
hostages  was  instituted.  Professors,  merchants,  teachers, 
ministers,  officers,  workmen,  priests,  all  indeed  were 
arrested  who  were  not  sufficiently  yielding.  In  some 
cases  all  the  more  or  less  notable  men  of  the  town  were 
put  in  prison,  so  that  "  the  counter-revolution  should 
not  dare  raise  its  head."  In  some  cases  simply  those 
were  imprisoned  for  whom  a  ransom  could  be  paid.  To 
a  certain  extent  the  arrested  Ministers  were  meant  to 
be  hostages.  The  Bolsheviks  frankly  said  that  if  the 
Soviet  Power  was  overthrown  the  iViinisters  would  be 
made  to  pay  dearly  for  that.  By  degrees,  as  civil  war 
spread  and  the  rule  of  the  Bolsheviks  acquired  a  more 
sanguinary  character,  the  institution  of  hostages  also 
became  stained  with  blood.  Frequently  a  whole  family 
was  made  to  answer  for  one  of  its  members.^ 

In  the  meanwhile  criminality  grew  to  a  shocking 
extent.  In  Petrograd  alone,  in  January  1918,  15,000 
robberies  took  place  in  private  apartments,  and  9300 
thefts  from  shops  and  135  murders  were  committed. 
These  crimes  awoke  an  echo  in  all  classes  of  society. 
As  there  were  no  courts  of  justice,  the  dangerous  con- 
viction grew  in  every  average  comparatively  quiet  man 
that  he  must  settle  not  only  his  own  grievances  by 
punishing  his  olfender,  but  also  deal  with  any  criminal 
he  met  in  the  street.    All  over  Kussia,  not  excepting  the 

^  In  October  1918  the  wife  of  the  former  mayor  of  Moacow,  Kudneff,  was 
looked  up  in  a  Moscow  gaol    Ue  had  fled  and  she  was  imprisoned  as  hostage. 


396     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

capitals,  a  ruthless  death-penalty  was  inflicted  on  the 
thief  caught  red-handed.  They  were  killed  like  mad 
dogs  in  the  streets,  at  the  market,  or  stations,  wherever 
they  were  caught.  Sometimes  they  were  shot,  some- 
times beaten  to  death,  or  thrown  into  the  water  when 
near  a  river.  Frequently  the  real  thief  would  get  away, 
particularly  in  the  case  of  a  professional,  and  instead  of 
him  the  infuriated  crowd  would  get  hold  of  an  innocent 
man  and  make  him  pay  for  the  crime. 

The  people  in  the  street  dealt  as  cruelly  with  those 
who  were  suspected  of  being  speculators,  particularly  in 
food-stuffs,  which  were  growing  more  and  more  scarce 
and  more  difficult  to  obtain. 

One  evening  in  a  well-frequented  street,  the  Liteinaia, 
in  Petrograd,  I  encountered  an  extraordinary  proces- 
sion. I  could  not  at  first  make  out  what  it  meant.  A 
crowd  of  youngsters,  women,  soldiers,  and  civilians  with 
cries  and  threats  were  surrounding  a  cart  in  which  some 
men  were  standing  and  supporting  a  peculiar  object, 
resembling  a  scarecrow.  This  object,  thickly  covered 
with  rags  and  bits  of  paper,  was  kept  standing  upright 
on  a  barrel,  and  at  each  jolt  swayed  to  all  sides  like  a 
doll  or  a  lifeless  body.  A  pot  was  thrust  over  its  head 
covering  its  face.  From  out  of  the  pot  some  pitch  was 
dripping  on  to  the  rags.  Only  the  movements  of  the 
hands  clutching  convulsively  at  this  or  that  neighbour, 
made  me  see  that  it  was  not  a  doll  but  a  man. 

"  Whatever  is  the  matter  ?  "  I  asked  one  of  the 
women  standing  by. 

"  A  speculator  has  been  caught,"  she  answered  with 
great  excitement.  "  He's  been  hoarding  up  sour  cream 
in  his  shop.     We'll  teach  him  how  to  do  so." 

She  hurried  on,  exasperated,  but  at  the  same  time 
relieved.  This  savage  act  of  meting  out  justice  clarified 
the  anger  that  was  boiling  in  the  half-famished  popula- 


BOLSHEVIST  GOVERNMENT  397 

tion,  and  even  afforded  them  a  sense  of  moral  satis- 
faction. The  State  rulers  had  ceased  dealing  out  justice 
and  punishing  the  wrongdoers. 

The  crowd  created  for  itself  a  substitute  for  justice, 
hideous,  blind  and  merciless,  but  it  eased  the  darkened 
conscience  of  the  people. 

It  should  be  said  that  these  lynchings  and  settle- 
ments with  profiteers,  robbers,  speculators,  horse- 
thieves,  pickpockets,  and  other  transgressors  against 
what  remained  in  the  people's  mind  as  right,  and 
especially  the  claims  of  property,  began  long  before  the 
Bolshevist  regime,  at  the  time  of  the  Provisional 
Government.  All  State  service  having  fallen  to 
pieces,  there  was  nobody  to  see  that  the  laws  should 
be  observed. 

Revolution  in  itself  is  the  negation  of  all  old  laws, 
and  an  effort  to  put  something  new  in  place  of  the  old. 
But  everyday  life  demands  the  immediate  settlement  of 
various  conflicts  and  misdeeds.  Hence  the  revolutionary 
crowds  act  for  themselves.  The  Bolsheviks  have  only 
increased  and  deepened  these  conditions,  having  form- 
ally abolished  the  old  law-courts.  Here,  as  in  every- 
thing, they  evinced  that  mixture  of  dogmatic  demagogy, 
and  simple  criminality,  which  forms  the  characteristic 
peculiarity  of  Bolshevism. 

The  Provisional  Government  fought  against  the 
spirit  of  destruction,  against  hostilities  to  the  State  and 
society,  against  low  and  sometimes  brutal  instincts  by 
words  of  persuasion,  not  as  an  authority  who  makes 
demands  and  punishes  evildoers  with  the  sword,  but  as 
a  priest  with  a  cross  in  his  hand  and  a  sermon  on  his 
lips.  The  Bolsheviks  have  recognised  all  the  outbursts 
of  the  lower  instincts  of  society  as  a  lawful  manifestation 
of  the  revolutionary  will,  and  in  their  speeches  and 
articles  praised  them,   particularly  when  the  cruelty 


398     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       oh. 

shown  was  part  of  the  class  struggle  on  which  Bol- 
shevism built  its  social  relations. 

The  Soviet  Power  deprived  of  the  right  to  act  and 
the  possibility  of  expressing  their  views  those  who  dis- 
agreed with  it,  and  tried  to  sober  and  clear  the  people's 
mind  and  conscience.  After  having  destroyed  the 
people's  representation,  they  took  away  freedom  of 
speech.  The  struggle  with  the  Press  lasted  several 
months. 

By  means  of  an  armed  rising  the  Bolsheviks  threw 
down  the  Provisional  Government  in  which  their  own 
comrades,  the  Socialists,  were  in  a  majority.  The 
power  was  seized,  but  literate,  thinking,  and  especially 
writing  Russia  would  not  submit  to  the  usurpers, 
whereupon  the  Bolsheviks  simply  decided  to  shut  the 
mouths  of  their  opponents. 

On  November  10th,  the  day  when  the  decree  on  the 
establishment  of  the  Soviet  Power  appeared,  another 
decree  was  issued  regarding  the  Press,  which  may  be 
called  a  decree  for  the  muzzling  of  the  Press. 

In  the  grave  and  decisive  hour  of  the  change  of  Government, 
and  the  days  following  them,  the  Temporary  Revolutionary 
Committee  was  compelled  to  adopt  a  series  of  measures  against 
the  counter-revolutionary  press  of  various  shades.  Immediately 
on  all  sides  cries  were  raised  that  the  new  power  was  violating 
the  fundamental  principle  of  its  programme,  encroaching  on  the 
freedom  of  the  press.  The  Workmen's  and  Peasants'  Govern- 
ment draws  the  attention  of  the  people  to  the  fact  that  this 
Liberal  screen  in  our  midst  actually  conceals  the  liberty  of  the 
propertied  classes,  who  have  taken  into  their  hands  the  lion's 
ishare  of  the  whole  press,  in  order  to  be  able,  unhindered,  to 
poison  the  minds,  and  to  bring  confusion  into  the  consciousness, 
of  the  masses.  Every  one  knows  that  the  bourgeois  press  is 
one  of  the  most  powerful  weapons  of  the  bourgeoisie.  At  the 
critical  moment  when  the  new  power,  that  of  the  workmen  and 
peasants,  is  taking  firm  hold,  it  was  impossible  to  leave  the  weapon 


XIV  BOLSHEVIST  GOVERNMENT  399 

entirely  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy  at  a  time  when  it  is  as 
dangerous  as  bombs  and  machine-guns.  For  this  reason  pro- 
visional measures  have  been  taken  for  cutting  off  the  flood  of 
mud  and  slander  in  which  the  yellow  and  green  press  would 
have  willingly  drowned  the  young  conquest  of  the  people.  As 
soon  as  the  new  regime  takes  firm  root,  all  administrative 
repressive  measures  will  stop.  Complete  freedom  will  be  given 
it  within  the  boundaries  of  responsibility,  in  accordance  with 
the  widest  and  most  progressive  law  in  this  respect. 

And  pending  this  freedom  the  papers  will  be  closed 
for  the  following  offences : 

(1)  For  inciting  to  open  public  resistance  or  to  dis- 
obedience to  the  Government ;  (2)  for  sowing  troubles, 
by  means  of  an  obviously  slanderous  distortion  of  the 
facts ;  (3)  for  inciting  to  acts  which  are  of  a  criminal 
character  and  liable  to  punishment. 

The  first  two  points  were  well  known  to  the  Russian 
Press,  seeing  that  imder  Tsarism  all  prosecutions 
against  the  Press  were  based  on  accusations  of  sowing 
trouble,  and  of  disobedience  to  the  authorities.  The 
third  point  provoked  an  involuntary  smile ;  under  its 
provisions  the  Bolshevist  Press  should  have  been  the 
first  to  be  closed,  since  it  incited  to  murder  and  looting. 

At  least  in  those  days  the  Bolsheviks  tried  to  justify 
themselves. 

At  the  sitting  of  the  Central  Executive  Conmiittee  on 
November  16th  the  following  resolution  regarding  the 
Press  was  adopted : 

The  closure  of  the  bourgeois  papers  was  caused  not  only  by 
the  purely  fighting  requirements  in  the  period  of  the  rising  and 
the  suppression  of  coimter-revolutionary  attempts,  but  likewise 
as  a  necessary  temporary  measure  for  the  establishment  of  a 
new  regime  in  the  sphere  of  the  press,  under  which  the  capital 
proprietors  of  printing-works  andj  paper  would  not  be  able  to 
become  autocratic  beguilers  of  public  opinion.  .  .  .  The  re- 
establishment  of  the  so-called  freedom  of  the  press,  viz.  the 


400     FEOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch, 

simple  return  of  printing-offices  and  paper  to  capitalists, 
poisoners  of  the  people's  conscience,  would  be  an  unpermissible 
surrender  to  the  will  of  capital,  i.e.  a  counter-revolutionary 
measure. 

The  Right  Socialists,  who  were  then  still  in  the 
Committee,  protested.  Trotsky,  in  supporting  this 
resolution,  said,  "Under  conditions  of  civil  war  the 
prohibition  of  newspapers  is  a  lawful  measure.  .  .  . 
Those  measures  which  are  employed  to  frighten 
individuals  must  be  applied  to  the  Press  also.  .  .  . 
All  the  resources  of  the  Press  must  be  handed  over  to 
the  Soviet  Power.  You  say  that  formerly  we  demanded 
freedom  of  the  Press  for  the  Pravda  ?  But  then  we 
were  in  a  position  to  demand  a  minimum  programme  ; 
now  we  insist  on  the  maximum  programme.  When 
the  power  was  in  the  hands  of  the  bourgeoisie  we 
demanded  juridical  freedom  of  the  Press.  When  the 
power  is  held  by  the  workmen  and  peasants  —  we 
must  create  conditions  for  the  freedom  of  the  Press." 
(Pravda,  18th  November.) 

These  were  not  accidental  speeches  uttered  in  the 
heat  of  debate,  but  a  programme  which  Trotsky  and 
his  colleagues  carried  out  to  the  end.  Never  since  the 
Russian  Press  existed  has  it  had  to  suffer  such  prosecu- 
tions and  insults.  In  this,  as  in  all  other  spheres  of  life, 
Socialist  despotism  proved  to  be  far  harsher  than  that 
of  the  Tsar.  The  old  regime  still  reckoned  with  the  law, 
public  opinion,  and  a  certain  code  of  morals.  The 
Bolsheviks  cast  all  this  aside  as  being  bourgeois  pre- 
judices. His  Majesty  the  Proletariat  must  monopolise 
public  opinion.  His  voice  alone  might  be  heard  in  the 
country.  All  other  human  speech  must  be  silenced. 
This  assumption  was  made  as  the  foundation  of  the 
Bolshevist-Socialistic  conception  of  the  world.  On  it 
they  built,  as  it  seemed  to  them,  a  u^w  life,  which  in 


BOLSHEVIST  GOVERNMENT  401 

reality  threw  back  Russia  to  the  fifteenth  century,  if 
not  earlier.  They  trampled  with  the  fury  of  fanatics  on 
the  most  precious  inheritance  of  humanity,  freedom  of 
thought  and  speech. 

From  the  beginning  of  the  Bolshevist  rule  Russian 
journalists  of  all  opinions,  both  Socialists  and  Radicals, 
became  real  martyrs.  Sailors  armed  to  the  teeth,  Red 
Guards  in  wolf-skin  caps— perhaps  the  same  who  killed 
Dukhonin — forced  their  way  into  the  printing-works, 
scattered  about  the  type,  made  havoc  of  all  papers  and 
documents,  arrested  the  staff,  and  frequently  the 
workmen  also,  exercised  violence  over  defenceless  people 
whose  only  weapon  was  free  speech.  After  such  ex- 
ploits the  victors  sometimes  went  off,  and  sometimes 
installed  themselves  in  the  printing-works  and  news- 
paper-offices to  prevent  the  counter-revolutionaries  from 
addressing  their  readers  again. 

The  Smolny  tried  not  to  interfere  in  these  outrages, 
and  to  divest  themselves  of  all  responsibility.  The 
members  of  the  editorial  office  had  no  physical  possi- 
bility of  making  the  brigands  produce  any  document 
proving  their  right  to  make  such  raids.  In  some  cases, 
however,  the  raiders  produced  a  document.  It  is  not 
difficult  to  make  up  an  order  in  a  country  where  each 
committee,  whether  that  of  a  town,  a  district,  a  region, 
or  a  house,  represents  a  separate  authority,  or,  as  they 
say  in  Russia,  a  separate  Sovdepia.^  Any  one  of  these 
committees  and  Soviets  issued  documents,  passports, 
permits,  orders.  A  seal  was  affixed,  and  below  it  an 
illegible  signature.  With  that  kind  of  document  in 
their  hands,  bold  people  passed  through  all  the  closed 
doors,  forced  everybody  to  obey  them,  and  took  all 
they  wanted. 

1  This  word,  which  is  a  contraction  from  SO  Viet  of  the  Workmen's  DEPuties, 
has  acquired  rights  of  citizenship  in  Russia,  and  the  entire  part  of  Russia  seized 
by  the  Bobheviks  and  held  under  the  power  of  the  Soviets  is  called  "Sovdepia." 

2d 


402     PROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK      c«. 

To  newspaper-ofi&ces  they  came  not  with  documents, 
but  simply  with  rifles.  In  November,  during  the  elec- 
tions for  the  Constituent  Assembly,  the  Cadets  wished 
to  issue  an  evening  paper,  Borha  (Struggle).  I  took 
part  in  it.  We  began  the  paper  in  a  sharply  out- 
spoken, oppositional  tone.  On  the  very  first  evening 
our  paper  was  bought  wholesale  on  the  Nevsky.  And 
on  the  same  evening  several  schoolboys  selling  it  were 
arrested.  It  was  only  on  the  second  day  that  the  Red 
Guards  discovered  the  printing-office  where  the  Borba 
was  being  printed,  and  arrived  there  in  an  armed  crowd. 
They  broke  to  pieces  the  set-up  type.  They  tore  to  bits 
a  batch  of  Cadet  electoral  proclamations  and  handbills, 
and  spoilt  the  printing-machines  with  their  bayonets. 

When  I  arrived  on  the  next  day,  such  a  chaos 
reigned  in  the  spacious  premises  of  the  printing-office 
as  if  a  herd  of  oxen  had  trampled  through  it.  I  passed 
on  into  the  compositors'  room.  The  workmen  stood 
near  the  boxes  sullen  and  angry.  The  printers'  workmen 
in  Russia,  as  everywhere,  belong  to  the  most  developed 
and  best  organised  class.  Their  trade  union  existed 
even  in  the  time  of  Tsarism. 

I  knew  that  most  of  the  compositors  were  much 
more  to  the  Left  than  I.  There  were  Social- 
Revolutionaries  and  Social-Democrats  among  them. 
I  thought  that  after  such  a  raid  not  one  of  them  would 
wish  to  risk  himself  for  the  sake  of  a  Cadet  electoral 
sheet. 

"  What  have  your  comrades  done  here  yesterday  ?  " 
I  asked. 

A  unanimous  indignant  outcry  came  from  them  in 
answer : 

"  Comrades,  you  say  ?  They  are  no  comrades  of 
ours.  They  are  hooligans,  robbers,  policemen,  worse 
than  the  Tsar's  policemen." 


XIV  BOLSHEVIST  GOVERNMENT  403 

The  workmen  gathered  round  me  and  told  me  of 
the  raid  made  by  the  Reds,  of  their  threats,  of  their 
ignorance,  and  kept  on  saying  : 

"  No  comrades  of  ours,  policemen  and  nothing  else." 

"  Well,  that  means  the  end  of  our  paper,  they 
threaten  to  arrest  all  of  you  ?  "  said  I. 

"  An  end  to  the  paper  ?  By  no  means  !  How  dare 
they  gag  us  ?  If  you,  the  newspaper  staff,  are  not 
afraid,  we  don't  mean  to  surrender.  So  decide  for 
yourself." 

Scores  of  eyes  were  looking  questions  at  me. 

"  What's  there  to  decide  ?  We  must  fight  and  not 
keep  silent !  We  will  soon  give  you  the  material." 

I  saw  a  light  flash  over  their  frowning  faces,  and 
I  understood  that  in  spite  of  all  party  differences  and 
prejudices — in  spite  of  the  fact  that  my  colleagues  and 
I  represented  the  bourgeois  party  to  these  people,  a 
general  thirst  for  freedom  and  a  common  indignation 
against  the  oppressors  bound  us  together.  And  I  must 
say  that  those  moments  passed  with  the  workmen  in 
the  raided  printing-office  gave  me  then  that  stimulat- 
ing feeling  of  solidarity  which  is  essential  for  public 
work.  But  thinking  of  these  compositors  now,  I  wonder, 
with  a  heavy  heart,  what  Bolshevist  Russia  has  done 
to  them  ?  Has  she  killed  them  physically  by  starvation 
or  with  a  bullet,  or  killed  their  spirit,  that  proud  human 
feeling  of  independence  which  so  clearly  marked  our 
printers  ?  It  is  that  feeling  which  the  Bolsheviks  cannot 
stand  in  any  one. 

Notwithstanding  the  workmen's  courage,  we  issued 
only  three  numbers.  Eventually  the  Reds  came  and 
placed  a  sentry  in  the  printing  -  office.  They  were 
stronger  than  we.  The  work  had  to  be  stopped.  Borba 
(the  Struggle)  was  ended. 

These    repressive    measures    were    not    specially 


404     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       c«. 

directed  against  the  bourgeois  or  Cadet  Press.  The 
Bolsheviks  viewed  with  the  same  intolerance  all  their 
opponents,  without  any  indulgence  to  their  comrade 
Socialists,  whom  indeed  they  treated  more  contemptu- 
ously, calling  them  Social-Patriots. 

On  the  30th  November,  in  one  night,  searches  were 
made  and  ten  newspapers  were  c\o&ei—Nasha  Reck, 
Sovremennoie  Beh,  Utro,  Rabochaia  Gazeta,  Volia 
Naroda,  Trudovoe  Shvo,  Edinstvo,  and  Rabotcheie 
Delo,  the  last  six  Socialist.  One  of  the  best  printing- 
offices  in  Petrograd,  belonging  to  Suvorin,  where  three 
newspapers  were  published,  was  requisitioned  for  the 
Soldatskaia  Pravda. 

This  time  it  was  not  the  freak  of  some  enter- 
prising committee,  but  the  order  came  from  the 
Inquiry  Commission  of  the  Military  Revolutionary 
Committee.  All  the  Socialist  Committees  entered  a 
protest,  including  the  Central  Committee  of  the  Social- 
Democratic  party  to  which  the  Bolsheviks  had  belonged. 

The  Central  Committee  of  the  Social-Democratic 
party  decided  "to  bring  to  the  knowledge  of  all  the 
members  of  the  party  that  the  central  organ  of  the 
party,  the  Rabochaia  Gazeta,  is  closed  by  the  Military 
Revolutionary  Committee.  While  branding  this  as  an 
arbitrary  act  in  defiance  of  the  Russian  and  interna- 
tional proletariat,  committed  by  so-called  Socialists  on 
a  Social-Democrat  paper,  and  the  Labour  Party,  whose 
organ  it  is,  the  Central  Committee  has  decided  to  call 
upon  the  party  to  organise  a  movement  of  protest 
against  this  act  in  order  to  open  the  eyes  of  the  labour 
masses  to  the  character  of  the  regime  which  governs 
the  country." 

But  the  workmen's  eyes  were  opened,  only  much 
later,  and  as  yet  were  fixed  exclusively  on  the  Bolsheviks, 
who  continued  their  policy  of  frightfulness,  which  was 


BOLSHEVIST  GOVERNMENT  405 

incomparably  more  drastic  than  that  of  the  Tsar's 
regime.    Lenin  outdid  Stolypin. 

In  November,  immediately  after  the  accession  of 
Lenin  and  Trotsky  to  power,  all  the  newspapers  were 
closed.  Little  by  little  they  appeared,  then  were  again 
closed,  either  wholesale  or  separately.  The  editors  had 
to  conduct  humiliating  negotiations  with  the  Smolny. 
Their  papers  appeared  under  new  names.  They  had 
to  change  printing-oflBces,  and  altogether  lived  under 
martial  law,  under  a  continuous  menace  of  closure, 
searches,  arrest,  and  personal  violence  against  the  entire 
staff,  from  the  editor  down  to  the  humblest  workman. 

In  February  again  all  the  papers  were  prohibited. 
But  for  some  reason  the  chief  Cadet  paper,  Nash  Viek 
(the  former  Rech),  was  still  allowed  to  appear.  This 
made  the  editorial  staff  feel  very  uncomfortable.  Many 
of  them  thought  that  it  was  wrong  to  benefit  by  the 
right  of  appearing,  no  one  knew  why,  when  all  the 
other  organs  of  Eussian  thought  were  condemned  to 
silence.  Still  it  was  decided  to  continue  the  paper. 
This  was  the  only  tribune  from  which  the  voice  of 
reason  and  conscience  could  be  heard.  Under  what 
conditions  the  staff  worked  may  be  judged  from  the 
fact  that  when  on  the  eve  of  my  departure  from  Russia, 
in  March,  I  went  to  Nash  Viek,  to  which  I  regularly 
contributed,  and  took  with  me  a  short  paragraph 
on  a  women's  meeting  at  which  Mme.  KoUontay,  a 
zealous  Bolshevist  leader  and  Minister  of  Public  Welfare, 
spoke,  the  editor,  a  friend  of  mine,  said,  "  It  is  very 
interesting,  but  if  we  publish  it  we  shall  have  the  sailors 
coming  here  with  bayonets." 

And  he  was  right.  All  the  articles  were  considered 
in  that  light :  Would  the  Reds  come  with  their  bayonets 
or  not  ? 

In  spite  of  this,  the  Russian  journalists,  with  an 


406     FEOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       oh. 

unyielding  stubbornness,  with  the  courage  of  real 
soldiers,  led  an  unequal  and  obdurate  struggle  against 
the  Bolsheviks,  refuting  their  errors  and  exposing 
their  crimes,  the  falseness  of  their  ideas,  and  the  lunacy 
or  treachery  of  their  leaders.  Many  mistakes,  many 
slips,  many  weaknesses  and  blunders  were  committed 
by  the  Russian  Press  during  the  first  happy  period  of 
the  Russian  Revolution.  But  when  the  cruel  days  of 
the  Bolshevist  reaction  arrived,  those  same  journalists 
showed  that  those  were  errors  of  logic  and  not  of  con- 
science. They  did  not  go  into  the  camp  of  the  victors, 
would  make  no  concessions  or  compromise.  This  was 
a  real  heroic  struggle  not  only  for  freedom  of  speech, 
but  for  a  free  united  Russia.  And  the  Russian  intelli- 
gentsia has  the  right  to  say  with  pride  that  in  the 
darkest  year  of  the  fierce  tyranny  the  Russian  journalists, 
literally  at  the  risk  of  their  lives,  remained  at  their  posts, 
standing  out  for  the  real  interests  of  the  people  against 
a  band  of  fanatics,  traitors,  and  hypocrites. 

There  was  much  embitterment  in  this  struggle, 
without  speaking  of  the  dangers.  The  well-known 
publicist,  B.  Miakotin,  one  of  the  editors  of  the  popular 
Socialistic  review,  RussJcoe  Bogatstvo,  belonging  to  the 
party  of  the  Populist-Socialists,  was  in  the  printing- 
office  of  the  Volia  Naroda  when  the  Reds  broke  in. 
They  behaved  with  violence,  threw  about  the  tjipe, 
and  took  away  the  manuscripts.  B.  Miakotin  had 
suffered  imprisonment  and  was  sent  to  exile  during 
the  Tsar's  regime.  He  was  really  of  the  Left,  irreconcil- 
able to  the  last  degree,  and  even  considered  the  Cadets 
as  not  sufficiently  democratic.  Seeing  how  the  agents 
of  the  Socialistic  Government  were  behaving  with  his 
paper,  B.  Miakotin  cried  out  indignantly,  "  I  would 
have  preferred  to  see  my  paper  closed  by  the  gendarmes 
of  the  Tsar  than  by  these  hooligans," 


xiv  BOLSHEVIST  GOVERNMENT  407 

And  the  hooligans  continued  their  destructive  work. 
They  tried  to  weaken  the  Press  by  means  of  threats, 
arrests,  and  prosecutions  of  journalists.  This  was  of 
no  avail.  They  made  advertisements  a  Government 
monopoly,  having  correctly  reckoned  that  this  would  be 
a  heavy  material  blow  to  the  papers.  But  even  this  was 
of  no  avail,  seeing  that  the  journalists  made  every  sacri- 
fice provided  they  had  some  means  of  expressing  them- 
selves. The  Bolsheviks  requisitioned  most  of  the  print- 
ing -  offices  and  the  paper.  But  seeing  that  most  of  the 
printers  were  opposed  to  the  Soviet,  there  was  always 
some  way  of  printing  a  paper.  Finally,  in  July  1918, 
the  Bolsheviks  definitely,  as  they  say  themselves,  closed 
the  papers  for  ever.  Since  then  in  the  part  of  Russia 
seized  by  them  there  is  no  Press,  except  the  official 
Bolshevist  organs.  The  dictatorship  of  the  proletariat, 
as  the  Bolsheviks  themselves  call  their  regime,  has 
killed  the  freedom  of  the  Press,  or  better  to  say  killed 
the  Press  itself.  So  it  became  clear  that  free,  human 
speech,  the  foundation  of  civilised  comity,  as  indeed  of 
all  other  liberties,  of  all  the  fimdamental  rights  of  the 
man  and  citizen,  was  incompatible  with  a  Socialistic 
State. 

The  Bolshevist  power  showed  that  any  despotism, 
whether  that  of  the  Tsar  or  of  Socialism,  is  compelled 
to  have  recourse  to  identical  repressive  measures,  and 
make  use  of  the  same  terminology. 

In  addressing  the  Moslems,  Lenin  generously  pro- 
mised them  the  inviolability  of  their  beliefs  and  customs. 
But  with  regard  to  the  ruling  religion  among  the  Russian 
people,  the  Orthodox  Church,  the  Soviet  of  the  People's 
Commissaries  did  not  deem  fit  to  observe  this  inviol- 
ability. It  displayed  not  only  disrespect,  but  derision 
for  the  religious  feeling  of  Orthodox  people. 

The  Revolution  brought  great  trials  to  the  Orthodox 


408     PROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

Churcli.  During  tlie  first  period,  it  is  true,  she  was 
treated  with  great  consideration.  To  protect  her  in- 
terests and  to  effect  within  her  the  necessary  reforms 
a  new  Ministry  was  created,  called  the  Ministry  of 
Cults,  under  the  direction  of  a  gifted  young  philosopher, 
Anton  Kartashefi.  He  was  the  very  man  for  the  post.. 
With  a  small  group  of  writers  and  scholars  he  had  long 
endeavoured  to  arouse  the  Orthodox  Church  from  her 
lethargy,  and  to  set  new  ideals  before  her  ignorant  and 
indolent  priests. 

After  the  Revolution  all  their  discussions  bore  fruit. 
Kartasheff,  as  Minister  of  Public  Worship,  was  able  to 
give  practical  effect  to  the  proposals  for  Church  reform. 
It  was  not  easy  work.  The  clergy,  bewildered  by  the 
Revolution,  unaccustomed  either  to  think  or  to  act,  were 
a  feeble  support.  When  at  the  end  of  August  a  Church 
Council  met  in  Moscow,  for  the  first  time  for  two  hundred 
years,  the  event  was  barely  noticed  by  the  general 
public,  absorbed  as  it  was  in  the  whirl  of  revolutionary 
politics.  For  the  first  two  weeks  the  proceedings  were 
languid  and  formal.  But  the  guns  of  the  Bolshevist 
insurrection  roused  the  spirit  of  the  Church.  To  the 
sound  of  the  bombardment  of  the  Kremlin  the  Council 
elected  a  Patriarch. 

The  Bolsheviks  were  not  slow  in  showing  their 
hostility  to  the  Church.  Kartasheff,  with  the  other 
members  of  the  Provisional  Government,  was  thrown 
into  the  fortress,  where  for  four  months  he  lay  under 
the  constant  menace  of  death.  In  Tsarskoye  Selo,  when 
Kerensky's  troops  were  fighting  the  Red  Guard,  a  priest 
ventured  to  pray  publicly  for  the  cessation  of  civil  strife. 
The  Reds  took  him  out  into  a  square  and  shot  him  before 
the  eyes  of  his  son.  But  these  were  isolated  acts.  Later 
the  Church  was  subjected  to  systematic  persecution. 

On  27th  January  a  hundred  armed  sailors  entered 


XIV 


BOLSHEVIST  GOVERNMENT  409 


the  Alexander  Nevsky  Monastery,  declaring  that  they 
had  come  to  inspect  the  buildings  and  requisition  them 
for  hospital  purposes.  The  order  came  from  the  Com- 
missary for  Social  Welfare,  Madame  Kollontay,  a  mili- 
tant atheist,  whose  logical  capacity  is  not  so  strong  as 
her  revolutionary  ardour. 

The  appearance  of  Bolshevist  soldiers  within  the 
monastery  enclosure  aroused  intense  excitement  among 
the  parishioners.  On  2nd  February  fifteen  soldiers  came 
with  a  commissary  appointed  to  take  over  the  build- 
ings. When  they  demanded  the  keys  of  Bishop  Proko- 
pius  the  church  bells  rang  out.  At  once  several  thou- 
sands of  men  and  women,  including  a  few  soldiers,  ran 
to  the  rescue.  The  Reds  were  disarmed  and  arrested ; 
machine-gunners  were  sent  to  relieve  them,  and  in  the 
shooting  that  followed  a  priest  named  Skipetroff  was 
mortally  wounded. 

Now  the  Alexander  Nevsky  Monastery  had  its 
martyr,  and  the  sins  of  the  monks  were  forgotten.  The 
monastery  at  once  became  a  centre  of  that  new  piety 
of  suffering  in  which  the  people,  worn  out  by  the  con- 
stant disturbances  and  the  conflicting  appeals  of  endless 
political  orators,  sought  support  and  comfort,  counsel 
and  repose.  On  the  following  Sunday  a  great  Church 
procession  was  arranged  as  a  protest  against  the  sac- 
rilege and  murder,  and  all  the  churches  of  Petrograd 
were  invited  to  take  part. 

Never,  not  even  in  the  first  days  of  the  war,  had 
the  cold,  sceptical  capital  seen  such  an  outburst  of  re- 
ligious fervour.  About  200,000  people  thronged  the 
square  before  the  Kazan  Cathedral  and  the  neighbour- 
ing streets.  Church  banners  waved  like  standards  of 
a  new  army  ;  above  the  sea  of  people  rose  the  familiar 
figures  of  the  saints  on  hundreds  and  hundreds  of  icons  ; 
and  the  whole  procession  moved  to  the  Alexander 


410     FEOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

Nevsky  Monastery  singing  prayers  and  psalms.  Though 
it  was  the  depth  of  winter,  they  sang  most  loudly  and 
earnestly  of  all  the  Easter  prayer,  **  Christ  is  risen  from 
the  dead."  It  was  as  though  they  looked  for  a  miracle. 
And  not  in  vain.  These  thousands  of  people,  differing 
so  in  position,  education,  and  ideas,  but  united  in  one 
powerful  religious  impulse,  themselves  without  know- 
ing it,  constituted  a  miracle  of  ecclesiastical  revival. 
And  the  centre  of  this  miracle  was  that  same  Alexander 
Nevsky  Monastery  which  had  seemed  hopelessly  petrified 
in  official  splendour  and  worldly  wealth.  The  wave  of 
revival  spread  all  over  Russia,  from  town  to  town, 
bringing  strength  and  courage  and  enlightenment. 

But  the  Bolsheviks  were  intent  on  carrying  out  their 
programme.  On  the  eve  of  this  Church  procession, 
which  aroused  and  amazed  Petrograd,  they  published 
their  decree  for  the  separation  of  Church  and  State. 
Intrinsically  there  is  nothing  criminal  in  the  idea  of 
separation ;  it  is  obviously  a  question  for  frank  and 
simple  discussion  ;  but  the  decree  came  from  a  band  of 
usurpers,  most  of  whom  were  not  even  Orthodox.  It 
was  imposed  on  the  people.  Its  whole  tone,  and  still 
more  the  acts  of  the  Soviet  Government,  were  imbued 
with  hostility  to  the  Church.  The  Church  was  deprived 
of  all  her  rights,  and  was  not  so  much  separated  from 
the  State  as  placed  in  complete  subjection  to  the  secular 
power.  "  Ecclesiastical  and  religious  societies  have 
no  right  to  own  property.  All  properties  of  ecclesi- 
astical and  religious  societies  existing  in  Russia  are  de- 
clared to  be  the  property  of  the  people.  Buildings 
and  objects  intended  for  use  in  religious  services  are 
to  be  handed  over  by  a  special  decree  of  the  local  or 
central  authorities  for  use,  free  of  charge,  by  the  cor- 
responding religious  society." 

That  is  to  say,  if  the  secular  authorities  so  will  it, 


1 


BOLSHEVIST  GOVERNMENT  411 

the  doors  of  a  church  may  be  closed  in  the  face  of  the 
parishioners.  In  a  supplementary  order  Madame  Kol- 
lontay  explained  :  "  Church  services  may  be  continued 
if  a  petition  to  that  effect  is  made  by  the  collective  of 
believers — a  typically  Bolshevist  perversion  of  the  Russian 
language — ^who  must  pledge  themselves  to  imdertake 
the  repair  and  maintenance  of  the  buildings  and  staff." 

By  all  these  orders  the  freedom  of  conscience  pro- 
claimed at  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution  was  abolished. 
It  is  worth  noting  that  these  measures  applied  only  to 
the  Orthodox  Church.  Other  religious  communities, 
such  as  the  Lutherans,  Mohammedans,  Jews,  and  others 
were  untouched. 

Having  in  mind  how  submissively  the  Russian  Church 
accepted  her  degradation  at  the  hands  of  Rasputin  it 
might  have  been  thought  that  she  would  meekly  endure 
anything.  But  one  of  the  causes  of  the  submission  of 
the  Church  authorities  to  Rasputin  was  the  fact  that 
the  Tsar  was  the  official  head  of  the  Church.  Now  they 
were  their  own  masters ;  they  were  free  to  act,  and  they 
rose  in  indignant  protest.  Their  one  head  was  the 
Patriarch,  and  they  listened  to  his  voice.  He  declared 
his  will  firmly.  In  reply  to  the  separation  decree,  the 
Church  Council  in  Moscow  formally  anathematised  the 
Bolsheviks.  To  all  the  churches  was  sent  an  epistle 
from  the  Patriarch  cursing  the  usurpers  as  "  sons  of 
perdition,'*  who  were  crucifying  the  Church  and  had 
sold  Russia  to  the  hereditary  enemy  of  the  Slavs — 
Germany. 

This  epistle  of  the  Patriarch  is  the  boldest  and  most 
solemn  and  public  protest  that  has  yet  been  made  against 
the  Bolshevist  Power. 

It  was  impossible  to  print  it  in  full.  The  papers 
that  printed  extracts  from  it  were  punished  with  fines 
and  suspension.    Moscow  expected  that  the  Patriarch 


412     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

liimself  would  be  arrested,  but  the  Bolsheviks  did  not 
dare. 

Like  all  the  Bolshevist  decrees,  the  decree  for  the 
separation  of  the  Church  was  not  systematically  carried 
out.  But  the  attitude  of  the  Government  encouraged 
all  the  elements  of  anarchy  and  disorder,  and  the  transfer 
of  the  churches  and  monasteries  to  the  local  Soviets  in 
many  cases  gave  the  mob  a  welcome  opportunity  for 
plunder.  Churches  were  robbed.  In  the  Kremlin  itself, 
where  at  every  gate  and  at  every  corner  stood  a  Bol- 
shevist guard,  ''  unknown  "  robbers  carried  off  from  the 
Patriarch's  sacristy  in  the  Cathedral  of  the  Assumption 
tens  of  millions'  worth  of  ancient  Church  treasures. 
Naturally  the  robbers  were  not  discovered.  More  than 
that,  priests  were  insulted  and  beaten,  bishops  were 
imprisoned,  church  processions  were  violently  dispersed, 
and  in  Kiev  the  Metropolitan  Vladimir  was  shot  dead. 

The  attitude  of  the  people  to  the  various  anti-Church 
measures — for  instance,  to  the  new  institute  of  civil 
marriage  and  simplified  divorce — ^is  one  of  distrust. 
There  was  considerable  excitement  last  May  when  the 
registers  of  births,  deaths,  and  marriages  were  taken 
from  the  churches.  The  Soviet  Government  found  it 
necessary  to  appeal  to  the  population  of  Moscow,  on 
22nd  May,  in  a  long  declaration,  in  which  they  explain 
that  they  have  established  complete  liberty  of  conscience. 
Every  man  may  believe  as  he  chooses.  "  But  the 
Church  controlled  not  only  the  souls  of  men,  but  a  large 
capital.  The  people  paid  its  last  farthing  for  gold 
settings  for  icons,  diamond  headgear,  all  the  splendour  of 
the  churches,  all  the  luxury  in  which  the  Church  auth- 
orities bathed.  The  People's  Commissaries  have  taken 
all  this  from  the  churchmen  and  given  it  back  to  the 
people.  Let  the  workmen  and  peasants  dispose  of 
Church  property  and  not  the  clerical  authorities." 


ttv  BOLSHEVIST  GOVERNMENT  413 

Thus  here,  too,  the  principles  of  the  dictatorship  of 
the  proletariat  were  applied.  The  churches  were  placed 
at  the  disposal,  not  of  the  faithful,  not  of  the  parish, 
not  of  those  who  cared  for  the  church  and  for  the  means 
of  worship,  but  of  those  who  had  seized  power  by  force 
of  arms.  So  invaders  sometimes  treat  an  alien  religion 
in  a  conquered  land. 

But  the  men  who  call  themselves  the  People's 
Government  fought  the  Church  as  a  political  and  social 
enemy.  "  The  Church  has  always  served  the  rich  and 
not  the  poor,  and  therefore  when  the  ancient  oppressors 
started  a  campaign  against  the  workers,'*  so  continues 
this  declaration,  written  in  a  climisy  imitation  of  the 
popular  style,  "  the  managers  of  the  Church  went  with 
the  oppressors.  They  raised  the  cry  that  the  Soviet 
Government  was  polluting  holy  things,  oppressing  the 
faith,  robbing  Church  property.  They  rang  the  curfew, 
organised  religious  processions,  called  on  the  faithful  to 
revolt,  cursed  the  People's  Government,  provoked  fight- 
ing and  pogroms.  On  the  pretext  of  defending  Church 
property  they  attacked  the  workers  and  tried  to  destroy 
their  freedom.  They  begin  by  lying,  and  then  call  on 
the  people  to  commit  crimes." 

There  is  a  strange  irony  in  the  charge  that  the 
Church  is  destroying  the  liberty  of  the  workers  when  all 
liberty  is  destroyed  in  Russia,  when  not  only  the  body 
of  the  Orthodox  Church,  but  the  body  of  the  whole 
Russian  land,  is  torn  asunder  by  the  fortnula  proclaimed 
by  Karl  Marx  in  his  famous  Communist  manifesto  : 
"  Expropriate  the  expropriators." 

But  surely,  if  there  is  a  vital  principle  in  the  Church, 
the  loss  of  material  goods  will  not  weaken,  but  strengthen 
her.  And  that  is  just  what  is  happening  in  the  Russian 
Church.  Within  her,  new  leaders  are  coming  to  the 
front,  new  characters  are  being  formed ;    and  from 


414     FKOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ca. 

without  there  are  gravitating  to  her  honest  patriots  who 
long  for  the  resurrection  of  a  united  Russia.  Among 
the  Orthodox  are  people  of  various  classes  and  various 
political  views ;  but  it  is  possible  that  there  are  few 
Socialists  among  them,  and  that  is  a  cause  of  alarm  to 
those  who  wish  to  see  Russia  continuing  her  Socialistic 
experiments. 

In  the  people,  certainly,  a  great  change  has  taken 
place.  Some  have  yielded  to  the  temptation  of  a  cheap 
atheism.  Others,  on  the  contrary,  came  closer  to  the 
Church  and  valued  it  as  one  of  the  few  remaining 
embodiments  of  Holy  Russia. 

On  one  of  the  Sundays  in  January  1918  I  went  out, 
after  morning  service,  from  the  ancient  Chudov  Mon- 
astery in  the  Kremlin.  Its  red-brick  walls  were  muti- 
lated with  traces  of  bombardment.  On  the  walls,  over 
the  windows,  and  under  the  roof  pieces  were  torn  out. 
That  had  happened  in  the  November  days,  when 
the  Bolsheviks  were  attacking  the  Whites  who  had 
sought  refuge  in  the  Kremlin.  The  Kremlin  was  bom- 
barded from  the  Vorobyevy  Hills.  The  shells  hit  the 
palace,  the  Church  of  the  Twelve  Apostles,  blew  off  the 
head  of  one  of  the  towers,  pierced  the  cupola  of  the 
ancient  Uspensky  Cathedral.  But  the  Chudov  Mon- 
astery, in  which  was  situated  at  one  time  the  Patri- 
archal School — ^this  symbol  of  the  first  Russian  Uni- 
versity— suffered  most  of  all.  The  old  walls,  bmlt  as 
far  back  as  in  th%  fifteenth  century,  withstood  the  siege. 
The  church  remained  whole,  and  in  it,  as  in  all  the 
Kremlin  churches  in  that  winter,  the  customary  services 
were  held.  The  churches  and  the  great  spaces  in  front 
of  them  were  crowded  with  people. 

Below,  near  the  archway  of  the  monastery,  voices 
were  heard  humming.  Disputes  went  on — the  con- 
fusing, agitating  discussions  which  for  a  whole  year 


XIV  BOLSHEVIST  GOVERNMENT  416 

have  filled  Russia  with  the  noise  and  strife  of  verbal 
chaos.  This  time  they  were  not  foreign  comments,  nor 
bookish  echoes,  but  deep-felt  sentiments  arising  from 
the  very  bottom  of  the  troubled  sea.  Women's  voices 
sounded  louder  and  more  assertive  than  the  men's. 

"  They  want  everything  for  themselves,"  shouted 
a  yoimg  woman,  evidently  closing  a  series  of  arguments ; 
"  it  will  be  necessary  to  get  these  out  also.  And  who 
will  suffer  from  all  this  ?  Again  we.  Again  the  people. 
And  they  will  certainly  run  away." 

"  They'll  run  away  !  they'll  run  away  !  "  passed  as 
an  echo  through  the  crowd. 

An  angry  soldier's  bass  voice  interjected  and  put  the 
question,  which  seemed  absurd,  but  was  very  near  to 
this  crowd : 

"  You  just  tell  me,  have  you  seen  the  Cadets  in  the 
trenches  ?  They  fought  here ;  but  have  you  seen  them 
in  the  trenches  ?  " 

Another  woman's  voice  with  a  note  of  hysteria 
answered  sharply : 

"  Well,  what  of  that,  that  they  were  Cadets  ? 
They  protected  our  Holy  things.  They  did  right.  For 
you  they  are  nothing ;  only  stones  :  for  us  they  are 
Holy.  And  we  shall  defend  them  to  the  last." 
*'  But  who  touched  your  Holy  things  ?  " 
A  storm  of  voices  arose  all  round.  Not  so  much 
angry,  as  reproachful  words  flew  out : 

"  But  look  at  our  cathedrals.  And  what  have  you 
done  in  our  Alexander  Nevsky  Monastery  ?  .  .  .  And 
who  killed  the  priest  ?  Have  they  a  God  at  all  ?  .  .  . 
They  behave  as  if  accursed  by  the  power  of  Anti- 
Christ.  .  .  ." 

At  the  other  end  a  man's  hoarse  and  hasty  voice 
was  heard  attacking : 

"  Well,  that's  what  I  say,  enough  of  all  christenings. 


416     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       o«. 

I  don't  wish,  you  understand,  to  be  christened.  That's 
why  the  law  was  issued.^  Why  christening  ?  We  must 
drop  it.     I  don't  wish  it." 

An  aged  woman  with  a  shawl  over  her  head  stood 
up  on  her  tip-toes  the  better  to  see  the  scoffer.  She 
then  turned  to  me  and  said  with  contempt  in  her  voice  : 

"  I  knew  it.  He  has  a  dark  face.  They  all  have 
dark  faces." 

This  is  how  she  probably  saw  it.  It  was  however 
not  at  all  dark,  but  the  most  ordinary  grey  soldier's 
face  ;  young  and  unbearded  ;  strained  with  the  arduous, 
to  him  unaccustomed,  verbal  struggle.  The  soldier 
sincerely  believed  that  he  was  in  the  right.  But  around 
him  stood  indignant  people  thinking  otherwise.  It  was 
not  so  much  their  words  as  their  malevolent  looks  that 
pricked  the  soldier  like  needles.  And  one  could  not 
even  call  the  opponents  bourgeois,  they  were  of  the 
same  class  as  himself.  The  soldier  got  angry,  and  in 
repelling  the  attacks  on  him  grew  more  violent. 

"  Well,  don't  get  christened.  Who  forces  you  to  it  ? 
But  do  no  violence  against  others ;  don't  prevent  them 
from  believing  in  God  if  they  wish  to,"  calmly  said  a 
man  of  an  intelligent  aspect. 

"  Ah !  so ;  now  it  means  do  no  violence  .  .  .  And 
when  violence  was  done  against  me,  where  were  you  ? 
When  my  blood  was  sucked,  didn't  you  see  it  ?  " 

"  Who  sucked  it  ?  Have  we  done  so  ?  What's  the 
use  of  talking  such  nonsense  ?  " 

An  aged  woman  said  with  contempt : 

"  May  be  the  Holy  things  sucked  your  blood ;  that's 
why  you  attacked  our  Orthodox  Church." 

"  Well,  I  won't  have  them  christen  me.  .  .  .  Let 
them  try,  and  I  will  christen  them.  ..." 

1  The  law  was,  that  all  the  registers  should  be  withdrawn  from  the  churches 
and  given  over  to  the  civil  authorities. 


XIV  BOLSHEVIST  GOVERNMENT  417 

And  with  a  threat  he  raised  his  fist  over  the  woman's 
head.  A  laugh,  the  disdainful  laugh  of  people  who  are 
not  more  to  be  frightened  by  any  threats,  passed  through 
the  crowd. 

"  You  should  have  said  so  before.  .  .  .  You  only 
know  the  fist.  .  .  .  We've  always  seen  that  from  the 
policemen.     That's  an  old  dodge." 

And  again  a  sonorous  woman's  voice  was  heard  : 

"  And  still  we  shall  never  give  up  our  Holy  things." 

This  phrase,  "  Holy  things,"  beat  like  a  white  bird 
over  the  tortuous  confusion  of  ideas.  Together  with  the 
pigeons  it  circled  round  the  Kremlin  square  between  the 
belfries  and  the  cupolas,  over  the  damaged  red  monastery 
wall,  and  rose  towards  the  golden  crosses  of  the  ancient 
cathedrals,  over  which  a  short  time  ago  the  shells  had 
whistled.  And  it  descended  again  to  the  earth,  flew 
over  the  crowd,  was  repeated  from  mouth  to  mouth,  with 
a  prayer,  with  derision,  with  fear,  with  anger,  with  faith, 
with  pangs  of  expectation,  with  joy  and  hope.  The 
utterances  soimded  broken  and  unconnected.  They  did 
not  contain  any  of  the  ready  harmony  of  a  Cabinet  or 
public-meeting  eloquence.  But  one  felt  drawn  to  them 
by  the  force  of  reproach,  sadness,  and  wrath  in  the 
people.  Three  surly  -  looking  soldiers  with  rifles 
approached.  They  listened  for  a  moment,  and  exchanged 
glances  with  each  other. 

'*  We'll  have  to  fetch  the  sentry.  It  is  time  they 
were  dispersed,"  said  one  of  them  aloud,  and  disappeared. 

The  other  two  remained.  They  listened  silently 
and  gloomily.  May  be  they  thought  of  their  old  church 
in  their  village,  and  the  dark  icons  in  the  comer  of  their 
room  in  the  cottage,  and  the  whole  habitual  form  of 
the  Orthodox  rite  to  which  they  were  used  from  their 
childhood. 

But,    generally     speaking,     the     soldiers,     having 

2  E 


418     FEOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

succumbed  to  Bolshevism,  began  openly  to  break  with 
religion.  Whether  they  were  infected  by  the  simplicity 
of  Socialistic  rationalism,  or  whether  they  felt  them- 
selves banished  from  sacraments,  they  are  less  frequently 
seen  in  a  church.  In  the  religious  processions  which 
rallied  hundreds  of  thousands  of  devotees  that  winter 
least  of  all  were  soldiers  seen. 

And  yet  these  religious  processions  have  taken  hold 
of  a  great  number  of  people  who  formerly  kept  far  from 
the  church.  So  tormentingly  heavy  became  Russian 
life,  so  difficult  it  came  to  be  to  find  protection  on 
earth,  that  involuntarily  eyes  were  raised  to  heaven. 

At  the  end  of  January  I  had  occasion  to  take  part 
in  one  of  these  great  Church  processions. 

This  was  also  in  the  Kremlin,  in  the  so-called  Red 
Square,  near  the  renowned  church  of  Vassili  Blazhenny. 
From  all  parts  of  Moscow,  from  all  its  innumerable 
churches,  separate  processions  of  parishioners  arrived. 
One  after  another  these  processions  reached  the  square 
and  a  golden  sea  of  icons  and  banners  swayed  over  the 
crowd.  They  shone  like  lamps  in  the  twilight  of  the 
day.  New  and  old,  simple  and  luxurious,  they  stood 
firmly,  like  an  army  called  for  review  by  some  sovereign 
order.  Around  them  pressed  scores  and  thousands  of 
people,  expectant,  and  shedding  forth  their  emotion, 
griefs,  and  hopes  in  prayers  and  chants.  And  although 
snow  lay  on  the  ground — ^it  was  deep  winter — and  a 
long  way  off  till  the  spring  feast  of  Easter,  they  con- 
tinuously repeated  the  Easter  prayer  :  "  Christ  is  risen 
from  the  dead.  ..." 

From  above,  the  images  of  the  saints  we  all  know 
from  our  childhood  looked  at  the  praying  people.  The 
Mother  of  God,  with  white  hands  raised,  beseeched  the 
Lord.  Saint  Nicholas,  with  the  sign  of  a  cross,  was 
blessing  the  people  below.    Our  Saviour,  the  Apostles, 


BOLSHEVIST  GOVERNMENT  419 

and  the  Saints — all  from  the  height  of  the  banners  were 
gazing  on  the  troubled,  tortured,  wounded,  suffering, 
human  herd. 

The  Kremlin  bells  rang,  announcing  to  the  people 
that  the  Patriarch  was  coming  to  pray  together  with 
the  people.  In  front  of  him  were  carried  slowly,  one 
after  another,  the  Kremlin  Holy  things,  ornamentally 
wrought,  magnificent,  ancient,  through  the  narrow 
fortress  arches.  As  if  in  honour  of  their  elder  brothers 
the  flickering  rows  of  the  church  banners  already 
crowding  the  square  gave  way  to  them.  Excitedly  and 
nervously,  rarely  exchanging  a  word  here  and  there, 
the  crowd  awaited  the  Patriarch,  the  only  man  entitled 
to  consider  himself  the  representative  of  all  Russia. 
And  not  only  the  faces,  but  it  seemed  that  hearts  also 
turned  to  that  spot  where,  below  the  golden  mitre  of 
Patriarch  Tikhon,  slowly  floated  the  dark  purple,  gold- 
embroidered  banners  of  the  Uspensky  Cathedral. 

The  images  of  the  Saints  waved  over  the  crowd  as 
though  they  blessed  the  people,  disgraced,  hungry, 
wearied  in  body  and  spirit,  not  expecting  intercession 
from  any  one  on  earth. 

In  the  middle  of  the  square,  on  a  platform,  the 
Patriarch,  surrounded  by  the  senior  clergy,  ofiB.ciated  at 
a  divine  service.  Their  voices  were  not  heard,  the  words 
of  the  prayers  were  not  heard.  But  in  the  breathing  of 
the  crowd  of  many  thousands,  welded  in  one  sorrow, 
one  longing,  was  heard  a  single  prayer  rising  to  the 
grey  low  sky  : 

"  Lord,  save  and  protect  the  Russian  land.  .  .  ." 

Who  may  not  be  found  here  ?  ...  It  is  not  one 
class,  not  one  party.  It  is  simply  the  Russian  people 
in  all  their  variety.  And  many,  many  women,  young 
and  old,  girls  humble  and  high.  Many  wept,  not  trying 
at  all  to  hide  their  tears.    And  yet  a  kind  of  satisfaction, 


420    PROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK    ch.  xiv 

some  relief  was  felt  by  all  from  the  joint  prayer  in  the 
midst  of  a  town  filled  with  devout  traditions  of  the  past, 
full  of  reminiscences  of  the  mighty  and  ancient  Russian 
State. 

Indeed,  it  was  long  ago,  many  centuries  ago,  that 
Moscow  lived  through  foreign  invasion  and  troubles 
and  all  kind  of  disturbances.  She  fought  with  her 
enemies,  overcame  them,  again  leading  the  Russian 
people  out  into  the  wide  historic  road.  Then  also,  in 
front  of  these  Moscow  Holy  things,  the  people's  prayer 
sounded : 

"  Lord,  save  and  protect  the  Russian  land  !  " 


CHAPTER  XV 

EVERYDAY  LIFE 

Chaos — Legends — House  -  Committees  —  Litellectuals  Begging —  Soldiers 
from  Rumania — Russians  fighting  Russians — Streets — Dnmken  Pog- 
roms— Robbers  and  Hunger — Murder  of  the  Brothers  Guenglezi — 
Sadism. 

I  AM  nearing  the  end  of  my  book,  and  I  would  like  to 
give  an  idea,  on  general  lines  at  least,  of  the  ways  of 
everyday  life  during  the  first  four  and  a  half  months 
of  the  Bolshevist  reign.  Towards  the  end  of  March  I 
left  Russia,  but,  according  to  the  papers  and  to  the 
descriptions  of  Russians  who  left  after  me,  the  chief 
features  of  everyday  life  remained  the  same,  growing 
sharper  only,  harder  to  bear,  as  a  deeper  stream  of 
blood  flowed  over  my  country. 

In  revolution,  as  in  war,  an  enormous  part  has  to 
be  allotted  to  the  incredible  and  fantastical — a  part 
surpassing  anything  .that  our  imagination  is  accustomed 
to  suggest.  Events  in  prospect  or  in  thrilling  retrospect, 
people  turning  into  heroes,  leaders,  or  at  least  facile 
interpreters  of  popular  will,  the  unexpected  strength  of 
some  of  them  and  the  weakness  of  others,  success 
and  ruin,  heroism  and  crime — everybody  and  every- 
thing moves  along  unexpected  lines,  adopts  unaccus- 
tomed shapes  which  our  reason  is  too  slow  to 
comprehend. 

Thinking  people  become  depressed  and  overburdened 

421 


422     FEOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

on  realising  the  fact  that  revolution  does  not  develop 
logically,  but  appears  to  contemporaries  as  a  series  of 
nonsensical  and  meaningless  accidents.  From  a  distance 
only,  when  time  has  cooled  and  crystallised  the  revolu- 
tionary lava,  it  will  be  possible  to  evaluate  and  compre- 
hend the  dimensions  of  the  eruption  and  the  depth  of 
the  social  fissures  it  has  occasioned.  Meanwhile,  when 
action  is  still  developing,  when  history  with  maddening 
quickness  is  writing  under  our  eyes  its  mysterious 
records,  even  learned  scribes  and  philosophers  in  most 
cases  lose  their  heads  and  prove  too  slow  in  their  com- 
prehension of  the  proper  meaning  of  events.  Labouring 
under  immense  difficulties,  thought  is  driving  its  way 
through  a  chaos  resulting  from  the  ruins  of  a  shattered 
order  of  life,  and  faints  for  want  of  a  guiding  genius. 
To  this  accidental  disorder  intentional  disorder  of 
speech  was  added.  The  Socialists  endeavoured  to  clothe 
the  naked  body  of  Russia  in  revolutionary  phraseology. 
The  air  grew  thick  with  meaningless,  and  therefore 
especially  intoxicating,  dogmatical  speechifpng.  Reality 
quickly  and  mercilessly  disclosed  all  the  nonsense 
secreted  in  it,  but  a  sort  of  mania  of  words  went  on 
developing,  as  if  an  invisible  wizard  had  let  loose 
amongst  the  people  his  magical  formulae,  bewitching 
the  crowd  by  collective  hypnosis,  as  those  mediaeval 
legends  relate  which  we  were  wont  to  read  with  sceptical 
smiles. 

"  Peace  to  cottages.  War  to  palaces " ;  but  is  a 
democratic  peace  possible  when  Trotsky  himself  says 
that  "  an  unfortunate  peace  "  has  to  be  accepted  from 
the  German  Generals,  which  by  order  from  Kaiser 
William  they  will  enforce  upon  Russia  ? 

"  Self-determination  of  peoples  "  ;  but  at  the  same 
time  blood  is  flowing  on  the  Don,  in  the  Ukraine,  in 
Esthonia,  in  every  remote  township,  and  Red  troops 


EVERYDAY  LIFE  423 

disperse  by  the  force  of  arms  not  only  the  meeting  of 
White  Russians  in  Minsk,  but  also  the  meeting  of  Great 
Russians  in  Moscow. 

All  intellectuals  are  declared  suspect,  as  "  servants 
of  the  bourgeoisie,*'  At  the  same  time  a  Bolshevist 
Commissary,  having  conquered  the  rich  city  of  Kharkoff 
(according  to  revolutionary  terminology  this  was  called 
"  moving  the  front  from  abroad  into  the  interior  "), 
does  not  know  how  to  proceed  and  sends  to  the  official 
paper,  Izvestia,  the  following  nonsensical  telegram : 
"  Town  all  right.  Armoured  car  patrolling  streets 
introduces  quiet.  Capitalists  will  pay  indemnity,  other- 
wise we  shall  enforce  payment.  Meantime  necessary  to 
support  workers  in  mines,  factories.  Employers  fled, 
and  we  require  technical  specialists  to  take  industry  in 
our  hands." 

Later  on,  similar  despairing  telegrams  are  sent  by 
leaders  of  food -commandeering  expeditions  from  vill- 
ages, where  they  search  for  bread  :  "  No  poor  peasants 
found  in  village.  All  are  rich  exploiters.  They 
refuse  bread,  but  require  convocation  of  Constituent 
Assembly."  The  reading  of  such  news  every  day  made 
it  clear  that  common  sense  vanishes  in  revolutionary 
times  and,  like  the  bourgeoisie,  is  deprived  of  its  rights. 
Logic  had  been  dismissed  along  with  the  officials  sus- 
pected of  sabotage,  and  was  declared  "  Kornilovist " 
and  "  counter-revolutionary."  It  appeared  that  revolu- 
tion, especially  social  revolution,  had  no  enemy  more 
hated  than  Thought — sincere  and  sober.  Truth  became 
more  and  more  suppressed,  common  sense  experienced 
greater  difficulties  every  day  in  clearing  a  way  for  itself 
through  fogs  and  pits  of  revolutionary  babble  and 
reality.  And  legends  were  whirling  along,  bewildering 
everybody,  overflowing  the  land  and  concealing  the  true 
sense  of  events. 


424     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

It  was  so  already  in  March,  but  after  November  the 
fog  grew  still  thicker.  Very  few  persons  understood 
the  strength  and  depth  of  the  approaching  Bolshevist 
danger.  An  enormous  majority  of  intellectuals  frankly 
and  haughtily  despised  the  Bolsheviks  as  adventurers 
with  no  interest  in  the  Fatherland.  Bolshevist  theories 
were  so  evidently  senseless,  so  impracticable  and  dog- 
matical. The  reputation  of  their  leaders  was  so  darkly 
blemished  by  their  indiscriminate  choice  of  means. 
They  falsified  election  results,  quarrelled  about  expro- 
priated money,  made  friends  with  the  Tsarist  secret 
police  and  with  the  German  General-Staff.  The  Press 
proclaimed  this  aloud,  the  papers  published  lists  of  pro- 
vocateurs and  spies  serving  on  Bolshevist  Committees. 
Was  it  possible  for  such  people  to  enjoy  the  confidence 
of  the  country  ?  Of  course  not.  But  precisely  the 
impossible  thing  happened.  The  masses  believed,  and 
helped  the  Bolsheviks  to  seize  the  power  and  overthrow 
the  Provisional  Government.  When  power  was  seized, 
the  Press  of  different  shades  of  opinion  continued 
shouting  that  this  would  not  last  long ;  that  to-day  or 
to-morrow  the  Bolsheviks  would  be  overthrown.  And 
the  Bolsheviks  also  considered  themselves  as  caliphs 
for  an  hour,  admitting  this  openly  several  times.  Their 
opponents,  in  the  meanwhile,  lived  on  hopes  that  the 
desired  liberation  would  come  from  somewhere,  that 
Bolshevism  would  dispel  itself  like  smoke,  like  a  bad 
dream.  In  connection  with  these  hopes  all  sorts  of 
legends  were  circulating  in  the  city.  People  were  saying 
that  "  troops  are  marching  from  the  front  to  reinstate 
the  Provisional  Government  "  ;  that  "  Kaledin  was 
moving  from  the  South,  and  the  Cossacks  were  approach- 
ing Moscow."  There  was  much  talk  about  an  armoured 
train  that  appeared  not  far  from  Petrograd.  The  train 
had  passed  Novgorod,  running  towards  Moscow.  Whom 


EVERYDAY  LIFE  426 

will  the  train  support  ?  Kerensky  ?  Lenin  ?  But  it 
may  be  Germans  have  broken  through  already  ?  No 
one  knew  anything,  but  for  some  reason  everybody 
believed  that  help  was  coming,  and  that  the  Allies  would 
play  a  prominent  part  in  it.  The  diplomatic  repre- 
sentatives of  the  Entente  were  in  Petrograd  still.  The 
Ambassadors  see  and  know  everything.  Surely  they 
will  tell  their  Governments  and  their  peoples ;  they 
will  describe  the  burden  under  which  Russia  has  fallen, 
the  double  burden  of  war  and  revolution.  And  in  the 
far-away  but  friendly  West,  cut  off  from  Russia  by 
German  trenches  and  bayonets,  they  will  understand 
there  the  horror  of  the  situation,  and  surely  they  will 
come  to  help  the  Russians,  to  save  them  from  Germans, 
and  from  Bolsheviks  bound  to  the  enemy  by  treacherous 
bonds. 

That  was  one  of  the  soothing  legends.  Other 
legends,  gloomy  and  fearful,  were  circulated  about 
Germans,  their  influence,  their  presence  in  Petrograd, 
their  power.  The  armistice  was  not  yet  signed,  but  eye- 
witnesses were  describing  already  how  they  had  seen 
German  officers  in  uniform  or  mufti.  Restaurants 
were  named  where  Russian  officers,  indignant  but 
impotent,  had  to  meet  with  representatives  of  the 
enemy's  army.  The  address  was  secretly  passed  round 
of  the  house  where  German  officers  had  already  been 
living  for  a  long  time.  Their  names  even  were  known. 
The  spikes  of  German  helmets  became  conspicuous  in 
the  streets  long  before  the  arrival  in  Petrograd  of  the 
enemy's  delegation  headed  by  the  important  dignitaries, 
Count  Mirbach  and  Count  Kaiserling.  The  fact  that 
their  arrival  was  the  result  of  an  agreement  with  a  band 
of  adventurers,  on  whose  invitation  they  came  while  all 
parties,  all  organised  groups  opposed  peace  and  wanted 
to  continue  the  war,   gave  a  fantastical,   stupefying 


426     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

effect  to  the  authentic,  real  advent  of  living  Germans 
to  the  capital,  turning  it  into  a  sort  of  nightmare.  No 
one  believed  that  the  arrival  of  representatives  of  the 
Central  Powers  would  bring  grave  obligations  for  the 
Russian  people  with  it.  And  truly  it  was  difficult  to 
believe  such  a  thing  while  the  Allied  missions,  still 
remaining  in  Petrograd,  were  meeting  at  their  club  at 
one  end  of  the  Millionnaya  and  the  Germans  at  the 
other,  in  Palace  Square. 

The  decrees  and  orders  of  the  Soviet  authorities 
seemed  just  as  incredible  and  unreal.  They  were 
published  in  the  official  papers.  All  the  other  papers 
were  obliged  to  publish  these  decrees  in  most  conspicuous 
places.  Many  of  the  decrees  were  placarded  in  the 
streets,  nevertheless  nobody  considered  them  as  having 
any  significance ;  they  were  looked  upon  as  silly  jokes 
of  wicked  boys,  but  not  as  acts  of  the  Government.  At 
first  many  people  talked  with  the  Bolsheviks  as  they 
would  have  spoken  to  riotous  young  hooligans.  At  the 
same  time  the  intellectuals,  separated  from  one  another, 
divided  into  parties,  hypnotised  by  their  own  belief 
in  the  immutability  of  revolutionary  dogmas,  were 
impotent  to  oppose  them.  It  was  like  a  nightmare  in 
which  robbers  attack  you  and  you  find  it  impossible 
to  move. 

As  to  the  masses,  they  were  bewitched.  A  part  of 
them  believed  in  a  Bolshevist  miracle,  that  Lenin  and 
Trotsky  would  make  everybody  rich,  and  turn  them  all 
into  gentlefolk.  Others  did  not  believe  it,  but  with  a 
stupid,  inert  curiosity  they  looked  on  and  waited  to  see 
what  would  be  the  end  of  it  all. 

Such  inertia  was  especially  astounding  in  cases  of 
open  attacks  on  the  property  of  the  people,  as,  for 
instance,  the  Bolshevist  raids  on  the  State  Bank.  The 
Red  Guard  was  continually  descending  upon  the  State 


EVERYDAY  LIFE  427 

Bank  and  recoiling  from  it  again.  The  Bolshevist 
Commissary  was  persuading  and  arresting  the  clerks. 
The  papers  openly  and  harshly  abused  the  Soviet  of 
the  People's  Commissaries,  accusing  them  of  highway 
robbery,  of  the  desire  to  appropriate  the  property  of 
the  people.  Bank  officials  called  on  the  citizens  to 
defend  themselves,  while  the  citizens  crowded  the 
streets  near  the  Bank  and  waited  in  perplexity  to  see 
what  would  be  the  end  of  the  trouble.  Soldiers  passed 
along,  armed  cars  were  driving  about,  the  Red  Guard 
marched  past  clumsily,  clad  in  mufti,  carrying  all  sorts 
of  unnecessary  armament,  frowning  as  they  remarked 
the  unfriendly  looks  of  the  crowd.  Nevertheless,  the 
Reds  were  conscious  of  belonging  to  a  big  organisation, 
coherent  and  decisive  in  action,  and  that  gave  them 
self-assurance,  while  their  opponents  were  quite  dis- 
organised, and  therefore  inactive.  For  this  reason  the 
Reds  proved  always  stronger  in  action,  although  they 
were  always  beaten  in  controversy.  The  defenders  of 
Bolshevism,  who  instead  of  arguing  went  on  repeating 
the  same  catchwords, ''  counter-revolution,"  "  supporters 
of  the  bourgeoisie,''  "  saboteur s,''  etc.,  were  always  left 
in  the  minority  in  debates.  During  more  than  four 
months,  while  I  was  living  under  the  Bolshevist  regime, 
and  was  present  at  numerous  meetings  in  the  streets  or 
elsewhere,  I  never  saw  the  Bolsheviks  victorious.  They 
organised  their  own  meetings,  attended  by  enormous, 
quite  special  crowds,  and  there  they  actually  dominated. 
Sometimes  they  forced  an  entrance  into  buildings  where 
meetings  were  held  by  other  people,  occupied  the 
platform,  drove  out  the  organisers,  refused  their 
opponents  the  right  of  speech,  and  then  also  they 
proved  victorious.  But  everywhere,  when  the  crowd 
was  not  specially  gathered  by  them  beforehand,  but 
congregated  freely,  when  people  could  speak  openly, 


428     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

the  Bolsheviks  were  beaten  by  logic.  Their  strength 
had  nothing  to  do  with  logic,  it  consisted  in  the  know- 
ledge of  how  to  capture  by  trickery  the  confidence  of 
the  masses,  who  do  not  live  according  to  reason,  but 
act  upon  the  impulse  of  their  senses.  Profiting  by  a 
temporary  blindness  of  the  masses,  the  Bolsheviks 
succeeded  in  organising  a  compact  minority  of  supporters, 
and  when  the  masses  began  to  awaken  from  the  hypnosis 
they  were  already  fettered  in  chains ;  they  were  sur- 
rounded by  bristling  bayonets. 

The  simple-mindedness  of  the  Russian  intelligentsia, 
especially  of  its  Socialist  wing,  prevented  an  immediate 
conception  of  what  had  happened.  With  the  same 
ingenuousness  with  which  the  Socialists,  keeping  in 
memory  all  the  solemn  resolutions  of  the  Socialistic 
Congresses,  awaited  the  support  of  the  international 
proletariat,  and  hoped  to  obtain  a  democratic  peace 
from  Germany  by  the  force  not  of  arms,  but  of  words, 
they  supposed  now  that  by  Socialistic  pressure  it  would 
be  possible  to  bring  to  reason  the  dictators  ambuscaded 
in  the  Smolny. 

They  were  running  about,  creating  committees, 
publishing  declarations  and  proclamations,  accusing, 
even  threatening,  without  the  slightest  result.  Their 
comrades  of  yesterday,  Lenin  and  Trotsky,  turned 
their  backs  on  them,  cynically  and  openly.  And  at 
the  same  time  the  average  man,  who  with  the  pride 
of  a  new-born  citizen  had  quite  recently  voted  for  a 
Cadet,  a  Social-Revolutionary,  or  a  Social-Democrat,  was 
passing  through  a  really  tragical  experience.  Instead  of 
the  long-awaited  liberty,  a  new  and  more  humiliating 
slavery  had  come.  Public  life  was  shattered  to  pieces. 
Private  life  was  becoming  unbearable.  Nobody  knew 
what  to  expect  on  the  morrow.  Nobody's  life  was  safe, 
and  no  person  could  be  sure  of  the  safety  of  friends  and 


J 


XV  EVERYDAY  LIFE  429 

relations.  Personal  safety,  the  right  to  have  a  home,  to 
work  and  to  live,  all  the  details  of  everyday  life,  pre- 
sented a  number  of  complex  and  tormenting  problems. 

After  the  coup  d'etat  of  November  every  house  had 
to  be  organised  as  an  independent  military  and  civilian 
unity.  In  big  Russian  cities  people  live  in  flats,  not  in 
separate  houses.  In  an  average  building  not  less  than 
from  200-300  persons  are  housed.  Already  before  the 
advent  of  the  Bolsheviks,  house-committees  were  elected 
in  each  building  for  the  distribution  of  food,  of  ration- 
cards,  of  bread,  etc.  After  the  Bolshevist  coup  d'etat 
the  task  of  these  committees  became  much  more 
complex  and  wider.  First  of  all  they  had  to  organise 
for  self-defence.  The  militia,  created  after  the  destruc- 
tion of  the  Tsarist  police,  was  weak  and  imperfectly 
organised,  and  now  the  militiamen  themselves  had  to 
hide  from  the  Bolsheviks.  No  protection  existed  for 
anything  or  anybody.  Any  armed  band  could  enter 
any  house  at  any  moment  and  rob  it.  The  people 
themselves  had  to  provide  for  their  own  safety. 

In  the  house  where  we  were  living  the  men  used 
to  take  turns  in  acting  as  guards.  Returning  in  the 
evening  from  some  meeting  I  always  found  two  sentinels 
on  the  landing,  near  the  lift.  Their  rifles  were  kept 
ready  at  hand.  One  of  the  tenants,  an  oflSicer  of  the  line, 
thrice  wounded,  who  had  been  awarded  the  Cross  of 
St.  George  several  times,  commanded  the  house-guard. 
He  trained  the  others,  teaching  them  the  use  of  their 
rifles,  and  giving  orders  for  duties.  Besides  him  there 
were  two  more  ofi&cers  ;  the  rest  were  civil  service 
officials,  merchants,  an  engineer  from  the  electric 
station,  a  factory-engineer,  etc.  Mutual  friendliness 
reigned  throughout,  and  the  general  spirit  was  absolutely 
anti-Bolshevist. 

In  later  days  the  house-committees  got  into  great 


430     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

difficulties,  because  the  Soviets  tried  to  use  them  as 
organisations  for  collecting  money  and  commodities,  or, 
to  be  more  exact,  for  raising  contributions  in  accordance 
with  the  decree  enforcing  on  the  bourgeoisie  the  obliga- 
tion to  work.  Also,  to  deprive  the  committees  of  their 
middle-class  character,  representatives  of  the  poorer 
classes  were  included,  not  by  election,  but  by  appoint- 
ment of  the  Soviets,  to  realise  even  here  the  idea  of  the 
dictatorship  of  the  proletariat.  An  ignorant  soldier's 
wife  from  the  suburbs,  without  any  knowledge  of 
reading  or  writing,  would  appear  suddenly  as  member 
of  the  committee  of  a  building  inhabited  by  intellectuals, 
and  start  ordering  them  about. 

However,' in  the  winter  of  1917-1918,  at  the  time  of 
which  I  am  writing,  the  house-committees  were  still 
autonomous  to  a  certain  degree.  Cases  happened  in 
large  buildings,  especially  in  co-operative  houses,  where 
tenants  owned  their  flats,  of  committees  engaging 
officers  to  guard  the  building  and  to  act  as  house-porters. 
Then  the  local  Soviet  interfered.  They  could  not  allow 
"  White  Guards "  to  carry  arms.  It  savoured  of 
"  counter-revolution."  The  officers  had  to  be  dismissed, 
and  turned  out  to  beg  in  the  streets ;  the  unguarded 
house  was  left  an  easy  prey  to  robbers. 

At  the  same  time,  in  a  neighbouring  district  the 
guard  of  officers  was  allowed  to  exist.  Such  are  the 
peculiar  features  of  a  regime  of  Soviets.  Each  large  or 
small  Soviet  applies  its  own  rules  of  government.  In 
Petrograd,  where  the  number  of  quarter  Soviets  corre- 
sponded to  the  number  of  former  police  quarters,  in 
some  parts  of  the  city  life  was  easier  than  in  others. 
The  Sovdeps  (Soviets  of  Deputies)  of  the  quarter  of 
Vyborg,  Narva,  Vasiliostrov,  where  Bolshevism  was 
especially  strong,  acted  ferociously,  threatened,  issued 
special  regulations,  ruined  the  intellectuals,  together 


EVERYDAY  LIFE  431 

with  all  the  institutions  created  by  them,  all  the  schools, 
boards  of  guardians,  dining-rooms  for  the  poor,  educa- 
tional clubs,  etc.  And,  on  the  opposite  side  of  the 
street,  within  the  borders  of  the  territory  of  another 
Soviet,  similar  institutions  succeeded  somehow  in 
protecting  themselves  and  continued  to  exist. 

On  December  the  27th  all  private  banks  and  all 
their  safes  were  seized.  Next  day  their  nationalisation 
was  announced  by  a  decree,  which  evoked  the  same 
sceptical  smiles  as  all  similar  decrees  had  done  before. 
As  a  matter  of  fact,  this  proved  a  death-blow  not  only 
to  all  the  economical,  but  also  to  the  political  life  of 
the  country.  The  blow  in  this  case  was  much  harder 
than  in  cases  of  destructive  raids  by  separate  commis- 
saries. All  private  persons  and  all  enterprises  as  well 
were  ruined.  The  activity  of  political  organisations  was 
stopped.  Money  proved  to  be  indispensable  to  any 
organised  activity ;  lack  of  money  condemns  most 
energetic  persons  to  inaction.  By  closing  the  banks  the 
Bolsheviks  totally  paralysed  their  political  opponents. 
This  is  not  properly  imderstood  by  people  who  speak 
of  the  passiveness  and  inactivity  of  the  Russians.  The 
Russian  intellectuals,  i.e,  the  leading  part  of  the  Russian 
people,  who  alone,  thanks  to  their  education,  were 
prepared  for  organised  political  work  and  statecraft, 
got  into  such  straits  after  the  Bolshevist  coup  d'etat,  as 
they  had  never  experienced  under  the  Tsarist  regime. 
And,  notwithstanding  all  this,  they  went  on  struggling 
obstinately,  counteracting  every  move  of  the  Bolsheviks. 
If,  during  the  first  period  of  the  Russian  Revolution, 
much  absurdity  was  to  be  noted,  much  weakness,  much 
inaction,  and  too  much  theoretical  talk,  the  second 
period,  which  has  not  come  to  an  end  yet,  and  will 
continue  until  the  inevitable  downfall  of  the  Bolsheviks, 
is  remarkable  for  the  undoubted  heroism  of  the  intel- 


432     FEOM  LIBEETY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

lectuals.  I  do  not  speak  of  the  people  at  the  top,  of 
the  aristocracy  of  brains,  to  which  only  a  few  compara- 
tively belong,  great  writers,  scientists,  politicians,  and 
statesmen.  I  speak  of  the  scores,  the  hundreds  of 
thousands  of  people  of  different  classes,  ranks,  and 
professions,  united  by  a  common  love  of  books,  a 
common  thoughtfulness,  of  endeavouring  to  get  a 
proper  conception  of  their  own  actions,  and  of  the 
general  ways  of  life  as  well.  Those  are  the  almost 
imperceptible  workers,  the  small  wheels  that  keep  in 
motion  the  machinery  of  the  State  and  of  economic 
life.  These  people  showed  a  truly  heroical  resistance 
to  Bolshevist  violence.  Their  patriotic  feelings  were 
offended  by  the  ignominy  of  the  Brest-Litovsk  negotia- 
tions. Arrests,  murders,  devastation,  pogroms,  the 
dispersal  of  municipal  councils  and  of  the  Constituent 
Assembly,  perpetual  tampering  with  liberty  and  justice, 
created  a  general  feeling  of  moral  indignation.  The 
Eevolution  of  March  had  presented  the  Eussian  citizens 
with  the  boon  of  liberty,  and  therefore  all  the  heavier 
it  was  to  bear  the  chains  of  Bolshevist  slavery,  and  the 
harder  it  was  to  awaken  from  revolutionary  dreams 
and  to  get  again  into  the  clutches  of  a  tyranny,  a 
hundred  times  worse  than  any  tyranny  of  the  Tsar. 

The  average  Eussian  intellectual  did  not  bow  to  the 
new  master,  he  did  not  show  that  passiveness  at  all,  of 
which  we  are  so  often  accused  by  foreigners.  Eisking 
his  life  and  the  safety  of  his  family,  he  starved,  but  did 
not  barter  his  conscience.  The  civil  officials  went  on 
strike.  The  officers  preferred  to  be  voted  out  of  the 
army,  to  remain  in  hiding,  living  under  a  false  name,  work- 
ing with  their  hands  to  keep  themselves  alive,  but  they 
would  not  submit  to  the  dissolute  impudent  authority 
of  the  '  soldiers' '  committees.  The  officers  organised 
associations  of  dockers,  they  worked  on  the  railways, 


XV  EVERYDAY  LIFE  433 

unloading  cars  of  wood  or  corn.  Labourers  looked  sus- 
piciously at  these  hard-working  competitors.  During 
the  Revolution  workmen  were  assured  of  their  right  to 
address  unlimited  demands  to  their  employers,  whether 
private  persons  or  the  State  itself,  but  they  refused  to 
accept  any  obligations  for  themselves.  Mostly  because 
the  Bolsheviks  supported  them,  the  workers  obstinately 
refused  to  accept  any  system  of  piece-work,  any  mini- 
mum of  output,  anything,  in  general,  that  could  act 
as  a  control  over  the  productiveness  of  labour.  The 
officers  were  paid  by  the  piece,  and  therefore  they  were 
regarded  with  suspicion.  Once  they  were  found  work- 
ing too  hard  they  were  certainly  counter-revolutionaries 
and  White  Guards. 

The  intellectuals  went  on,  struggling,  seeking  to 
find  an  issue.  Societies  for  mutual  help  and  working 
associations  were  organised.  Officers,  barristers,  school- 
masters, engineers  got  emplojmfient  as  house-porters, 
as  messengers,  opened  repairing  workshops  for  electric- 
lighting  gear,  carried  on  some  petty  trading  on  com- 
mission, trying  in  general  to  get  hold  of  some  sort 
of  work.  Thousands  of  people  passed  through  the 
societies  for  mutual  help,  whose  object  was,  in  fact, 
to  transform  into  common  labourers  the  intellectual 
workers,  most  valuable  to  Russia  because  of  the  fact 
that  they  were  so  few  in  number.  One  had  only 
to  go  out  into  one  of  the  principal  thoroughfares, 
the  Nevsky  in  Petrograd,  the  Tverskaia  in  Moscow, 
to  see  that  senseless  waste  of  human  energy.  Officers 
were  breaking  the  ice,  selling  newspapers,  cigarettes, 
chocolate.  A  sailor  or  a  soldier  would  approach  them, 
negligently  taking  a  handful  of  currency  notes  out  of 
his  pocket,  and  disdainfully  smiling,  would  pay  the 
officer-hawker. 

It  was  vexing  to  look  at  them,  one  felt  sad  and 

2f 


434     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

ashamed.  And  at  the  same  time  one  pitied  also  the 
soldiers,  very  often  one  pitied  them  nearly  as  much  as 
at  the  time  when  they  were  defenders,  not  destroyers. 

While  the  freezing  Christmas  bHzzards  were  whirling 
and  howling  in  their  mad  career  along  the  enormous 
Russian  plain,  covering  roads,  houses,  villages,  and  rail- 
ways with  snow,  troops  of  soldiers  were  tramping  through 
Moscow,  one  after  the  other,  like  an  endless  greyish 
ribbon.  I  do  not  know  why,  but  generally  they  were 
to  be  seen  late  in  the  evening.  Carrying  their  heavy 
burdens  of  regulation  sacks  and  bundles,  wrapped  in  rags 
to  save  themselves  somehow  from  the  cruel  gusts  of  wind 
that  were  driving  in  their  faces  big  handfuls  of  prickly 
snow,  their  tired  frozen  feet  tramping  heavily  in  the  snow- 
drifts, the  soldiers  passed  from  one  railway  terminus  to 
another.  Trams  were  passing  them,  sometimes  a  lonely 
motor-car  would  run  past,  shots  were  heard  now  and 
then,  the  inevitable  accompaniment  of  outdoor  life  in 
Moscow  at  that  time,  but  the  soldiers  went  tramping 
on,  paying  no  attention  to  anybody,  tired  and  still  un- 
tiring, disconcerted  and  unabashed  at  the  same  time. 
In  the  dim  snowy  mist,  with  a  background  of  fantastical 
revolutionary  life,  these  soldier  figures  seemed  to  be 
ghosts  fleeting  over  from  the  far-away  front,  from  the 
fields  of  death,  to  cast  a  look  at  the  ancient  Russian 
capital  suddenly  turned  mad. 

But  at  once  when  one  approached  and  addressed  one 
of  them,  the  same  well-known  simple  face  of  the  real 
Russian  peasant  soldier  showed  from  under  the  snow- 
covered  tall  fur  hat.  Despite  their  lassitude,  they  were 
quite  ready  to  relate  with  their  usual  loquacity  the  story 
of  their  long  weary  journey.  They  were  the  remnants 
of  the  Russian  Army,  who  had  to  hold  on  to  the  end  in 
Rumania.  They  were  living  there  far  away,  in  a  strange 
country,  while  confusing  news  and  still  more  confusing 


EVERYDAY  LIFE  435 

tales  were  reported  about  the  great  trouble  that  was 
shattering  to  pieces  their  own  motherland.  The  soldiers 
listened  to  the  news  but  kept  on  holding  the  front.  Then 
somebody  told  them  that  they  had  fought  quite  enough, 
that  peace  was  concluded,  and  that  they  could  go  home. 
The  Rumanians  did  not  want  to  let  them  go,  and  began 
disarming  them. 

"Disagreeable  things  happened,"  explained  to  me 
regretfully  an  elderly,  bearded  soldier,  adding  after- 
wards :  "  But,  all  the  same,  although  they  took  away 
our  arms,  we  were  allowed  to  go.  Thanks  to  them  for 
that." 

However  they  had  to  cut  their  way  home  to  the 
native  village  through  Russia,  as  if  it  were  an  enemy 
country.  Nobody  seemed  to  be  interested  in  the  human 
dust  into  which  the  once  orderly,  well-organised  army 
had  been  transformed.  Nobody  cared  for  them.  The 
old  commanders  were  either  killed  or  dismissed  and  the 
new  commanders  were  fighting  the  White  Guards  and 
had  no  time  to  spare  for  soldiers  silly  enough  to  drag 
on  to  the  end  with  their  military  service.  No  trains 
were  prepared  for  them,  no  shelters,  no  meals.  They 
had  to  get  everything  themselves,  to  get  it  by  force 
really.  Sometimes  they  stopped  for  several  days  at 
some  railway  station,  already  overcrowded  with  similar 
grey-coats  awaiting  an  occasion  to  take  a  train  by 
storm.  Not  only  was  there  no  food,  but  there  was  not 
even  hot  water  to  make  tea,  without  which  a  Russian 
feels  very  miserable. 

Luckily  the  majority  had  taken  from  Rimiania  some 
bread  for  the  journey,  otherwise  they  would  have  died 
of  hunger,  but  even  so  most  of  them  were  starving. 
To  get  to  Moscow  they  had  to  cover  more  than  2000 
versts.  And  many  of  them  were  travelling  farther,  to 
the  Volga,  to  the  North,  to  Siberia ;    thousands  and 


436     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

thousands  of  versts  had  still  to  be  covered.  The  winter 
was  very  severe.  The  frost  was  just  as  intense  inside  the 
unheated  car  as  outside,  as  nearly  all  the  windows  were 
broken  by  soldiers  also,  who  like  impatient  children 
were  ready  to  break  everything  to  get  on  board  the 
train. 

The  trains,  too,  did  not  always  take  them  to  the 
places  where  they  wanted  to  go.  Very  often  did  the 
driver  stop  his  engine  :  it  was  impossible  to  go  on,  a 
battle  was  raging.     And  bitter  words  were  heard  : 

"  Russians  are  again  fighting  Russians.  Our  people 
are  smashing  one  another." 

They  stopped  there  sometimes  for  a  day  or  two 
listening  to  the  shouting,  not  trying  even  to  find  out 
who  was  right  and  who  was  wrong.  It  was  not  their 
business  any  more.  They  had  fought  their  own  war  to 
the  finish.  It  was  time  now  to  get  home  and  resume 
the  accustomed  peasant's  life. 

If  the  battle  did  not  slow  down  the  soldiers  crowded 
around  the  driver  and  negotiated  with  him.  Sometimes 
they  threatened,  ordering  him  to  proceed,  to  take  them 
to  some  other  place,  to  take  them  anywhere,  but  not  to 
stop  at  the  same  place  any  longer.  The  driver  under- 
stood that  there  was  no  use  arguing  and  discovered  some 
detour,  which  would  sometimes  equal  the  whole  length 
of  England.  They  passed  through  towns,  of  which  they 
never  dreamt  before,  they  heard  shooting  again,  they 
got  under  fire  themselves,  they  stormed  market-places 
and  small  townships  when  they  were  hungry,  and  went 
on  dragging  along  across  bleeding,  lacerated  Russia, 
choked  by  the  nightmare  of  civil  war. 

Russia,  although  it  was  their  own  motherland,  looked 
strange.  They  themselves  had  suffered  every  possible 
suffering,  on  the  front  line  they  had  gone  through  every 
danger  of  war.     But  they  suffered  honestly  and  man- 


EVERYDAY  LIFE  437 

fully,  as  other  millions  of  similar  patient  and  steady- 
peasants  had  suffered  during  three  years  of  war.  The 
enemy  had  destroyed  and  crippled  them  but  he  could 
not  conquer  them.  If  the  future  of  these  people  had 
depended  upon  Germany  alone  they  would  have  returned, 
of  course,  as  conquerors  to  the  motherland,  and  Moscow 
would  have  welcomed  them  with  triumphal  cheers, 
music,  banquets,  and  flowers.  But  the  organism  of  the 
State  had  broken  down,  the  will  to  conquer  had  weak- 
ened, and  here  they  came,  therefore,  these  imfortunate 
soldiers,  unwanted  by  anybody,  forlorn  and  forgotten, 
freezing  and  starving,  tramping  along  in  the  cold  blizzard 
as  if  they  were  crossing  a  strange  country. 

It  was  hard  and  painful  to  look  at  these  greyish, 
bent-down  shadows,  appearing,  one  after  the  other,  out 
of  the  white  curtain  of  snow,  illuminated  by  the  bluish 
light  of  the  street  lamps.  They  seemed  to  feel,  somehow, 
that  they  were  paying  for  the  common  sin  of  Russia, 
and  they  did  not  think  even  of  blaming  anybody.  They 
simply  told  the  short  and  broken  tale  of  their  trials.  I 
cannot  say  whether  it  was  their  starving  appearance 
that  appealed  to  me  so  much,  or  the  fact  that  during 
their  three  or  four  weeks'  wanderings  through  the  whole 
of  Russia  they  had  seen  that  happiness  and  quiet  could 
not  be  found  in  any  single  corner  of  the  land,  that  the 
martyred  people  were  tossing  about  like  madness,  but  I 
remember  being  especially  impressed  by  the  epic  calm 
of  these  soldiers.  They  did  not  accuse  anybody  and 
they  never  complained.  They  went  on  sa)dng  only : 
"  Bad  things  are  happening.  .  .  .  Very  bad  things  in- 
deed. .  .  ." 

The  situation  in  Petrograd  was  worse  than  in  Moscow, 
for  the  reason,  perhaps,  that  there  the  enormous  garri- 
son, depraved  by  the  Revolution,  contaminated  the 
arriving  soldiers  by  its  psychology,  rightly  qualified  by 


438     FEOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

Eoditcheff,  the  Constitutional-Democrat,  as  a  psycho- 
logy of  revolted  slaves,  this  qualification  being  repeated 
afterwards  by  Kerensky.  Very  rarely  did  the  soldiers 
tramp  through  Petrograd  in  a  continuous  stream  as 
I  saw  them  tramping  through  Moscow  in  January,  but 
at  the  same  time  the  Petrograd  streets  were  always 
full  of  soldiers.  The  city  seemed  to  have  been  stormed 
by  them. 

In  the  dark  winter  months  of  1917-1918  the  streets 
in  Petrograd  especially  presented  a  most  untoward 
appearance.  The  snowfall  that  winter  was  unusually 
heavy,  and  as  the  snow  was  scarcely  ever  cleared  aw^y, 
nobody  caring  to  keep  the  streets  in  order,  enormous 
snowdrifts,  in  some  places  over  a  man's  height,  accumu- 
lated in  heaps  along  the  pavement.  Paths  were  beaten 
through  the  snow  by  pedestrians,  close  to  the  houses, 
and  along  the  road  huge  snow  waves  marked  the  route 
trodden  by  sledge  -  trafiic  ;  the  half  -  starved  horses 
climbed  with  difficulty  over  the  snow-hills  (hay  was 
selling  at  about  a  rouble  per  pound),  falling  sometimes 
and  dying  from  exhaustion.  Dead  horses  were  left 
lying  for  several  days  not  only  in  the  by-streets,  but 
even  in  the  Nevsky.  And  yet  the  streets  were  always 
crowded  in  daytime,  and  in  the  evenings  as  well. 

Street  lamps  were  few,  and  their  light  was  dim. 
People  hurried  along,  trying  not  to  look  at  one  another. 
The  unrestrained,  affable,  effervescent  sociability  of  the 
first  days  of  the  Revolution  that  transformed  Petrograd 
into  a  continuous  meeting  was  gone.  Ever-watchful 
and  irritable  animosity  had  taken  its  place  now,  over- 
hanging the  dimly-lit  corridors  of  streets,  tearing  the 
people  asunder,  rendering  everybody's  bereavements 
harder  to  bear.  How  could  one  know  where  was  the 
friend  and  where  the  enemy  ? 

Soldiers  were  moving  about  in  crowds,  with  rifles 


EVERYDAY  LIFE  439 

and  without  them.  More  soldiers  came  along,  and  still 
more  again.  There  were  always  so  many  soldiers  about 
in  the  streets  of  Petrograd  that  civilians  were  swallowed 
up  by  their  greyish  tidal-wave  ;  civilians  hurried  to  hide 
themselves,  to  run  away,  to  get  into  the  shadow. 

Petrograd  was  not  only  a  centre  for  the  numerous 
Petrograd  garrison,  not  yet  demobilised,  which,  together 
with  the  neighbouring  detachments,  consisted  of  two  or 
three  hundreds  of  thousands  of  soldiers,  it  was  also  a 
point  of  passage  during  the  lengthy,  arbitrary,  and  self- 
organised  demobilisation  of  the  enormous  army  occupy- 
ing the  north-western  front.  Before  the  Revolution 
that  army  defended  from  enemy  attacks  the  beautiful 
capital  of  the  powerful  Russian  Empire  ;  having  been 
weakened  now,  demoralised,  and  having  lost  its  senses, 
it  rushed  through  Petrograd  like  an  invading  host, 
rolling  farther  and  farther  in  its  backwash,  never  taking 
heed  of,  or  understanding  anything,  led  by  the  one 
dominating  tendency,  to  get  home  as  quickly  as 
possible. 

The  streets  of  Petrograd  are  crammed  full  of  grey- 
coated  soldiers.  From  time  to  time  women  are  passing. 
If  imaccompanied  and  lonely  they  pass  as  close  as 
possible  to  the  houses,  or  along  the  snowy  roadway  by 
the  side  of  the  pavement,  trying  to  look  smaller,  not 
to  be  remarked.  What  business  can  a  woman  have  in 
the  half  darkness  of  the  evening  in  the  unrecognisable 
streets  of  her  native  city,  where  the  street  lamps  bum 
stingily  and  dimly,  and  shots  are  rattling  merrily  and 
loudly. 

Tac — tac — tac.  .  .  .  Somewhere,  very  near,  a  rifle 
is  talking.  The  passers-by  do  not  even  stop.  It  is  not 
worth  while.  They  are  used  to  it.  Some  of  them  turn 
the  head  for  a  moment,  while  walking  on,  and  listen, 
trying  to  ascertain  whence  comes  the  sound. 


440     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

Soldiers  pass  in  a  group  ;  they  are  laughing. 

"  It  must  be  near,  in  one  of  the  by-streets.  Comrades 
have  got  to  a  wine-cellar  and  are  working  there  now." 

They  laugh  quite  in  a  friendly  way,  with  a  hint  of 
envy  perhaps.  Drunken  pogroms  in  the  city  happened 
every  day.  They  started  at  the  Winter  Palace. 
Enormous  stores  of  old  and  valuable  wine  were  kept 
there.  The  wine  was  valued  at  the  sum  of  15  millions 
of  roubles.  Measures  were  to  be  taken  to  defend  the 
stores,  to  wall  up  the  cellars,  to  save  the  wine,  but 
soldiers  got  to  know  whence  came  the  attractive  smell 
of  spirits,  found  their  way  to  the  place,  and  the  trouble 
began. 

Legends  circulated  in  the  city  about  the  happenings 
in  the  Palace  cellars.  Battles  were  raging,  we  were  told, 
around  the  wine  casks,  drunken  and  sober  soldiers  alike 
were  drowned  in  hogsheads,  firemen  pumping  out  a  sea 
of  wine  overflowing  the  floors  began  drinking  also, 
falling  into  the  same  pit  when  drunk.  The  battle  raged 
for  several  days  under  the  walls  of  the  late  residence  of 
the  Tsar,  shots  were  rattling  all  the  time.  Sometimes 
the  quick,  business-like  rattle  of  machine-guns  was 
heard,  as  if  somebody,  trying  to  restore  order,  was 
leading  a  regular  attack.  Then  separate  shots  started 
again,  as  if  a  guerilla  warfare  was  going  on  for  the  right 
of  entrance  to  the  kingdom  of  Bacchus,  or  perhaps  for 
the  possession  of  brandy  or  champagne,  in  which  soldiers 
were  trading  at  the  time  all  about  the  city.  The 
prohibition  of  the  sale  of  wine  ordered  by  Nicholas  IL 
remained  still  in  force,  and  therefore  the  traffic  in  valuable 
wines  was  especially  brisk. 

The  beginning  of  the  drunken  pogroms  coincided 
precisely  with  the  armistice.  It  seemed  as  though  the 
dark  business,  transacted  in  a  Russian  fortress  which 
was  constructed  for  the  defence  of  the  country  but  had 


I 


EVERYDAY  LIFE  441 

been  turned  into  a  place  of  humiliation  for  Russia,  had 
raised  dismal,  stormy  waves  in  the  soul  of  the  people. 
Intoxicated  by  lying  or  mad  speeches,  it  thirsted 
anxiously  for  another  drink  more  customary  and  even 
more  intoxicating.  And  day  after  day,  week  after 
week,  the  drunken  savagery  continued,  overflowing  the 
unhappy  capital. 

It  started  at  the  Tsar's  Palace  ;  later  on  Grand- 
ducal  cellars  were  searched,  then  the  turn  came  of 
private  houses,  commercial  stores,  and  all  other  places 
smelling  of  spirits. 

The  Smolny  tried  in  vain  to  persuade,  even  to 
threaten.  There  was  nobody  to  execute  the  threats. 
Red  Guards  took  part  in  the  drunken  riots  side  by 
side  with  the  soldiers.  Not  all  of  them,  of  course ; 
some  of  them  disapproved,  some  even  abused  the 
rioters,  but  others  sneered.  And  there  were  some 
who  believed  in  a  fantastical  explanation  coming  from 
the  Smolny. 

There  were  stories  of  drunken  pogroms  organised  by 
Cadets  to  strengthen  the  anti-revolutionary  movement. 
At  the  meeting  of  the  Petrograd  Soviet  on  the  19th  of 
December,  the  general  secretary  of  the  People's  Com- 
missaries announced  the  discovery  of  a  counter-revolu- 
tionary conspiracy  for  the  robbing  of  wine-cellars  in 
which  the  Constitutional  Democratic  party  had  taken 
part. 

*'  Dark  forces  are  watching  us,"  said  the  Izvestia, 
"  they  organised  the  revolt  of  Generals  Kaledin, 
KomiloS,  and  others  to  drown  the  people's  Revolution 
in  blood.  These  dark  forces  are  trying  at  the  same  time 
to  create  a  state  of  anarchy  and  disorder  in  the  country, 
in  Krasnoe  and  Petrograd  especially.  They  lead  ignorant 
and  weak  people  to  drunkenness  and  pogroms." 

In  the  Soviet  of  the  People's  Commissaries  hardly 


442     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

anybody  believed  that  drunken  pogroms  were  the  result 
of  the  incitements  of  the  Central  Committee  of  the 
Cadet  party,  which  consisted  more  of  people  suffering 
chiefly  from  an  overdose  of  love  of  order  than  of  people 
with  an  inclination  for  hooliganism.  But  the  Bolsheviks 
invented  this  legend  about  Cadet  drunken  pogroms 
because,  at  the  moment,  they  thought  it  would  profit 
them.  They  had  not  the  necessary  force  to  stop  the 
pogroms. 

During  the  whole  of  December  and  a  part  of  January 
strange  figures  appeared  on  one  or  the  other  street 
in  Petrograd,  congregating  near  some  house ;  they 
appeared  and  vanished,  to  reappear  again.  A  crowd 
collected  gradually  on  the  spot,  looking  on  and  listening. 
Such  things  generally  happened  in  the  evenings  when 
freezing,  wintry  darkness  was  settling  down  in  the 
streets.  People  stood  about  as  if  they  were  waiting  for 
something  to  happen,  as  if  they  were  feeling  that  the 
struggle  had  begun  there  already.  They  were  gazing 
into  a  by-road,  a  dark,  narrow  gorge,  at  the  bottom  of 
which  they  could  see  grey-coated  soldiers  moving  slowly 
about.  Perhaps  the  Soviet  authorities  had  sent  them  ? 
They  were  keeping  order  maybe,  protecting  ignorant 
and  weak  people  from  the  temptation  of  wine  ?  Then, 
in  this  case,  why  in  the  half  darkness  were  shots  heard 
from  that  place,  and  growls  at  times  as  if  there  in  the 
snow,  in  the  dim,  greenish  light  of  street  lamps,  a  beast 
was  prowling  about  ? 

We  are  not  wandering  about  in  a  forest.  A  city 
raises  its  walls  all  around,  a  city  that  quite  recently  was 
gorgeously  arrayed  and  proud  of  itself.  The  outward 
envelope  of  culture  is  still  there,  preserved  somehow. 
There  are  the  lofty  buildings,  the  electric  lights.  The 
ominous  face  of  Rasputin  is  still  looking  down  from  a 
cinematograph  poster.    Darkened  trams  are  still  crawling 


EVERYDAY  LIFE  443 

along  slowly  like  dreaming  ghosts  completing  the  ghostly 
appearance  of  the  dismal  street. 

There  are  the  shots  again  !  A  scream  is  heard ;  a 
groaning  figure  runs  out  of  the  by-road  and  vanishes 
quickly  round  the  turning.  A  wounded  man,  perhaps. 
The  crowd  looks  at  the  runaway  with  cold  and  hostile 
curiosity.  Some  time,  long  ago  in  the  far-away  spring 
days  of  March,  when  all  Petrograd  was  living  in  the 
streets  and  the  people  were  intoxicated  by  another  wine, 
the  wine  of  newborn  liberty,  they  looked  at  one  another 
with  childish  and  happy  trustfulness.  It  was  a  foolish 
mood  to  yield  to,  perhaps.  The  happiness  may  have 
been  due  to  a  blinding  feeling  of  groundless  optimism, 
but  if  life  should  be  deprived  of  the  moments  of  personal 
or  collective  pathos,  what  would  be  left  of  it  ? 

The  glowing  sparks  of  great  happiness,  of  a  closeness 
of  human  beings  to  one  another,  such  as  was  never 
experienced  before,  are  extinguished.  Animosity  and 
distrust  have  again  disrupted  the  compound,  locking 
up  the  individual  in  his  cell  of  personal  emotions.  Again 
man  is  a  wolf  to  another  man.  Civil  war  has  covered 
Eussia  with  blood-stains,  glowing  red  fumes  of  blood  are 
rolling  along,  rising  higher  up,  threatening  to  stifle,  to 
kill,  to  blot  out  everything. 

People  are  gloomily  looking  at  one  another.  Each 
pair  of  eyes  is  suspiciously  asking  of  others  : 

"  Who  are  you  ?  What  evil  are  you  going  to  inflict 
upon  me  ?  What  evil  deed  are  you  hurrying  to  ?  How 
shall  I  protect  myself  from  you  ?  " 

Having  asked  the  questions,  they  turn  away  hur- 
riedly. They  hide  themselves  as  if  they  were  afraid  of 
having  said  too  much.  Courage  gets  weaker  every 
day,  and  gloomy,  evil  fear  is  getting  hold  of  the 
people. 

The  most  abject,  the  most  humiliating  of  all  fears,  is 


444     FEOM  LIBEKTY  TO  BEEST-LITOVSK       ch. 

the  fear  of  man  by  man,  because  there  is  no  beast  in 
existence  more  merciless,  more  insatiable  in  its  rage 
than  man. 

One  seeks  to  get  away  quickly  from  the  distrustful, 
unkind  crowd,  to  lock  oneself  up  in  one's  own  corner, 
between  four  walls,  not  to  see,  not  to  hear,  not  to  know 
whither  the  sneering  demons  of  anarchy  are  pushing 
Eussia. 

It  was  not  the  feeling  of  self-preservation  alone  that 
kept  indoors  the  inhabitants  of  Petrograd,  Moscow,  and 
other  cities.  As  the  surrounding  dangers  increased  in 
numbers  the  fear  of  danger  grew  blunter  in  many  people. 
This  sounds  like  bravado,  but  life  was  really  getting  so 
terrible  that  it  was  not  worth  while  to  be  afraid,  especi- 
ally because  there  was  no  issue  left ;  one  could  not  go 
away.  A  cowardly  soldier  can  run  away  even  from  the 
front  line  if  he  considers  desertion  less  terrible  than  the 
enemy,  but  civil  war,  like  a  fire  in  the  plains,  covers 
the  whole  space  at  once  and  it  is  difficult  to  run  away 
from  it. 

This  is  the  reason  of  the  growth  of  a  special 
psychology,  when  people  try  to  pretend  that  they  are 
living  as  usual.  They  go  to  the  theatres,  they  visit 
one  another  to  take  tea  together,  even  in  the  evenings, 
despite  robbery  going  on  in  the  streets  as  it  went  on 
in  the  highways  in  olden  times.  In  Moscow  people 
were  careful  in  the  evenings  to  go  about  in  crowds, 
armed,  if  possible,  because  malefactors,  sometimes  in 
civilian  dress,  sometimes  in  military  uniform,  stopped 
the  passers-by  and  stripped  them  of  their  clothes. 
Sometimes  they  took  ofi  only  fur  coats  or  boots,  some- 
times also  other  clothing,  and  then  they  allowed  the 
victims  to  go  home  in  the  frost  nearly  naked.  My 
fur  coat  was  never  taken  from  me,  although  I  walked 
about  at  any  hour  of  day  or  night  and  often  went 


EVERYDAY  LIFE  445 

out  alone ;  but  several  of  my  acquaintances  were 
robbed  in  the  streets. 

Raids  were  also  organised  on  clubs  and  theatres. 
Suddenly  during  a  performance  or  a  card  party  armed 
men  would  appear  at  all  the  exits  ordering :  "  Hands 
up  !  "  Robbery  started  at  once.  Money,  rings,  watches, 
jewels  were  taken  away.  Then  the  robbers  commanded : 
*'  Nobody  to  move  for  ten  minutes."  And  people  did 
not  move,  waiting  for  the  robbers  to  get  into  their 
motor-cars  and  drive  away. 

And  on  the  morrow  crowds  collected  again  in  the 
same  theatre  or  the  same  club,  as  if  nothing  had 
happened  there  the  night  before. 

Such  carelessness  is  to  be  explained  partly  by  a 
strong  desire  to  forget,  and  partly  by  the  fact  that 
generally  nothing  more  happened  than  robbery,  pure 
and  simple.  Street  murders  were  comparatively  rare, 
although  murders  could  be  committed  just  as  easily  as 
robberies,  without  any  risk  of  punishment.  This  does 
not  mean  that  no  murders  were  committed. 

In  January  1918,  135  murders  were  committed  in 
Petrograd,  but  for  the  same  month  15^600  house  rob- 
beries were  recorded,  and  such  a  disproportion  between 
robberies  and  murders  shows  that  some  restraining 
principles  were  still  alive  in  the  human  soul. 

However,  there  existed  a  certain  category  of  people 
to  whom  summary  justice  was  meted  out  at  once, 
and  with  beastly  cruelty  :  the  so  -  called  profiteers 
and  speculators.  Every  time  when  some  one  was  sus- 
pected of  hoarding  food  or  speculating  in  food-stuffs,  the 
crowd  lost  its  equilibrium.  It  happened  sometimes  that 
a  woman  selling  a  few  pounds  of  bread  in  the  street 
would  be  thrown  into  the  river  and  drowned.  How 
dared  she  extort  such  a  price  !  Bag-men,  i.e.  people 
smuggling  provisions  into  the  city,  were  thrown  under 


446     PROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

railway  trains,  although  without  these  provisions  hunger 
would  have  been  felt  .more  keenly.  The  same  crowds 
robbed  the  provision  trains  afterwards,  and  even  shoot- 
ing did  not  disperse  them  at  once.  In  the  winter  of 
1917-18  famine  had  already  shown  its  claws  and  had 
begun  to  strangle  the  population  of  big  cities,  Petrograd 
and  Moscow  especially.  They  had  not  then  reached 
the  degree  of  famished  numbness  which  later  crept  over 
all  the  town  dwellers  in  Northern  Russia,  but  talk  about 
food,  and  unexpressed  longings  for  food,  and  dreams 
about  it,  especially,  were  already  becoming  a  sort  of 
obsession. 

In  February  we  held  a  small  meeting  at  the  editorial 
office  of  the  Rech,  We  were  talking,  as  usual,  about 
the  mysterious  negotiations  of  Brest,  about  Germans, 
about  the  Allies,  and  what  they  were  thinking,  and 
whether  we  could  succeed  without  their  support.  The 
same  endless  Russian  argumentation  was  going  on, 
when  suddenly  one  of  the  editors  said  : 

"  I  am  hungry,  you  know." 

Other  people  present  looked  at  one  another  smiling 
sadly  and  shrugging  their  shoulders. 

"  Hungry  ?     Well,  I  am  always  hungry  myself." 

"  I  also.  .  .  ." 

"  I  too.  .  .  ." 

And  then  we  began  talking  at  once  about  our  edi- 
torial affairs,  as  if  ashamed  of  this  outburst.  The  man 
who  started  the  hunger  talk  was  a  journalist  with  a 
well-known  name,  still  earning  plenty  of  money  as  the 
paper  continued  to  appear,  although  at  intervals.^ 

^  The  Rech  was  suppressed  later,  as  were  all  the  other  papers.  One  of  the 
people  present  at  the  meeting,  Feigelson,  an  experienced  and  honest  reporter, 
very  well  known  to  all  intellectual  Petrograd,  did  actually  die  from  starvation. 
Most  of  his  co-editors  had  left  Petrograd,  but  he  could  not  leave,  having  just 
enough  money  to  send  his  family  away.  One  had  to  pay  big  bribes  for  the  right 
to  get  out  of  the  city.  He  could  have  arranged  matters  in  a  simpler  way  by 
selling  his  joumaliatic  experience  to  the  Bolsheviks,  who  would  have  employed 


XV  EVERYDAY  LIFE  447 

Not  only  the  middle  class  and  the  intellectuals  were 
starving,  the  whole  population  of  the  city  was  under- 
going the  same  ordeal,  except  the  privileged  Soviet 
officials.  It  was  so  difficult  to  get  bread,  the  food  con- 
trol institutions  organised  by  the  Soviets  were  so  help- 
less that  the  big  works  and  factories  tried  themselves 
to  organise  the  feeding  of  their  people.  In  January 
1918  the  big  engineering  Kolomna  works  constructed 
an  armoured  train,  hired  a  military  escort,  armed  the 
escort  with  rifles  and  machine-guns,  and  having  en- 
trained this  peculiar  military  expedition,  sent  it  to  the 
South,  into  the  Ukraine,  to  get  corn.  The  com  was 
duly  found  there  and  bought  at  a  much  higher  price 
than  the  prices  fixed  by  the  Soviets.  Twenty-five  cars 
were  loaded  and  started  on  their  way  back.  Return- 
ing, the  train  had  to  break  through  the  barriers  of 
different  governments  and  Soviets  that  had  then  already 
partitioned  Russia.  At  some  places  they  paid  to  pass, 
at  others  they  had  to  shoot.  Sometimes  they  had  to 
negotiate  and  surrender  a  part  of  their  spoils  to  the 
starving  population,  sometimes  they  made  their  way 
through  by  force.  Several  cars  had  to  be  abandoned 
on  the  way,  but  nevertheless  plenty  of  com  was  safely 
brought  home. 

With  every  consecutive  month  of  the  Bolshevist 
regime  famine  and  anarchy  are  growing,  and  trade  and 
manufacture  are  decaying  steadily,  and  as  a  result 
mutual  animosity  and  irritation  are  also  growing.  They 
are  manifested  most  strongly  in  the  action  of  the  Bol- 
sheviks themselves,  who  have  made  of  violence  and 
murder  the  mainstay  of  their  power.  Himian  life  has 
lost  all  its  value. 


him  quite  willingly,  but  the  old  journaliat  did  not  like  to  barter  his  conscience. 
He  was  found  dead  in  an  empty  fiat.  The  medical  statement  was :  "  Death 
from  starvation." 


448     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

It  was  so  already  from  the  first  days  of  the  installa- 
tion of  the  so-called  Soviet  republic.  The  shooting  of 
military  cadets  and  officers  had  turned  into  wholesale 
massacres  at  such  places  for  instance  as  Sebastopol,  Sim- 
feropol, Kiev,  Vyborg,  Cronstadt,  etc.  This  happened 
at  the  time  when  Trotsky  and  his  comrades  were  openly 
talking  of  the  guillotine,  but  terror  was  not  proclaimed 
yet  as  a  system  of  government.  That  did  not  prevent 
the  Bolsheviks  murdering  anybody,  anywhere,  without 
trial,  or  any  other  vestige  of  justice. 

The  Red  Army  men  murdered  openly  in  the  streets 
the  people  who  did  not  happen  to  please  them.  Murders 
were  committed  in  prisons,  in  private  houses,  in  barracks 
— anywhere,  and  people  could  murder  anybody  they 
liked.  There  was  no  punishment  for  killing  a  human 
being,  as  there  is  no  punishment  for  killing  a  mouse. 

Once,  in  March  1918,  about  11  o'clock  in  the  night, 
I  was  returning  home  from  one  of  these  tedious,  in- 
effective meetings  held  for  no  practical  reason  whatever 
by  members  of  the  dissolved  municipal  council,  to  in- 
dulge in  quite  futile  argument  on  the  best  manner  of 
fighting  the  Bolsheviks.  One  could  not  well  refrain  from 
attending  these  secret  meetings  because  of  the  fact  that, 
notwithstanding  their  absolute  impotence,  they  provoked 
great  alarm  at  the  Bolshevist  headquarters  in  Smolny. 
Each  time  the  municipal  councillors  were  expecting  to 
be  raided  by  the  Red  Guards,  when  everybody  would 
be  arrested  and  prosecuted.  One  felt  it  a  duty  to  share 
with  the  rest  the  danger  of  being  transferred  to  the 
cellars  of  Smolny,  where  all  arrested  persons  were  in- 
terned, but  it  was  very  hard  to  sit  through  the  meetings. 
The  disjunction  of  Democratic  forces,  primarily  pushed 
to  the  fore  by  the  Revolution,  was  too  evident,  and  it 
was  not  clear  who  would  come  to  take  their  place  ? 
We    all   knew    for    sure    that   the   Bolsheviks    would 


EVERYDAY  LIFE  449 

vanish  sooner  or  later.     But  who  would  take  their 
place  ? 

Two  friends  were  seeing  me  home,  who  had  also 
taken  part  in  the  meeting.  We  were  finding  our  way 
with  difficulty  through  snowdrifts,  along  gloomy  streets, 
weird  and  deserted.  We  had  just  arrived  at  the 
entrance  of  my  house  when  we  heard  the  rattle  of  rifle 
fire.  It  was  the  sound  of  volleys  quite  near  to  us.  The 
young  porteress  opened  the  door,  put  her  head  carefully 
out,  and  looked  outside. 

"  It  seems  to  come  from  beyond  that  house,"  she 
said,  pointing  with  a  scared  look  at  a  house  separating 
us  from  the  Neva. 

"  No,  it  must  be  nearer,"  remarked  one  of  my 
friends  calmly.     "  It  seems  to  come  from  my  street." 

The  shooting  continued.  I  invited  my  friends  to 
come  in  and  wait  till  it  stopped.     They  refused. 

"  It  makes  no  difference.  They  will  stop  here  and 
begin  at  another  place.    We  are  sleepy." 

I  did  not  insist.  We  had  got  accustomed  to  the 
constant  firing.  Who  knew  when  any  one  of  us  would 
stop  a  stray  bullet  ?  Some  days  afterwards  we  got  to 
know  what  was  the  matter  in  this  particular  case. 
One  of  the  departments  of  the  Union  of  Towns  was 
working  for  the  prisoners  of  war.  The  department 
used  to  send  parcels  to  Germany  for  the  Russian 
prisoners — tobacco,  underwear,  lard,  bread,  and  tea. 
Some  rogue  suggested  the  idea  to  a  band  of  soldiers  of 
robbing  the  stores,  of  robbing  in  fact  the  starving 
Russian  prisoners.  For  several  days  the  premises  of 
the  Union  of  Towns  were  consecutively  invaded  by 
Red  Guards,  soldiers,  and  representatives  of  the  local 
Soviet.  They  broke  open  the  boxes,  carried  the  things 
away,  spoiling  and  destroying  as  much  as  they  stole, 
like  Germans  in  a  stormed  village.    And  this  was  done 

2g 


450     FEOM  LIBERTY  TO  BEEST-LITOVSK       ch. 

in  Petrograd,  quite  openly,  under  the  eyes  of  those 
who  called  themselves  the  People's  Government.  The 
men  at  the  head  of  the  Union  of  Towns  telephoned 
to  the  Smolny  demanding  that  the  interests  of  the 
prisoners  of  war  should  be  protected,  but  nothing  was 
done  and  the  stores  were  totally  devastated. 

One  of  those  robber-bands,  consisting  of  soldiers, 
were  storming  Millionnaya  Street,  where  the  Stores  had 
their  premises,  when  a  party  of  young  people  were  sitting 
around  the  tea-table.  It  was  a  farewell  party  arranged 
in  honour  of  the  brothers  Guenglezy,  who  were  going 
to  France  with  their  parents.  The  father  was  a  teacher 
at  a  secondary  school  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Petrograd. 
The  young  brothers  had  joined  the  French  Army  as 
officers  and  were  in  a  hurry  to  get  away  from  Petrograd 
as  the  Germans  were  already  approaching  the  city. 

The  Red  Guards  arrested  all  of  them,  as  indubitable 
members  of  the  White  Guard,  and  took  them  to  the 
Smolny.  Next  morning  the  young  girls  were  set  free, 
but  their  companions,  three  Russians  and  three  French- 
men, were  taken  during  the  night  to  the  icebound  Neva 
and  shot  on  the  ice.  As  a  matter  of  fact  they  were  not 
only  shot  but  slowly  and  cruelly  murdered.  Two  of 
the  bodies  were  found  quite  disfigured  and  with  evident 
vestiges  of  tortures.  The  eldest  of  the  murdered  young 
men  was  aged  twenty-four,  the  youngest  eighteen. 

Papers  were  still  appearing  at  the  time.  They 
published  all  the  details.  Letters  of  the  bereaved  father 
were  published,  demanding  why  his  sons  had  perished, 
suffering  in  such  a  terrible  manner  when  they  did  not  even 
take  any  part  in  politics  ?  The  People's  Commissaries 
considered  it  worth  while  to  declare  publicly  that  they 
had  nothing  to  do  with  the  murder,  but  the  murderers 
were  never  discovered,  they  were  never  named  even. 
Neither  were  the  murderers  of  Shingareff  and  Kokoshkin 


EVERYDAY  LIFE  461 

punished,  although  they  were  known.  Together  with 
the  six  students  a  seventh  person  was  shot,  whose 
identity  could  not  be  established.  Evidently  he  was 
included  quite  accidentally  in  the  massacre. 

The  number  of  such  accidental  and  non-accidental 
victims  was  practically  limitless,  both  in  the  cities  and 
in  the  provinces.  The  same  paper  that  published  the 
letter  of  M.  Guenglezy,  senior,  published  also  the  order 
instituting  an  inquiry  into  the  execution  by  shooting 
of  the  "  big  speculator  and  counter-revolutionary '' 
Apter,  by  the  Soviet  of  the  Petrograd  quarter.  The 
Soviet  authorities  explained  simultaneously  that  those 
**  criminals  alone  who  are  caught  red-handed  may  be 
shot  at  sight,  but  not  the  persons  kept  under  arrest 
by  the  Regional  Soviet."  Such  legal  subtleties  were 
not  easily  learned  by  the  Red  gendarmes.  Once  a 
person  is  arrested,  he  or  she  is  certainly  a  counter- 
revolutionary, and  a  counter-revolutionary  can  be 
killed,  and  there  you  are. 

There  was  an  official  communique,  published  on  the 
same  page  of  the  paper,^  stating  that  at  the  other  end 
of  the  city,  in  the  Rozhdestvensky  Soviet,  in  whose 
district  the  brothers  Guenglezy  and  their  friends  were 
murdered,  the  following  question  was  asked  by  the 
Social-Democrats  of  the  Mensheviks  section  : 

**  In  the  night  of  the  2nd-3rd  of  March,  in  the 
courtyard  of  the  house  N.  11  Kirillovskaia  Street, 
several  volleys  were  fired.  Some  time  after  this,  five 
dead  bodies  were  carried  out  of  the  house.  They  were 
heaped  on  a  sledge  and  taken  away.  In  the  house 
N.  11  a  military  unit  is  barracked.      Has  the  Executive 

*  I  quote  from  the  Constitutional  Democratic  paper,  Nash  Vitk^  of  the 
9th  of  March  1918.  I  have  tried  to  take  all  my  data  and  quotations  from  the 
Socialist  Press,  not  because  it  is  more  trustworthy,  I  would  not  say  that,  but 
as  I  had  to  speak  mostly  about  Socialists,  I  preferred  to  rely  upon  their  own 
sources.  In  March,  however,  in  Petrograd,  all  the  papers  were  suppressed 
except  N(uh  Vkh  and  Naaha  Zhizn. 


452     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

Committee  any  knowledge  of  this  case  ?  And  if  not, 
what  measures  are  to  be  taken  ?  " 

A  member  of  the  Rozhdestvensky  Soviet  explained 
that  five  soldiers  were  arrested  that  night  because  they 
were  preparing  to  commit  a  robbery  in  a  shop.  When 
caught,  it  was  ascertained  that  all  of  them  were  drunk. 
They  were  shot  in  the  street  at  sight. 

The  questioner  was  not  content  with  the  reply ;  he 
explained  quite  correctly  that  they  were  speaking  about 
different  bodies.  The  men  mentioned  by  him  were 
killed  in  the  courtyard.  Evidently  five  more  men  were 
shot  the  same  night  in  the  same  Rozhdestvensky 
district.^ 

All  this  happened  in  the  quarter  where  I  was  living. 
My  friends  and  I  heard  the  shooting  in  the  night,  but 
Heaven  only  knows  with  which  of  the  murders  the 
shooting  was  related.  We  did  not  know  what  was 
happening,  but  even  if  we  knew,  if  the  bloody  deed 
were  committed  under  our  eyes,  we  should  have  been 
powerless  to  stop  the  criminals  and  prevent  the  crime. 

Perhaps  they  did  not  consider  themselves  as  criminals, 
but  as  avengers,  justified  in  what  they  were  doing. 
They  were  told,  of  course,  that  the  bourgeois  and  their 
servants  were  enemies  of  the  people. 

Social  discontent,  existing  in  every  country,  was 
made  more  acute  by  the  propaganda  of  class  war  which, 
relentless  and  unimpeded,  went  on  from  the  first  days 
of  the  Revolution.  The  Bolsheviks  had  set  all  passions 
astir,  they  started  civil  war,  preaching  the  destruction 
of  the  bourgeoisie  together  with  the  intellectuals,  as  one 
of  the  best  means  of  creating  a  paradise  on  earth.  The 
impunity  of  murderers  added  a  special  perversity  to 

^  This  did  not  close  the  list  of  murders  reported  in  that  issue  of  the  paper. 
Reports  were  also  published  of  atrocities  in  Sebastopol  and  Kiev,  neither  was 
it  some  extraordinary  special  issue.  Every  day  when  we  get  the  papers  we 
read  in  them  reports  and  desciiptions  of  murders  and  other  crimes. 


XV  EVERYDAY  LIFE  463 

the  crime,  which  the  Bolsheviks  increased  by  glorifying 
as  a  most  gallant  deed  the  destruction  of  the  bourgeois 
and  any  other  enemies  of  Bolshevism.  Animosity 
between  human  beings  forms  an  inseparable  part  of 
Bolshevist  ideology.  And  as  the  masses  were  already 
irritated,  apart  from  that,  by  disorder  and  impoverish- 
ment, there  was  no  difficulty  in  stirring  up  their  evil 
instincts  and  inducing  them  to  commit  dark  deeds. 

The  more  so  because  the  example  was  given  from 
the  top.  The  crowd  considered  the  Soviets  as  chiefs 
who  at  any  rate  were  now  the  masters.  And  most 
malicious,  partly  criminal  elements  congregated  around 
the  Soviets.  They  formed  the  new  governing  Class, 
unfettered  by  law,  tradition,  public  opinion,  or  bonds 
of  connection  with  the  people  to  whom  they  were  absolute 
strangers.  They  could  arrest,  rob,  assault,  murder  as 
much  as  they  liked,  with  perfect  impimity.  And  their 
own  crimes  had  gradually  killed  the  soul  of  these  people 
and  their  conscience.  They  suffer  from  moral  insanity. 
One  has  only  to  read  the  descriptions  of  massacres  of 
officers,  of  the  wholesale  murder  of  the  Romanoff  family, 
of  the  crushing  of  revolts  in  towns  and  villages,  to  see 
that  human  sufferings  do  not  arouse  any  longer  a  feeling 
of  pity  in  the  souls  of  the  Bolsheviks  and  their  servants, 
and  do  not  even  raise  in  them  any  healthy  aversion. 
Without  fear  or  disgust  they  go  on  committing  murders 
and  atrocities. 

The  lust  of  sadism,  with  which  the  actions  of  the 
Bolshevist  leaders  are  marked,  is  undoubtedly  con- 
taminating a  part  of  the  population. 
^^.^However,  despite  all  these  acts  of  madness,  despite 
the  flood  of  blood  covering  the  Russian  land,  it  would 
be  a  very  great  injustice  to  accuse  the  Russian  People 
as  a  whole  of  all  these  crimes.  The  guilty  party  are  the 
leaders  and  instigators,  the  doctrine  is  guilty,  which  is 


454    FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK    ch.  xv 

based  upon  the  naked  beastly  fight  for  material  welfare 
alone,  upon  the  absolute  negation  of  the  value  of  human 
personality,  which  is  deprived  of  the  spark  of  God-like, 
Christian  love  of  man  for  man  that  the  best  intellects 
during  many  centuries  have  tried  to  hand  on  from 
generation  to  generation.  Trotsky,  Lenin,  Zinonieff, 
Radek,  Parvus,  Kolontay,  all  these  people  cannot  give 
the  crowd  more  than  they  have  got  themselves.  And 
precisely  the  moral  principle  is  lacking  in  them  which 
is  the  cement  binding  together  human  society.  Detesta- 
tion of  falsehood,  love  of  truth,  consideration  for  the 
human  personality,  pity  and  conscience,  all  qualities, 
in  fact,  that  are  the  essentials  of  true  humanity,  are 
lacking  in  these  people,  and  the  teaching  they  are 
propounding  does  not  bind  them  by  any  moral  impera- 
tives. Therefore  do  they  carry  with  them  death  and 
decay. 

If  their  immorality  should  penetrate  to  the  core  of 
the  masses,  Russia  would  be  definitely  turned  into  a 
desert,  inhabited  by  savage  beasts.  But  I  am  sure 
that  the  people  have  still  preserved  a  sort  of  moral 
restraint.  The  conscience  of  the  people  is  not  dead 
yet.  The  desire  to  build  up  a  human  life,  a  life  of 
justice,  of  order,  is  still  conserved. 

Notwithstanding  the  lack  of  any  restraint,  or  any 
prohibitions  by  the  police  and  the  authorities,  wholesale 
burglaries  and  wholesale  destruction  of  the  intellectuals 
began  only  after  the  Bolsheviks  had  systematically 
started  the  thing  themselves.  And  even  then  they  had 
to  perpetrate  these  abominable  deeds  with  the  help  of 
hired  alien  criminals  and  executioners,  Hungarians, 
Chinese,  and  Letts. 

Evidently  Russians  were  unfit  for  such  a  sordid 
business. 


CHAPTER   XVI 

WAR   WITH   THE   RUSSIANS — PEACE   WITH   THE   GERMANS 

The  Self- Determination  of  Nations — The  Home  Front — Stories  of  a  World 
Revolution — Brest-Litovsk  Diplomacy — ^The  Break  with  the  Germans 
— Lenin  and  Trotsky — Panic — ^The  Socialistic  Fatherland  and  the 
Red  Army — ^The  Approach  of  the  Germans — Peace  signed  on  March  3. 

While  yet  preparing  to  seize  the  supreme  power,  the 
Bolsheviks  had  drawn  up  their  principal  decrees.  Among 
these  was  a  solemn  declaration  of  the  rights  of  the 
peoples  of  Russia.  The  Bolsheviks  attached  great  im- 
portance to  it  and  published  it  almost  simultaneously 
with  the  decrees  concerning  the  land  and  peace  (15th 
November). 

This  declaration  established  the  following  abstract 
principles  :  (1)  the  equality  and  the  sovereign  rights  of 
the  peoples  of  Russia  ;  (2)  the  right  of  the  peoples  of 
Russia  to  free  self-determination,  extending  to  their 
separation  and  the  formation  by  them  of  independent 
states ;  and  (3)  the  free  development  of  the  national 
minority  and  of  the  racial  groups  peopling  the  territory 
of  Russia. 

As  this  territory  is  inhabited  by  no  fewer  than  one 
hundred  different  races,  any  measure  extending  or  alter- 
ing their  mutual  relations  is  of  course  of  great  im- 
portance not  only  for  each  one  of  them  individually,  but 
also  for  Russia  as  a  whole. 

The  proper  solution  of  the  national  question  has  long 

455 


456     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

occupied  the  attention  of  public  thought  in  Russia.  The 
centralising  rule  of  autocracy  raised  many  obstacles  to  the 
free  and  reasonable  development  both  of  its  non-Russian 
subject  nationalities  and  of  the  Russian  people  itself, 
and  this  considerably  weakened  the  coherence  and  unity 
of  Russia.  But  in  spite  of  this  short-sightedness,  not- 
withstanding all  the  blunders  of  the  bureaucracy,  Russian 
rule  in  the  East,  in  Siberia,  in  Central  Asia,  in  Trans- 
Caucasia,  improved  the  economic  and  social  conditions 
of  life  among  the  native  population,  laid  down  railways, 
introduced  a  postal  and  telegraph  service,  opened  schools, 
instituted  courts  of  justice,  and  guaranteed  safety  to  all. 

Russian  literature,  journalism,  science,  and  art  had  an 
enormous  influence  on  the  more  educated  members  of 
the  various  races,  for  whom  the  Russian  intellectual  class 
was  rather  a  comrade  in  the  development  of  one  general 
Russian  form  of  civilisation  than  the  representative  of 
a  conquering,  sovereign  race.  They  were  especially 
brought  together  by  a  common  struggle  with  the  old 
regime.  Georgians,  Jews,  Armenians,  Tartars,  Esthon- 
ians,  Russians — all  struggled  together  for  political  free- 
dom. It  seemed  as  if  amidst  common  privations  and 
persecutions,  in  prison  and  in  exile,  they  had  formed  a 
firm  alliance,  that  they  might  afterwards,  working  all 
together  and  as  one  man,  create  more  fitting  conditions 
of  life  in  Russia.  Of  course,  there  were  diSering  currents 
of  thought  among  them,  but  on  the  whole  the  leading 
intelligent  classes  not  only  of  the  Great  Russian  race, 
but  of  Russia  in  the  broad  sense  of  the  word,  were  ad- 
vancing toward  that  political  order  which  gives  ea.ch 
race,  each  territory,  the  possibility  of  free  development. 

Almost  all  were  agreed  as  to  the  necessity  for  the 
broad  autonomy  of  races.  The  autonomous  point  of 
view  was  developed  in  greatest  detail  by  the  Cadet 
party.     The  Socialists,  and  a  section  of  the  Radicals, 


WAR  WITH  THE  RUSSIANS  467 

went  further  and  insisted  on  federation.  Under  auto- 
cratic rule  this  dispute  was  of  semi-conspirative  nature, 
as  even  abstract  ideas,  when  not  in  accord  with  the 
views  of  the  Government,  were  then  punished  as  a 
crime,  while  the  pursuit  of  autonomy  was  regarded  as 
an  attempt  on  the  unity  of  the  Russian  Empire.  After 
the  Revolution  of  March  1917  the  various  racial  move- 
ments assumed  an  impassioned  character.  The  Polish 
question  was  simplest  of  all  to  solve.  The  Provisional 
Government  proclaimed  Poland  an  independent  state. 
Finland  got  back  her  constitutional  rights,  infringed  by 
the  Imperial  Government  during  the  last  quarter  of  a 
century.  But  the  claims  of  Finland  to  complete  in- 
dependence were  not  supported  either  by  the  Govern- 
ment of  Prince  Lvoff  or  by  that  of  Kerensky.  Other 
races  which  had  never  yet  enjoyed  national  independence 
or  had  lost  it  long  ago  {e.g,  the  Georgians)  made  various 
demands,  which  frequently  did  not  express  the  will  of 
the  people,  but  merely  the  ambitions  of  a  small  group. 
Attempts  were  made  at  the  separation  of  whole  terri- 
tories which  had  never  yet  claimed  independence  (the 
Ukraine). 

"  The  Provisional  Government  did  not  attempt  to  meet 
these  demands,  considering  that  it  had  no  right  to  settle 
such  fundamental  questions  without  the  representatives 
of  the  people,  and  awaited  the  summoning  of  the  Con- 
stituent Assembly  for  their  solution. 

But  the  Bolsheviks  shattered  all  these  national 
dreams.  Their  attitude  towards  the  nationalities  of 
Russia  is  full  of  their  characteristic  contradiction  be- 
tween solemn  and  pathetic  promises  on  paper  and 
shameless  arbitrariness  in  practice.  This  characteristic 
runs  right  through  all  their  actions,  as  the  reflection  of 
their  disorderly  anarchism.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
predominant  Marxist  side  of  their  teaching  impels  them 


458     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BRE8T-LIT0VSK       ch. 

to  an  international  imperialism  distinctly  opposed  to 
the  principle  of  racial  self-determination. 

Marx  placed  class  distinctions  above  national  ones 
(the  proletariat  has  no  fatherland).  This  idea,  with 
certain  variations,  emerges  at  all  the  international  Social- 
Democratic  congresses.  Lenin,  in  fact,  makes  it  his 
direct  aim  to  create,  by  means  of  a  world-revolution,  a 
class  super-state,  extending  over  the  whole  world.  His 
speeches  on  the  free  self-determination  of  nations  are 
inevitably  filled  with  hypocrisy  and  falsehood.  The  very 
idea  of  freedom  is  a  stranger  to  Lenin  and  his  comrades, 
and  is  incompatible  with  their  Moslem-like  conviction 
that  the  Bolshevist  Koran  contains  all  those  truths  which 
must  be  instilled  into  mankind  by  sword  and  fire.  But 
when,  for  the  extension  of  the  influence  and  authority 
of  the  Soviet  of  People's  Commissaries,  they  stood  in 
need  of  one  or  another  nation,  they  always  tried  to 
bribe  it  by  verbal  promises. 

Following  the  general  declaration  of  the  self-deter- 
mination of  nations,  decrees  were  issued  and  appeals 
made  to  the  individual  peoples.  Having  begun  separate 
peace  negotiations  with  the  Germans,  the  Bolsheviks 
started  a  zealous  anti-British  propaganda  in  the  East, 
particularly  emphasising  the  despotism  of  the  British  in 
India. 

On  5th  December  Lenin  issued  an  appeal  to  the 
"  Mussulman  workers  of  Russia  and  the  East." 

Moslems  of  the  East,  Tartars  of  the  Volga  and  the  Crimea, 
Kirghizes  and  Sarts  of  Siberia  and  Turkestan,  Turks  and  Tartars 
of  the  Trans-Caucasus,  Chechentsi  and  mountaineers  of  the 
Caucasus,  all  ye  whose  mosques  and  houses  of  prayer  have  been 
destroyed,  whose  beliefs  and  customs  have  been  trampled  under 
foot  by  the  Tsars  and  oppressors  of  Russia :  Henceforth  your 
beliefs  and  customs,  the  institutions  of  your  national  civilisation, 
are  free  and  unassailable.    Live  your  lives  freely  and  without 


XVI  WAR  WITH  THE  RUSSIANS  459 

hindrance.  .  .  .  Support  the  Revolution  and  its  fully-empowered 
Government.  .  .  . 

Moslems  of  the  East,  Persians  and  Turks,  Arabs  and  Hindoos, 
all  ye  whose  lives  and  property,  freedom  and  native  land  have 
for  centuries  been  but  objects  of  traffic  for  the  greedy  marauders 
of  Europe,  all  ye  whose  lands  the  robbers  who  began  the  War 
(i.e.  the  Allies)  desire  to  share  ! 

Far-off  India,  that  India  which  has  been  oppressed  for 
centuries  by  the  enlightened  freebooters  of  Europe,  has  already 
raised  the  banner  of  revolt,  organising  its  Soviet  of  Delegates, 
throwing  off  the  hated  yoke  of  slavery,  and  calling  the  peoples 
of  the  East  to  battle  and  to  liberation. 

In  the  declaration  declining  Constantinople  for 
Russia  it  proceeds : 

The  treaty  for  the  partition  of  Turkey  and  its  surrender  of 
Armenia  is  torn  up  and  destroyed.  As  soon  as  military  operations 
are  over,  the  Armenians  will  be  guaranteed  the  right  of  freely 
determining  their  political  destiny. 

This  passage  is  clearly  calculated  to  attract  the  sym- 
pathies of  the  Turks,  not  of  the  Armenians.  After  the 
terrible  massacres  of  the  Armenians  by  the  Turks  during 
the  war  (with  the  indubitable  participation  of  the 
Germans)  to  speak  of  the  free  self-determination  of  an 
Armenia  not  separated  from  Turkey  is  simply  mockery 
of  the  Armenian  people.  The  declaration  is  signed  by 
Lenin  and  by  Dzhugashvili,  the  Commissary  for  National 
Affairs.  The  latter  is  a  Georgian,  and  a  section  of  the 
Georgians  has  always  been  hostile  to  the  Armenians, 
and  in  Trans-Caucasia  has  fought  against  them  in 
alliance  with  the  Mohammedans.  This  also  explains 
a  great  deal. 

It  must  also  be  remarked  that  the  declaration  refers 
to  Mussulman  beliefs  with  a  respect  with  which  the 
Bolshevist  Commissaries  never  speak  of  the  Christian 
Orthodox  Church  dominant  in  Russia. 


460     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       oh. 

Later,  during  the  Brest-Litovsk  peace  negotiations, 
where  Turkey  kept  increasing  the  demands  she  presented 
to  the  Bolshevist  delegates,  a  special  decree  concerning 
Turkish  Armenia  was  issued  (14th  of  January).  In  it 
it  was  announced  that  the  Soviet  of  People's  Com- 
missaries "  supports  the  right  of  the  Armenians  to  self- 
determination,  extending  to  independence." 

For  this  end  the  following  guarantees  were  to  be 
given :  the  Russian  troops  were  to  be  withdrawn  and 
replaced  by  a  popular  militia,  and  a  Soviet  of  Delegates 
of  the  Armenian  People  was  to  be  created. 

This  latter  point  expresses  the  real  attitude  of  the 
Bolsheviks  to  different  nationalities.  Submit  to  us,  in- 
troduce our  system  of  government  among  yourselves, 
ruin  your  own  people  as  we  are  ruining  the  Russians, 
and  we  will  be  your  friends. 

The  celebrated  formula  of  the  self-determination  of 
nations,  which  brought  so  much  confusion  into  the 
Russian  Revolution  and  about  which  the  Bolsheviks 
raised  the  loudest  clamour,  was  now  interpreted  by 
them  exclusively  as  the  self-determination  of  nations  on 
a  Bolshevist  basis. 

During  his  negotiations  with  Trotsky  at  Brest 
General  Hoffman,  in  declining  to  accept  this  formula, 
was  fully  entitled  to  refer  to  the  fact  that  the  Bol- 
sheviks themselves  acknowledged  the  right  of  peoples 
to  self-determination  less  than  any  one  else. 

The  Bolsheviks  broke  up  the  Congress  of  White 
Russians  at  Minsk  at  the  point  of  the  bayonet  (31st 
December).  They  not  only  sent  an  ultimatum  to  the 
Rada  (Council)  of  the  Ukraine  in  Kiev  (19th  December), 
but  even  began  a  regular  war  against  it.  In  the  Caucasus 
the  Georgians  saved  themselves  from  the  Bolsheviks  by 
rushing  into  the  arms  of  the  Germans.  In  Moscow 
itself  the  Soviet  forbade  the  Union  of  Great  Russians 


XVI  WAR  WITH  THE  RUSSIANS  461 

to  hold  meetings  and  to  print  papers.  The  Bolshevist 
troops  obliged  the  Don  Cossacks  by  force  to  acknowledge 
the  authority  of  the  People's  Commissaries. 

These  were  individual  episodes  in  that  ferocious  and 
savage  civil  war  to  which  the  Bolsheviks  devoted  them- 
selves, sometimes  with  the  fury  of  fanatics,  some- 
times with  the  greed  of  banditti,  while  at  times 
they  managed  to  combine  the  psychology  of  both. 
The  leaders  of  the  Bolsheviks  strove  to  concentrate  the 
attention  of  the  masses,  of  whom  they  were  then  masters, 
on  the  details  of  civil  war,  that  their  thoughts  might  be 
diverted  from  the  peace  with  the  Germans.  The  Soviet 
published  news  of  what  was  doing  at  Brest-Litovsk,  but 
sparingly  and  incompletely.  On  the  other  hand,  it  pub- 
lished joyful  official  telegrams  about  its  victories  on  the 
Home  Front,  about  the  capture  of  Moscow  and  Orenburg, 
Vorenezh  and  Simferopol,  Kiev,  Taganrog,  Rostoff, 
Irkutsk,  and  many  other  Russian  cities.  The  Democratic 
peace,  about  which  the  Bolshevist  Press  continued  to 
clamour,  amounted  to  nothing  more  than  a  hasty  and 
shameful  capitulation  to  a  powerful  Germany  and  to 
new  wars  with  less  powerful  opponents  at  home. 

On  1 9th  December  an  ultimatum  was  sent  to  the 
Rada.  On  24th  January  a  war  broke  out  in  Finland 
between  the  Reds  and  the  Whites,  in  which  the  Bol- 
shevist Guards  took  an  active  part.  On  27th  January 
war  began  with  Roumania,  against  whom  the  Bolsheviks, 
for  some  reason  or  other,  had  long  borne  a  grudge.  (May 
not  Rakovsky,  Lenin's  Roumanian  associate,  have  had 
a  finger  in  the  pie  ?)  On  31st  December  the  Bolsheviks 
imprisoned  the  Roumanian  Ambassador  in  the  Petro- 
pavlovsky  fortress  and  released  him  only  on  the  demand 
of  the  whole  corps  diplomatiqice,  who  visited  the  Smolny 
for  the  purpose.  But  when,  after  the  declaration  of 
war,  the  Soviet  of  People's  Commissaries,  in  the  rudest 


462     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

manner  possible,  forced  the  Roumanian  Legation  to 
leave  Russia  at  twenty-four  hours'  notice,  the  diplo- 
matists of  the  Alliance  were  powerless  to  shield  the 
dignity  of  their  colleagues.  This,  however,  is  far  from 
being  the  only  instance  of  the  helplessness  exhibited  by 
the  diplomatists  of  the  Alliance  before  the  insolence  of 
the  Bolsheviks,  with  respect  to  whom  the  political  leaders 
of  the  Entente  failed  to  assume  any  definite  attitude. 

Roumania  retaliated  on  the  Bolsheviks  by  disarming 
the  Russian  troops  on  her  territory,  which  may  of  course 
have  been  a  matter  of  necessity.  But  she  also  occupied 
a  portion  of  Russian  territory,  including  Kishineff,  the 
principal  city  of  Bessarabia. 

On  all  the  other  fronts  the  Bolsheviks  fought 
with  varying  success,  sometimes  retreating,  sometimes 
victorious. 

The  different  stages  of  this  bloody  and  insane  civil 
war  are  so  confused  and  form  such  a  chaos  that  to 
describe  them  in  brief  is  far  from  easy.  The  fact  alone 
that  at  one  and  the  same  time,  though  in  different 
places  and  in  differing  mutual  relations,  the  Germans 
were  now  the  allies,  now  the  antagonists,  of  the  Bol- 
sheviks, complicates  the  story  seriously.  As  a  general 
rule  it  may  be  stated  that  the  Germans  supported  the 
Bolshevist  authority  in  such  actions  as  tended  to  the 
ruin  of  Russia.  They  also  supported  in  their  struggle 
against  Bolshevist  authority  those  parts  of  Russia  or 
those  nationalities  whose  separatist  tendencies  were  a 
danger  to  the  future  unification  of  Russia. 

In  Finland  the  Germans  assisted  the  White  Guard 
to  defeat  the  Reds,  and  helped  toward  the  separation 
of  Finland  from  Russia.  In  the  Ukraine  the  Germans 
supported  the  separatists,  thus  fulfilling  the  cherished 
idea  of  Bismarck,  who  had  dreamt  of  weakening  Russia 
by  cutting  off  the  wealthy  South  from  the  industrial 


WAR  WITH  THE  RUSSIANS  463 

North.  On  the  Don  the  German  prisoners  of  war  and 
officers  helped  the  Bolsheviks  to  drive  out  of  the  Cossack 
territory  the  handful  of  officers  who  under  General 
AlexeiefE  and  General  Korniloff  had  just  begun  the 
fonnation  of  the  Volunteer  Army.  In  Siberia  the 
Germans,  along  with  the  Bolsheviks,  established  the 
destructive  Soviet  Authority  by  the  most  bloody  of 
methods.  Yet  at  the  same  time,  after  the  conclusion  of 
the  Brest-Litovsk  peace,  when  a  German  Ambassador 
was  already  in  Moscow,  the  Moscow  papers  printed 
official  telegrams  from  the  Vorenezh  front  reporting 
the  capture  by  the  Germans  of  one  or  another  village 
from  the  Bolsheviks.  The  German  forces  did  this  in 
agreement  with  the  Ukraine  Government,  which  in 
January  1918  had  sent  a  separate  delegation  to  Brest 
and  concluded  a  separate  peace  with  the  Germans.  The 
Bolsheviks  did  not  acknowledge  either  this  peace  or  the 
right  of  the  Ukraine  to  conclude  a  separate  peace  in 
general.  On  January  30th,  aided  by  the  local  Bol- 
sheviks, they  brought  about  a  revolution  in  Kiev.  They 
deposed  the  Rada  and  instituted  Soviets.  The  Ukraine 
Government  tried  conclusions  with  the  latter.  But  the 
forces  of  the  Soviet  of  People's  Commissaries  came  up 
and  occupied  Kiev  after  a  series  of  bloody  battles  and 
a  destructive  bombardment  of  the  city.  This  Bolshevist 
victory  was  accompanied  by  a  regular  massacre.  Not 
satisfied  with  the  death  or  the  shooting  of  those  officers 
who  had  fought  in  the  field,  the  Bolsheviks  went  from 
house  to  house  with  their  lists  and  shot  down  the  officers 
whom  they  found  without  mercy,  in  the  presence  of 
their  wives,  mothers,  and  children.  According  to  an 
approximate  estimate,  about  2000  officers  were  killed. 
The  story  of  the  Kiev  massacre  is  one  of  the  most  abomin- 
able blood-stained  pages  in  the  dark  story  of  the 
Russian  Civil  War. 


464     FROM  LIBEETY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

Ferocity  is  the  distinguisliing  feature  of  all  the  feats 
of  the  Bolsheviks  on  the  home  front.  They  acknow- 
ledge this  themselves,  and  even  emphasise  their  ruthless- 
ness  in  their  conflict  with  the  recusants. 

At  the  third  Congress  of  Soviets  Lenin  said  :  "  Yes, 
we  are  men  of  violence.  We  stand  for  violence  against 
those  who  exploit  the  poor,  and  we  are  not  to  be  shaken 
by  the  cries  of  those  who  weep  and  lose  their  heads  in 
the  face  of  the  great  struggle."     (January  22nd.) 

They  showed  especial  cruelty  towards  the  so-called 
Komilovists.  The  Bolsheviks  hastened  to  crush  the 
Russian  Army  in  the  process  of  regeneration,  because 
they  were  afraid  of  this  handful  of  brave  men  who  had 
carried  off  the  national  flag  of  Russia  to  the  Don,  so 
that  what  was  left  of  real  Russia  might  rally  round  it. 

Hastily  echelon  after  echelon  of  the  Soviet  troops 
were  despatched  to  the  so-called  Don  front.  That  they 
might  concentrate  all  their  as  yet  insignificant  forces 
against  the  Komilovists,  the  Bolsheviks  were  ready  to 
make  any  terms  with  the  Germans. 

This  willingness  to  give  way  to  the  Germans  was 
not  a  matter  of  chance,  nor  simple  treachery,  but  part 
of  a  definite  plan.  By  strengthening  their  position  in 
Russia,  even  though  it  were  with  the  help  of  German 
Generals,  the  Bolsheviks  satisfied  their  vast  ambitions 
and  made  for  themselves  a  base  for  organising  a  universal 
revolutionary  conflagration.  As  to  their  first  personal 
aim,  of  course,  they  were  silent ;  about  the  second  they 
raised  as  great  a  clamour  as  they  could. 

Their  leaders,  especially  those  acquainted  with  the 
life  of  the  West,  such  as  Lenin  and  Trotsky,  lied  de- 
liberately, afl&rming  that  the  world-revolution  had  be- 
come a  fact.i    This  lie  was  repeated  without  cessation, 

*  They  affirmed  this  beginning  with  the  autumn  of  1917.    Since  that  time 
mw^  changes  have  t^ken  place  in  the  world.    Thanks  to  the  wonderful  energy 


XVI  PEACE  WITH  THE  GERMANS  466 

in  print  and  verbally,  and  in  the  reports  brought  from 
abroad  by  Bolshevist  Commissaries. 

A  few  days  after  the  November  Revolution  the 
Moscow  Izvestia  (the  official  organ  of  the  Bolsheviks) 
published  the  report  of  the  foreign  delegation  of  the 
Bolsheviks  on  the  international  situation. 

"  There  is  no  European  revolution,"  said  the  report,  "  but 
the  period  of  ferment  among  the  popular  masses  of  the  warring 
countries  is  already  giving  way  to  a  new  period  of  open  mass 
struggle  for  peace.  The  existence  of  a  Workmen's  and  Peasants* 
Government  in  Russia,  the  definite  practical  steps  it  has  taken 
towards  the  conclusion  of  peace,  and  the  demand  for  an  armistice, 
will  cause  the  proletariat  of  all  the  warring  countries  to  rise,  and 
the  more  powerful  and  determined  the  Workmen's  Government 
will  be,  the  sooner  the  popular  movement  in  favour  of  peace  will 
pass  into  an  open  revolutionary  outbreak."  (November  21, 1917.) 

In  another  article  the  delegates  wrote  : 

The  creation  of  a  united  democratic  front  among  us  will 
give  a  powerful  impetus  to  the  cause  of  peace.  The  voice  of  the 
proletariat  sounds  in  the  West.    Peace  is  coming. 

This  theme,  with  sundry  variations,  has  been  con- 
stantly repeated  by  the  Bolshevist  Press.  The  clearer 
became  the  severity  of  the  German  conditions  of  peace, 
the  more  shamelessly  the  Bolshevist  orators  and  jour- 
nalists clamoured  about  the  general  peace  which  the 
coming  world-revolution  would  bring  with  it. 

In  Austria,  indeed,  in  January  1918  a  great  ferment 
broke  out  among  the  workmen.  The  foreign  corre- 
spondents of  the  Soviet  exaggerated  it  and  wired  news 
of  great  disturbances  in  Germany.  This  coincided  with 
the  Third  Congress  of  Soviets. 

The  imcultured,  poorly  educated  majority  in  the 

of  the  Bolsheviks  and  the  no  less  wonderful  short-sightedness  of  the  statesmen 
of  the  West,  the  Revolution  has  actually  become  a  universal  fact,  and  who 
knows  when  and  how  it  will  end  ? 

2h 


466     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

Congress  were  unable  to  penetrate  the  depths  of  the 
deception  in  which  they  were  entangled.  It  was  in 
vain  that  the  scanty  opposition,  the  so-called  Social 
Patriots,  strove  to  explain  to  the  peasants  and  workmen 
gathered  at  the  Congress  that  the  Bolsheviks  were  lead- 
ing Russia  to  destruction.  They  were  simply  ignored. 
The  vanity  of  the  delegates  was  flattered  by  the  mis- 
taken conviction  instilled  into  them  that  they  were 
masters  of  the  situation  and  that  the  Commissaries  were 
mere  executors  of  their  will,  though,  as  a  matter  of 
fact,  the  Soviet  of  People's  Commissaries  even  then 
formed  not  the  dictatorship  of  the  proletariat,  but  a 
dictatorship  over  the  proletariat. 

Partly  in  order  that  with  the  help  of  the  Congress 
the  Russian  proletariat  might  be  prepared  for  the  de- 
gradation of  Brest-Litovsk,  partly  because,  perhaps, 
they  really  still  calculated  on  the  support  of  their  German 
comrades  and  wished  to  gain  time,  the  People's  Com- 
missaries succeeded,  about  the  end  of  January,  in  obtain- 
ing a  ten  days'  suspension  of  the  peace  negotiations  and 
carried  on  a  double  game  at  the  Congress.  In  a  series 
of  clever  speeches  Trotsky  withdrew  the  attention  of  its 
members  from  the  external  front  to  the  home  front.  The 
international  position  of  the  Soviet  Republic  was  repre- 
sented as  being  not  at  all  that  of  a  country  severed  from 
its  friends  and  given  over  into  the  hands  of  its  enemies. 
On  the  contrary,  certain  little -known  foreign  orators, 
speaking  for  the  Socialists  of  Switzerland,  America, 
Sweden  and  Norway,  assured  the  simple  members  of 
the  Congress  that  the  whole  world  was  following  the 
proceedings  of  the  Workmen's  and  Peasants'  Govern- 
ment with  admiration.  According  to  the  words  of  these 
visitors,  Parliamentarianism  had  outlived  itself  every- 
where, and  the  power  of  the  old  capitalist  system,  which 
could  not  resist  the  pressure  of  the  victorious  proletariat, 


XVI  PEACE  WITH  THE  GERMANS  467 

was  coming  to  an  end  everywhere.  Their  hearers  grate- 
fully applauded  them,  without  asking  either  of  what 
groups  in  particular  they  were  delegates,  or  in  what 
manner  the  success  of  the  Social  revolution  had  ex- 
pressed itself  in  the  countries  in  whose  name  they  spoke. 
Chicherin,  the  future  Minister  of  Foreign  AfEairs, 
who  at  that  time  was  quite  unknown,  except  for  the 
fact  that  he  had  just  returned  from  England,  where  he 
had  been  imprisoned  for  pacifist  agitation,  represented 
the  political  condition  of  Great  Britain  in  January 
1918  in  the  following  manner  : 

The  working  masses  of  England  are  turning  their  eyes 
towards  revolutionary  Russia,  and  are  beginning  to  exhibit 
great  political  activity  in  their  own  country.  The  revolutionary 
ferment  in  England  is  growing,  in  spite  of  all  the  efforts  of  the 
leaders  of  the  English  compromising  Socialist  parties,  who  strive 
to  restrain  the  revolutionary  current  in  the  masses  by  means 
of  watchwords  stolen  from  the  Russian  revolutionaries.  A 
shameless  campaign  of  persecution  and  slander  is  carried  on  by 
the  venal  Press  of  the  English  bourgeoisie  against  the  Russian 
revolutionary  movement. 

The  People's  Commissaries  kept  repeating  in  all  pos- 
sible forms  that  the  proletariat  of  Russia  had  become 
the  vanguard  of  the  proletariat  of  the  world,  that 
Europe  and  America  gazed  with  envy  on  the  Soviet 
Republic  which  had  created  a  new  Socialistic  paradise. 

Chaos  reigned  all  around.  Fighting  went  on.  Rail- 
way transport  deteriorated  more  and  more,  and  grew 
slower  and  slower.  Difficulties  in  the  supply  of  food 
were  clearly  leading  to  famine.  Germany  was  treating 
Russia  as  a  conquered  country,  yet  at  the  same  time 
the  Izvestia  wrote : 

Now,  when  the  revolution  has  begun  in  Germany  as  well, 
our  comrades  at  Brest  are  supported  by  the  workmen  not  of 
Russia  alone,  but  also  of  the  Central  Powers.    And  this  support 


468     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK      on. 

gives  them  indomitable  power,  and  they  will  know  how  to  re- 
sist the  demands  of  Austro-German  Imperialism.  {Izvestia, 
February  3,  1918.) 

This  was  published  in  an  official  organ  at  a  moment 
when  both  the  Bolshevist  civil  employees  and  all  who 
read  the  papers  knew  of  the  indemnities  and  annexations 
required  of  Russia  by  the  Germans.  The  German 
Generals  went  their  own  way.  If  they  had  condescended 
to  negotiate  with  the  Bolsheviks,  whom  of  course  they 
despised,  it  was  not  that  the  Conference  at  Brest-Litovsk 
should  be  turned  into  a  political  meeting,  whence  the 
voices  of  the  Bolshevist  agitators  might  resound  over  the 
whole  of  Europe.  The  Germans  needed,  at  any  cost,  a 
speedy  cessation  of  military  operations  on  their  Eastern 
front  and  a  treaty  even  if  signed  by  the  Soviet  of  People's 
Commissaries.  They  would  have  been  very  glad  if  the 
treaty  could  have  been  signed  by  some  one  of  greater 
authority,  but  this  was  impossible.  When  Count  Mir- 
bach  brought  his  delegation  to  Petrograd,  there  were 
men  among  his  Staff  who  had  formerly  lived  in  Russia 
and  had  old  acquaintances  among  the  Russians.  They 
tried  to  renew  their  intercourse  with  them,  and  both  in 
Petrograd  and  in  Moscow  sought  to  enter  into  negotia- 
tions with  more  responsible  Russian  circles  and  men  of 
mark.  All  this,  of  course,  was  carried  on  in  great 
secrecy ;  but  I  have  the  right  to  affirm  that  such  at- 
tempts were  made,  that  the  Germans  made  applications 
to  commercial  and  industrial  circles  and  to  politicians, 
but  met  with  an  energetic  repulse.  The  feeling  of  loyalty 
to  the  Allies  was  too  strong  among  them,  and  did  not 
admit  of  any  compromises  with  the  enemy.  Perforce 
the  Germans  had  to  continue  their  negotiations  with  the 
Bolsheviks,  though  of  course  they  could  not  but  under- 
stand that  a  peace  treaty  signed  by  Trotsky,  Radek,  & 
Co.  was  neither  more  nor  less  than  a   forged  bill  of 


PEACE  WITH  THE  GERMANS  469 

exchange.  Like  usurers  doing  business  with  a  slippery 
customer,  the  Germans  accepted  a  document  which  went 
beyond  the  bounds  of  all  prudence,  so  that  when  the 
day  of  reckoning  came  there  might  be  something  to 
discount. 

The  chronology  of  the  peace  negotiations  between 
the  Soviet  of  People's  Commissaries  and  the  Central 
Powers  was  as  follows  : 

November  12 — Peace  decree. 

„  13 — The  parlementaires  under  Lieut.  Schneur 

set  forth. 
„         28 — Meeting  of  the  Plenipotentiaries  at  Brest- 
Litovsk. 
December  18 — Armistice. 

„  31 — The  Russo-German  Conference  in  Petrograd 

began  work. 
February   10 — The  Russian  delegation  declined  to  sign 
the  Peace  Treaty. 
„  18 — The  Germans  resumed  miUtary  operations. 

„  19 — The    Soviet    of    People's    Commissaries 

despatched    a    wireless    accepting    the 
German  conditions. 
„  21 — Parlementaires  despatched. 

March  3 — Treaty  signed,  worse  than  the  former  one. 

„  17 — The  All-Russia  Congress  of  Soviets  ratified 

the  treaty. 

Altogether  four  months  elapsed  between  the  proposal 
of  an  armistice  made  by  the  Bolsheviks,  who  had  de- 
clared themselves  the  Government  of  Russia,  and  the 
final  ratification  of  the  Peace  Treaty.  During  this  period 
the  subsidence  of  the  Russian  Empire  went  on  day  by 
day,  and  the  Germans  found  it  increasingly  possible  to 
dictate  any  conditions  they  liked  to  their  adversaries. 
The  Bolsheviks  cannot  even  be  called  a  defeated  side, 
as  they  had  not  fought  the  Germans,  but  after  seizing 
the  government  of  the  country,  had  declared  military 


470     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

operations  at  an  end.  It  would  be  more  correct  to  say- 
that  both  the  Bolsheviks  and  the  Germans  had  con- 
quered Russia,  each  in  their  own  way  and  each  for  their 
own  ends — ^the  Kaiser,  in  the  name  of  German  Im- 
perialism ;  Lenin,  in  the  name  of  Socialistic  world-Im- 
perialism. 

The  details  of  the  intercourse,  negotiations,  agree- 
ments, and  mutual  deception  of  these  two  singular  allies, 
have  not  yet  been  revealed  to  the  pubHc.  The  Press  has 
only  been  able  to  publish  fragmentary  information  about 
the  negotiations  at  Brest  and  also  about  the  Russo- 
German  Conference  when  it  was  opened  in  Petrograd  on 
New  Year's  Eve,  in  the  offices  of  the  Ministry  of  Foreign 
Affairs. 

The  principal  representative  of  the  Central  Powers 
at  this  Conference  was  Count  Mirbach.  He  arrived  with 
his  delegation  while  the  diplomatic  representatives  of 
the  Allied  Powers  and  their  military  missions  were  still 
in  the  capital.  The  situation  was  very  critical.  An 
unpleasant  collision  might  be  expected  any  day,  the 
more  so  that  the  first  few  days  both  Germans  and 
Austrians  sported  their  uniforms. 

At  last,  in  the  beginning  of  February,  the  German 
conditions  were  published.  Their  chief  sting  lay  in  the 
ironically  formulated  second  paragraph  : 

Since  the  Russian  Government,  in  agreement  with  its 
principles,  has  already  proclaimed  for  all  the  peoples,  without 
exception,  belonging  to  the  State  of  Russia,  the  right  of  self- 
determination,  extending  to  complete  separation,  it  therefore 
takes  note  of  the  decisions,  expressing  the  will  of  the  people 
concerning  the  desire  of  Poland,  Lithuania,  Courland,  and 
portions  of  Esthonia  and  Livonia  for  complete  national  independ- 
ence and  separation  from  the  State  of  Russia. 

This  fairly  good  parody  of  Bolshevist  phraseology 
signified  neither  more  nor  less  than  the  appropriation  of 


XVI  PEACE  WITH  THE  GERMANS  471 

a  considerable  slice  of  Russian  territx)iy.  That  same 
annexation  was  threatened  about  which  the  Russian 
Socialists  had  raised  such  a  clamour.  But  they  had 
feared  that  Russia  would  annex,  disbelieving  those  who 
said  that  if  discipline  were  not  retained  in  the  army  it 
would  not  be  Russia  who  would  annex,  but  Russia  from 
whom  portions  would  be  cut  away. 

When  the  German  conditions  were  laid  before  the 
Central  Executive  Committee,  a  lengthy  resolution  of 
protest  was  passed  in  reply  to  them.  Arguing  against 
the  German  decision  upon  the  destiny  of  the  races 
dwelling  on  the  Western  border  of  Russia,  the  Bolsheviks, 
inter  aliuy  said : 

The  statement  of  the  German  delegation  that  the  will  of 
the  people  in  the  territories  mentioned  has  already  been  expressed, 
is  not  correct.  In  a  state  of  siege,  under  the  pressure  of  a  military 
censorship,  the  people  of  the  occupied  territories  could  not 
express  their  will.^ 

The  resolution  wound  up  with  the  usual  appeal  to  the 
workers  of  the  whole  world  and  with  a  proposal  to 
transfer  the  peace  negotiations  to  Stockholm.  The 
Germans,  of  course,  refused  to  do  so.  After  some 
time,  a  delegation  was  again  despatched  to  Brest-Litovsk. 
On  this  occasion  one  of  the  principal  statesmen  who 
entered  into  the  so-called  Russian  delegation  was  an 
international  adventurer,  the  Austrian  Jew,  Sobelson, 
better  known  by  his  nom  de  plume  of  Karl  Radek. 
An  educated  man,  far  from  stupid,  but  with  a  very  •dis- 
creditable past,  his  thoughts  of  course  were  least  of  all 
of  Russia.  The  negotiations  carried  on  by  such  men 
could  not  bear  a  serious  character,  and  were  more  of  the 
nature  of  a  ribald  bouffonade.    Indeed,  the  Bolshevist 

^  These  words  might  be  used  as  a  weapon  against  the  later  declarations  of 
the  Bolsheviks  that  they  express  the  wiU  of  the  people,  if  indeed  words  in 
general  ooold  serve  as  a  weapon  against  them. 


472     FROM  LIBEKTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

delegates  themselves  did  not  estimate  the  value  of 
the  Brest-Litovsk  treaty  from  the  point  of  view  of  the 
interests  of  the  nation,  the  rule  over  whom  they  had 
seized,  but  exclusively  as  a  means  of  propaganda. 

The  actual  significance  of  the  Brest-Litovsk  negotiations 
lies  in  the  fact  that  they  tore  off  German  imperialism  the  disguise 
which  it  had  temporarily  borrowed  from  the  wardrobe  of 
democracy,  and  exposed  the  cruel  reality  of  landholding  and 
capitaHstic  annexationism.  The  Brest-Litovsk  negotiations  have 
made  everything  clear ;  more  than  this  cannot  be  required  of 
them.     (Izvestia,  22nd  January.) 

But  the  Germans  persistently  pursued  their  aim. 
They  were  weary  of  the  peace  farce.  They  had  to  put 
an  end  to  it  and  at  the  same  time  show  their  own  working 
classes  the  real  importance  of  the  Bolshevist  babblers. 

They  laid  down  such  conditions  that  even  the  Bol- 
sheviks found  it  disadvantageous  to  submit  to  the  will 
of  the  Germans  immediately  and  without  protest. 
Trotsky  produced  a  stage-effect  which  cost  the  Smolny 
and  its  supporters  no  small  amount  of  fear  and  agita- 
tion. On  February  10,  at  a  meeting  of  the  Peace 
Conference  at  Brest-Litovsk,  Trotsky  read  the  following 
declaration : 

In  the  name  of  the  Soviet  of  People's  Commissaries  the 
Government  of  the  Kussian  Federated  Republic  informs  the 
governments  and  nations  warring  against  us  and  of  the  Allied 
and  neutral  countries,  that  while  decUning  to  sign  an  annexationist 
treaty  Russia  on  her  part  declares  the  state  of  War  with  Germany, 
Austria-Hungary,  Turkey  and  Bulgaria  at  an  end.  Simultane- 
ously, the  Russian  forces  on  all  the  lines  of  the  front  are  given 
the  order  for  complete  demobilisation. 

At  the  same  time,  the  Commander-in-Chief  Krylenko 
issued  an  order  for  demobilisation,  beginning  thus  : 

The     peace     negotiations     are    finished.       The     German 


PEACE  WITH  THE  GERMANS  473 

capitalists,  bankers  and  land-owners,  supported  by  the  silent 
co-operation  of  the  English  and  French  bourgeoisie,  have 
required  of  our  comrades,  the  members  of  the  Peace  Delega- 
tion at  Brest,  conditions  which  the  Russian  revolution  cannot 
sign.  But  we  cannot,  will  not,  and  shall  not  wage  war  against 
those  Germans  and  Austrians  who,  like  us,  are  workmen  and 
peasants.    (February  10.) 

Therefore  the  war  was  declared  at  an  end  and  the 
demobilisation  of  the  whole  front  was  announced. 

This  was  called  shortly — neither  peace  nor  war.  If 
the  Bolsheviks  had  really  been  pacifists,  such  a  de- 
claration, and  especially  the  simultaneous  order  for 
demobilisation,  might  be  explained  as  the  highest  ex- 
pression of  peaceableness,  as  Tolstoy's  non-resistance  of 
evil  carried  to  the  extreme.  But  it  was  not  a  question 
of  peaceableness.  The  People's  Commissaries  wanted 
to  use  their  military  power  in  another  direction.  They 
fanned  the  flames  of  civil  war ;  they  stormed  Kussian 
towns  ;  sent  artillery  to  shell  Kiev,  Voronezh,  Eostov  ; 
they  shot  prisoners  of  war  and  the  wounded.  They 
had  neither  the  power  nor  the  wish  to  fight  the  Germans. 
Trotsky  and  Radek,  those  international  adventurers  who 
had  built  their  career  on  Socialism,  knew  that  they 
would  have  to  submit  to  the  Germans,  but  calculated 
that  it  would  be  more  profitable  not  to  do  so  at  once. 

On  returning  from  Brest,  Trotsky  reported  to  the 
Central  Executive  Committee.  He  pointed  out  the  in- 
extricable position  of  the  People's  Commissaries  : 

Germany  demands  annexations  and  a  war  indemnity  of  ten 
milliards.  Nevertheless,  we  must  not  carry  on  the  War.  The 
opinion  that  we  ought  to  carry  on  the  peace  negotiations  along 
with  our  Allies  has  no  foundation.  If  we  were  to  acknowledge 
it,  we  should  also  acknowledge  that  we  must  continue  the  War 
along  with  our  Allies.  But  this  would  mean  still  further  to 
weaken  Russia  which  is  already  destitute.     Even  admitting 


474     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

that  the  fortunes  of  War  will  be  on  the  side  of  the  Allies,  which 
is  very  unlikely,  this  would  be  victory  not  for  Russia,  but  for  the 
Allies  only,  who  would  then  present  their  bills. 

Trotsky  said  that  when  he  declared  that  the  Soviet  did 
not  wish  to  continue  this  "  unrevolutionary  war,"  was 
demobilising  the  Russian  Army  and  abrogating  the 
state  of  war,  German  Secretary  of  State  Kuehlmann 
exchanged  sinister  smiles  with  Hofmann  and  Count 
Czernin.  One  could  read  in  their  faces :  "  They  will 
agree  and  sign  everything." 

But  when  Trotsky,  in  the  name  of  the  delegation, 
announced  its  refusal  to  sign  an  annexationist  treaty, 
Kuehlmann,  notwithstanding  all  his  self-control,  was 
bewildered.  For  the  learned  experts  of  the  German 
delegation  this  was  a  surprise  from  the  legal  point  of 
view  as  well.  Their  learned  counsel  made  a  long  search 
in  his  books  and  discovered  an  analogical  case  only  in 
the  history  of  the  wars  of  the  Persians  with  the  Greeks. 

The  report  does  not  say  whether  this  ancient  analogy 
consoled  the  members  of  the  Central  Committee. 
Trotsky  himself,  seeking  to  justify  the  treachery  of 
the  Soviet,  accused  the  Allies,  as  usual,  of  being  the 
cause  of  the  calamities  and  degradation  which  had  over- 
taken Russia. 

"  The  Germans  are  acting  with  the  tacit  consent  of 
England,  France  and  America  at  the  expense  of  Russia, 
Lloyd  George  said — ^let  Russia  determine  her  own 
frontier.  In  these  words,  Lloyd  George  pointed  out 
to  the  Germans  that  the  more  they  took  from  Russia 
the  easier  would  be  their  settlement  with  the  Allies 
afterwards.  .  .  . 

"  We  stand  within  a  ring  of  the  Imperialists  of  the 
whole  world,  united  against  us.  The  whole  question 
lies  in  how  the  nations  will  come  out  of  the  war :  will 
France  come  out  of  the  war  under  the  leadership  of 


PEACE  WITH  THE  GERMANS  476 

her  Stock  Exchange,  or  of  her  heroic  proletariat  ? 
Will  Lloyd  George  remain  master  of  England,  or  will 
new  masters  appear — the  workmen,  who  even  now  give 
enormous  moral  support  to  the  Russian  revolution  ?  " 

Trotsky  finished  his  speech  with  an  appeal  to  the 
proletariat  of  Germany  and  Austria,  whom  he  held 
responsible  for  the  fate  of  Russia. 

As  we  know,  the  German  proletariat  then  gave  no 
answer  to  Trotsky  and  the  Soviet,  unless  we  take  as  an 
answer  the  eloquent  silence  of  the  German  Social- 
Democrats.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Government  of 
the  Kaiser,  speaking  in  the  name  of  the  German  people, 
announced  on  February  18th  that  the  armistice  was  at 
an  end  and  that  the  war  was  resumed. 

This  created  a  regular  panic  in  the  ranks  of  the 
Bolsheviks.  A  conflict  took  place  between  Trotsky  and 
Lenin,  who  demanded  that  a  peace  be  signed  at  once, 
whatever  its  nature.  That  same  night  (February  18th- 
19th),  in  consequence  of  Lenin's  insistence,  the  Soviet 
of  People's  Commissaries  sent  Berlin  a  radiogram,  agree- 
ing to  sign  a  peace  treaty  on  the  conditions  laid  down 
by  the  Germans.  In  a  series  of  articles,  venomous  and 
frank  to  the  verge  of  cynicism,  Lenin  explained  why 
the  most  miserable  peace  would  be  more  profitable  for 
the  Soviet  authority  than  war.  The  young  Russian 
Revolution  could  not  stand  war  on  all  fronts  at  once, 
and  ought  not  to  risk  the  lives  of  the  Red  Guards,  "  the 
cream  of  the  leading  proletariat."  Lenin  argued  that 
"  by  stopping  the  war  the  Soviet  authority  frees  itself 
from  both  the  warring  imperialist  groups  and  can  utilise 
their  mutual  enmity  and  the  War,  can  utilise  the  period 
of  free  hands  for  continuing  and  fortifying  the  social 
revolution.  The  reorganisation  of  Russia  on  the  basis 
of  the  dictatorship  of  the  proletariat  and  of  the  national- 
isation of  the  banks  and  larger  industrial  undertakings, 


476     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

accompaniad  by  the  barter  of  produce  between  town 
and  country,  is  quite  possible  economically,  given  the 
guarantee  of  several  months'  peaceful  labour.  Such  a 
reorganisation  would  make  Socialism  invincible  both  in 
Russia  and  in  the  world  at  large,  creating  at  the  same 
time  a  firm  economic  basis  for  a  mighty  Red  Army  of 
workmen  and  peasants."     {Pravda  for  February  24th.) 

Lenin  considered  that  what  they  would  sign  would 
be  not  a  peace  treaty,  but  "  a  breathing  space."  This 
word,  as  well  as  Lenin's  expression  that  they  must  sign 
a  Tilsit  peace,  was  repeated  by  some  with  bitter  irony, 
by  others  with  the  full  conviction  that  they  were  right. 
Lenin  argued  that  to  refuse  to  sign  the  German  condi- 
tions would  be  "  revolutionary  bluster  and  bombast," 
that  the  Soviet  was  not  bound  to  listen  to  the  "  Social 
Patriots  "  (this  nickname  had  already  been  given  to  the 
Left  wing  of  the  Socialist  Revolutionaries),  who  clamour 
about  treachery  and  demand  that  the  Soviet  authorities 
should  fight  for  the  liberation  of  Poland,  Lithuania,  and 
Courland.  "  Without  breaking  away  from  the  funda- 
mental principles  of  Marxism  and  of  Socialism  in  general, 
no  follower  of  Marx  can  deny  that  the  interests  of 
Socialism  are  higher  than  the  interests  of  the  national 
right  to  self-determination." 

But  even  in  the  Central  Executive  Committee  men 
accustomed  not  only  to  revolutionary,  but  also  to  inter- 
nationalistic  bombast,  did  not  accept  these  arguments 
at  once.  Actually,  they  had  already  agreed  to  capitu- 
late, but  the  Germans  were  in  no  haste  to  reply, 
disbelieving  the  radiogram  and  demanding  a  document 
signed  by  the  Soviet.  While  the  courier  despatched  with 
this  document  was  on  his  way  to  Brest,  endless  debates 
took  place  in  the  Soviet.  Two  currents  of  opinion 
appeared.  Some  supported  Lenin.  Others  considered 
that  the  conclusion  of  a  separate  peace  with  Germany 


XVI  PEACE  WITH  THE  GERMANS  477 

on  such  conditions  was  a  blow,  not  only  to  the  Russian, 
but  also  to  the  German  proletariat  (this  was  the  opinion 
of  the  Social  -  Revolutionaries).  The  interaationalist 
Social-Democrats  declared  that  "  the  conclusion  of  such 
a  peace  will  undermine  the  authority  of  the  revolution 
and  allow  the  Russian  counter-revolution  to  find  support 
in  German  imperialism."  Even  when  arguing  against 
the  Bolshevist  peace  which  was  to  ruin  Russia,  the 
Socialists  were  thinking  not  of  Russia,  but  of  the  Re- 
volution. As  before,  they  had  the  same  aim  with  Lenin  ; 
they  both  placed  the  interests  of  Socialism  above  the 
interests  of  the  nation.  But  he  was  bolder  than  they 
were  and  went  to  his  goal  along  a  straighter  path.  His 
arguments  convinced  the  Central  Executive  Committee. 
Lenin's  proposal  to  agree  to  the  German  conditions  was 
accepted  .by  116  votes  against  85.  That  same  night 
(February  24)  the  parlementaires  set  out  for  Brest. 

In  point  of  fact,  the  Soviet  authorities  had  no  choice 
before  them.  The  answer  of  the  Germans,  signed  by  von 
Kuehlmann,  to  the  Bolshevik  proposal  sent  by  courier 
was  instinct  with  the  authoritativeness  of  conquest,  and 
concluded  with  the  following  order  : 

The  above  conditions  must  be  accepted  within  48  hours. 
The  Russian  plenipotentiaries  must  at  once  proceed  to  Brest- 
Litovsk,  so  that  within  three  days  they  may  sign  the  treaty 
of  peace,  which  is  to  be  ratified  in  the  course  of  two  weeks. 

This  was  a  regular  ultimatum.  It  was  clear  that  the 
Germans  would  no  longer  allow  the  Bolshevist  delegates 
to  waste  time  in  long,  agitated  conversations,  but  would 
make  them  conclude  a  peace  without  any  evasions  or 
declamation.  Von  Kuehlmann's  conditions  were  more 
severe  than  the  original  ones.  Not  only  Courland,  but 
Esthonia  as  well,  was  to  pass  into  the  hands  of  the 
Germans.     Armenia  was  to  be  restored  to  Turkey.    The 


478     PROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

Ukraine  and  Finland  were  to  be  cleared  of  Soviet  troops 
and  of  the  Red  Guard.  The  Bolsheviks  were  bound  to 
cease  all  propaganda  against  the  Central  Powers.  The 
war  indemnity  was  to  be  paid  according  to  the  German 
proposals,  i,e,  with  a  very  large  payment  in  gold.  The 
whole  of  the  Russian  Army,  including  the  newly  formed 
units,  was  to  be  demobilised. 

The  units  referred  to  in  the  last  point  could  scarcely 
have  been  a  serious  danger  to  the  Germans,  and  this 
demand  was  made  rather  for  the  greater  humiliation  of 
the  Bolsheviks  than  for  any  practical  end.  The  Central 
Executive  Committee  submitted  to  Lenin's  magisterial 
demand  for  the  signature  of  the  peace  with  the 
Germans,  but  still  a  section  of  the  Soviet  raised  a 
martial  clamour. 

Having  announced  the  cessation  of  the  armistice  on 
February  18th,  the  Germans  immediately  renewed  mili- 
tary operations  and  advanced  along  the  whole  front, 
taldng  one  town  after  another.  Dvinsk,  Minsk,  Reval, 
Pskov,  all  that  previously  had  been  but  an  unattainable 
military  dream,  now  fell  into  their  hands.  With  every 
day  they  kept  drawing  nearer  to  Petrograd.  Their 
advance  aroused  panic  and  bewilderment  in  Bolshevist 
circles.  With  feverish  haste  the  Smolny  turned  out 
declarations  and  orders  whose  solemnity  was  equalled 
by  their  absurdity. 

After  having  already  decided  on  surrender  to  the 
Germans,  and  having  sent  to  von  Kuehlmann  a  courier 
with  a  letter  agreeing  to  any  terms  the  Germans  might 
see  fit  to  offer,  the  Soviet  overwhelmed  the  people  with 
appeals  calling  on  the  brave  to  range  themselves  under 
the  banners  of  the  Soviet  for  the  defence  of  their  Social- 
istic fatherland.  For  the  first  time  the  word  "  father- 
land "  was  used  in  an  official  document,  but  its  meaning 
was  lost   owing  to   the  adjective,  as  it  was  empha- 


XVI  PEACE  WITH  THE  GERMANS  479 

sised  that  for  non-Socialists  Russia  should  not  be  their 
fatherland. 

Even  under  the  pressure  of  the  German  advance 
the  Bolsheviks  continued  to  split  the  population  of  the 
Russian  Empire  into  two  warring  camps,  and  to  hound 
on  the  one  against  the  other.  "  On  the  one  hand,  the 
bourgeois  groups  look  forward  to  the  coming  of  the 
German  Generals  for  the  crushing  of  the  Revolution  ;  on 
the  other,  they  make  a  furious  onslaught  on  the  authority 
of  the  Soviet.  A  similar  spirit  animates  the  Press  of 
the  compromising  parties  "  (so  they  called  the  non- 
Bolshevist  Socialists).  "  They  depict  the  matter  as  if 
we  had  voluntarily  lowered  our  banner  before  the 
HohenzoUems."     (Appeal  to  the  working  population.) 

"  The  agents  of  the  bourgeoisie,  the  scribblers  of  the 
Press,  all  those  who  have  hitherto  clamoured  and 
accused,  who  had  prided  themselves  on  their  patriotism, 
now  await  impatiently  the  coming  of  the  Germans,  which 
is  to  free  them  from  the  rule  of  the  Soviets,"  wrote  the 
Bolshevist  papers. 

Calling  on  the  workmen  and  the  peasants  to  devote 
all  their  powers  to  the  cause  of  "  revolutionary  defence," 
the  People's  Commissaries  annoimced  that  "  every  bour- 
geois resisting  the  arrangements  for  the  work  on  National 
defence  must  be  immediately  put  on  his  trial  and  forcibly 
made  to  work." 

"  All  the  members  of  the  bourgeois  class  who  are  able 
to  work  must  be  enrolled  in  the  labour  battalions  under 
the  supervision  of  the  Red  Guards.  Those  who  resist 
are  to  be  shot."  The  words  "  to  be  shot "  are  to  be 
found  in  every  order,  in  every  appeal,  along  with  the 
call  "  to  preserve  order  with  a  hand  of  iron." 

To  show  what  the  Soviet  authorities  meant  by  this 
order  I  shall  quote  in  full  a  document  posted  up  in  the 
streets  of  Petrograd : 


480     PEOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

The  All-Russia  Extraordinary  Commission,  attached  to  the 
Soviet  of  People's  Commissaries  to  combat  the  counter-revolu- 
tion sabotage  and  speculation,  informs  all  citizens  that  hitherto 
the  Commission  has  been  generous  in  its  conflict  with  the 
enemies  of  the  people,  but  at  the  present  moment,  when  the 
hydra  of  counter-revolution  is  growing  more  impudent  with 
every  day,  inspired  by  the  treacherous  attack  of  the  German 
counter-revolutionist,  when  the  bourgeoisie  of  the  world  is 
attempting  to  strangle  the  vanguard  of  the  revolutionary  Inter- 
national— ^the  Russian  proletariat,  the  All -Russia  Extraor- 
dinary Commission,  acting  on  the  resolution  of  the  Soviet  of 
People's  Commissaries,  sees  no  other  means  of  suppressing 
counter-revolutionists,  spies,  speculators,  burglars,  hooligans, 
saboteurs,  and  other  parasites  than  their  merciless  destruction 
red-handed,  and  therefore  announces  that  all  agents  and  spies 
of  the  enemy,  counter-revolutionary  agitators,  speculators, 
organisers  of  rebellions,  and  participators  in  the  preparation  of 
rising  for  the  overthrow  of  the  Soviet  authority,  all  fleeing  to 
the  Don  to  join  the  counter-revolutionary  forces  of  the  Kaledin 
and  Korniloff  gang  and  the  Polish  counter-revolutionary  legions, 
sellers  and  purchasers  of  arms,  to  be  sent  to  the  Finnish  White 
Guards,  the  Kaledin,  Kornilofi,  and  Dovbor-Musnitsky  troops, 
or  for  the  arming  of  the  counter-revolutionary  bourgeoisie  of 
Petrograd,  will  be  shot  without  mercy,  red-handed,  by  the 
detachments  of  the  Commission.     (February  22nd.) 

All  is  characteristic  in  this  document,  even  its  very 
style.  It  is  written  without  a  single  full  stop,  as  if  to 
make  it  easier  to  lump  up  all  together,  both  criminals 
and  the  enemies,  external  and  internal,  of  the  Soviet 
authority.  This  confusion  corresponds  to  the  judicial 
conceptions  of  the  Soviet  authority  which  permits  its 
detachments  "  to  kill  on  the  spot  all  those  whom  the 
Reds  may  wish  to  kill."  It  reflects  the  malice,  social 
immorality,  mendacity  and  contempt  for  the  human 
personality  which  pertain  to  the  Soviet  authority. 

These  moral  qualities  of  Bolshevism  will  be  reflected 
very  clearly  in  all  the  long  and  complicated  documents 


PEACE  WITH  THE  GERMANS  481 

published  by  the  Soviet  during  the  painful  days  of  the 
German  advance,  when  the  Soviet  authority  assumed 
the  position  of  an  original  form  of  passive  resistance. 

The  working  masses  were  called  on  to  help  the  Soviets 
in  their  double  conflict  with  the  bourgeoisie,  external  and 
internal.  And  it  was  not  of  the  Germans,  but  of  the 
Russian  bourgeoisie,  that  the  Bolsheviks  spoke  with  the 
most  sincere  exasperation.  In  a  lengthy  manifesto, 
announcing  the  formation  of  a  Red  Socialistic  Army,  it 
was  explained  that  the  army  was  needed  for  fighting 
the  enemies  of  the  workmen's  and  peasants'  revolution. 

These  foes  are  many.  First  of  all,  they  are  our  owix  bourgeoisie, 
land-owners,  capitalists,  Komilovists,  and  so  forth.  ...  It  is 
not  only  the  Russian  bourgeoisie  that  directs  its  forces  against 
our  revolution,  but  all  the  Imperialists,  who  fear  that  the 
conflagration  of  the  Socialist  revolution  which  has  broken  out 
in  Russia  may  pass  over  to  their  countries. 

In  this  manifesto  Austria  and  Germany  are  not 
even  mentioned.  There  is  only  a  hint,  or  rather  an 
accusation  more  than  once  expressed  by  Trotsky  and 
his  comrades,  that  the  Allies,  having  come  to  terms 
with  the  Germans,  wanted  to  crush  the  Russian  Revolu- 
tion :  "  Facts  at  our  disposal  definitely  show  that  the 
united  bourgeois  forces  of  the  whole  world  are  pre- 
paring an  organised  campaign  against  the  Russian 
Revolution.  ..." 

The  call  to  defend  the  revolutionary  and  "  Social- 
istic fatherland  "  was  repeated  by  the  Bolsheviks  in  a 
variety  of  forms.  Words  were  sown  broadcast  by  them 
with  their  usual  impetuosity,  but  their  organisation  of 
the  defence  was  very  peculiar.  In  the  life  of  the  civilian 
population  it  expressed  itself  in  a  series  of  new  acts  of 
oppression  and  new  restrictions  which  led  to  still  greater 
disorganisation  everywhere.    Almost  all  the  papers  were 

2i 


482     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

closed.  "  All  publications  opposing  the  cause  of  revolu- 
tionary defence  and  taking  the  part  of  the  German 
bourgeoisie,  and  also  those  which  aim  at  utilising  the 
irruption  of  the  Imperialist  hordes  for  the  overthrow  of 
the  power  of  the  Soviet,  are  to  be  closed.  The  editors 
and  contributors  of  these  publications  who  are  fit  for 
work  are  to  be  mobilised  for  trench-digging."  Though, 
as  a  matter  of  fact,  not  a  single  paper  showed  any  signs 
of  pro-Germanism,  yet  ALL  the  papers  were  closed, 
excepting  the  principal  Cadet  paper,  Nash  Vieh  (this 
was  the  title  then  given  to  the  Rech),  which  somehow 
managed  to  escape,  though  it  undoubtedly  and  openly 
aimed  at  the  overthrow  of  the  Soviet  authority. 

To  ruin  civil  life  was  far  easier  than  to  organise  the 
defence  of  the  State.  The  military  measures  taken  were 
so  senseless  that  though  we  were  not  at  all  in  the  mood 
for  laughter,  yet  we  could  not  read  the  wonderful  speci- 
mens of  military  creativeness  produced  by  the  defenders 
of  the  Socialist  fatherland  without  a  smile. 

In  expectation  of  an  air-raid,  orders  were  given  that 
every  aeroplane  flying  past  was  to  be  reported  to  the 
Staff  by  the  House  ComLmittees  of  the  city,  though  these 
domestic  organisations  were  scarcely  adapted  for  making 
such  observations. 

The  Soviet  of  People's  Commissaries  announced  : 

Let  all  our  enemies  at  home  and  abroad  know  that  we  are 
ready  to  defend  the  acquisitions  of  the  Revolution  to  the  last 
drop  of  our  blood. 

A  special  committee  for  the  revolutionary  defence  of 
Petrograd  was  appointed,  on  which  were  civilian  Bol- 
sheviks and  Socialist -Revolutionaries.  The  supreme 
Commander-in-Chief,  Ensign  Krylenko,  who  had  just 
issued  the  order  for  the  general  demobilisation  of  the 
army,  now  issued  an  order  for  its  revolutionary  mobilisa- 


PEACE  WITH  THE  GERMANS  483 

tion.    This  warrior  had  curious  ideas  of  war  with  the 
Germans. 

We  must  meet  the  onslaught  of  the  enemy  with  public 
revenge,  with  public  terror.  If  we  can  succeed  in  throwing 
against  him  united  masses  of  revolutionary  citizens  who  will 
do  battle,  our  desperate  battle  of  civil  war,  not  only  according 
to  the  rules  of  military  strategy,  but  by  stealth  also  everywhere 
in  small  detachments  and  important  engagements,  for  every 
town,  every  village,  every  street,  every  house  in  the  cities, 
then  there  will  be  no  forces  which  the  Germans  could  set  against 
us.  Detachments  of  1000-1500  men,  sufficiently  supplied 
with  elementary  weapons  and  light  batteries,  detachments 
capable  of  quickly  entrenching  themselves  and  attacking  with 
the  impetuosity  of  our  revolutionary  detachments  of  the  civil 
war — such  detachments  will  be  sufficient  for  stopping  the  German 
advance. 

Apparently  they  were  not  sufficient.  The  Germans 
occupied  one  town  after  another.  It  cannot  even  be 
said  that  they  captured  them,  as  no  one  fought  with 
them,  no  one  defended  these  towns. 

The  soldiers  and  sailors,  completely  demoralised, 
stupefied  by  a  hail  of  contradictory  orders  and  promises, 
threw  down  everything  and  ran  away  in  all  directions. 
As  soldiers,  they  understood  that  men  cannot  fight 
without  what  is  most  important  in  war — without  com- 
manders— and  they  sought  safety  in  flight. 

Petrograd  presented  a  most  wonderful  picture.  No 
one  knew  where  the  enemy  was,  and  indeed  no  one  knew 
who  the  enemy  was. 

The  three  weeks  which  had  passed  between  the  pro- 
clamation of  that  singular  formula — neither  war  nor 
peace — and  the  final  signing  of  the  Peace  Treaty,  only 
intensified  the  nightmare  in  which  Petrograd  had  lived 
since  the  Bolshevist  Revolution.  The  papers  were  sup- 
pressed, as  "  the  Press  is  one  of  the  principal  weapons 
in  the  hands  of  the  dark  powers."    But  the  official 


484     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

periodicals  too  contained  scarcely  any  information  from 
tlie  front,  as  people  still  continued  to  call  the  line  of 
disposition  of  tlie  German  forces,  though  it  did  not 
possess  the  principal  feature  of  a  front — there  was  only 
the  German  Army  on  it,  while  the  opposing  Russian 
Army  had  long  ceased  to  exist.  It  had  ceased  to  exist 
not  only  because  Krylenko  had  issued  the  order  for 
demobilisation.  Even  before  it,  during  several  months, 
the  soldiers  had  been  demobilising  without  orders.  The 
few  units  which  still  managed  to  hold  out  at  the  front, 
having  lost  their  disciplinary  cement,  had  ceased  to  be 
military  units. 

This  was  a  period  of  general  flight,  or  rather  of  a 
general  desire  to  fly,  anywhere  from  the  unfortunate, 
ruined,  starving  city,  which  was  struggling  in  the  grip 
of  a  double  war.  But  only  the  privileged  were  able 
to  escape.  The  Germans  were  spread  over  the  whole 
of  the  West,  including  Finland,  where  the  Reds  were 
retreating  daily  under  the  pressure  of  the  Whites,  who 
were  supported  by  the  Germans.  It  was  possible  to 
escape  along  two  railway-lines  only — along  the  Northern 
Railway,  which  leads  to  Vologda  and  beyond  it  to 
Siberia,  and  along  the  Mcolaievsky  line  to  Moscow. 
The  soldiers  simply  fought  for  places  in  the  trains,  while 
civilians  could  only  obtain  tickets  through  the  Soviets. 
The  Bolshevist  officials  and  their  families  were  the  first 
to  disappear,  as  news  came  from  the  West  that  in  the 
districts  occupied  by  the  Germans  the  latter  made  short 
work  of  the  Bolsheviks.  Knowing  people  managed,  for 
large  sums  of  money,  to  buy  tickets  and  permits,  as 
departure  from  Petrograd  was  formally  forbidden.  A 
disorderly,  extravagant  evacuation  of  Government  in- 
stitutions and  a  part  of  the  works  was  carried  on.  Some 
civilians  managed  to  slip  into  railway-cars  along  with 
machinery,  lathes,  and  bundles  of  Government  papers  ; 


PEACE  WITH  THE  GERMANS  485 

but  these  favourites  of  fortune  were  few  and  the 
trains  were  crammed  principally  with  sailors  and 
soldiers. 

When  the  enemy  army  advanced,  when  the  Germans 
took  Dvinsk,  Minsk,  Lutsk,  and  finally  Pskov,  the  sol- 
diers fled  to  the  East,  like  leaves  driven  by  the  wind. 
This  coincided  with  the  February  snow-storms,  when 
the  already  disorganised  railway  traffic  was  almost  com- 
pletely stopped  by  snow-drifts.  Trains  took  forty-eight 
hours,  instead  of  the  usual  twelve,  to  travel  between 
Petrograd  and  Moscow.  Locomotives  and  cars  were 
covered  with  a  coating  of  ice.  Icicles  hung  from  the 
roofs,  the  bufEers,  the  platforms,  decorating  the  whole 
train  with  a  tracery  of  ice.  The  soldiers  not  only  filled 
the  cars,  but  clambering  over  the  icy  surface  mounted 
on  to  their  roofs,  hung  on  the  buffers  between  the  cars, 
stood  on  the  steps,  or  got  into  the  tender.  Sometimes 
a  gust  of  wind  would  sweep  them  to  the  ground.  Some 
fell  because  their  strength  gave  way.  Others  were  lifted 
off  with  frozen  hands  and  feet,  or  sometimes  dead. 

Railway-stations  became  real  fields  of  battle.  Shots 
were  heard  from  them  night  and  day,  especially  from  the 
terminus  of  the  Nicolaievsky  Railway  which  links  Petro- 
grad with  Moscow  and  Central  Russia.  The  soldiers 
took  the  terminus  by  storm,  and  the  railwaymen  were 
constantly  in  terror  for  their  lives,  as  the  crazed  bands 
of  soldiers  threatened  all  and  sundry  with  lynching. 

The  first  to  fly  was  the  garrison  of  Petrograd,  those 
same  reserve  units  whom  the  Provisional  Government 
had  bound  itself  not  to  remove  from  the  city,  as  they 
were  needed  for  the  protection  of  the  acquisitions  of  the 
Revolution.  From  that  time  onwards,  day  by  day,  the 
garrison  continued  changing  into  an  enormous  mob  of » 
undisciplined  parasites.  The  soldiers  lived  at  Govern- 
ment expense,  peddled  all  kinds  of  trash  in  the  streets. 


486     FROM  LIBEETY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

travelled  gratis  on  trams  and  trains,  misbehaved  them- 
selves in  the  streets,  and  sometimes  marched  about  the 
town  with  placards  bearing  the  most  peremptory  de- 
mands, such  as  :  "  Down  with  the  capitalist  Ministers  ! 
Death  to  Kerensky  !  Long  live  the  Universal  Revolu- 
tion !  "  and  so  forth.  But  they  took  no  very  active 
part  in  the  political  conflict.  They  took  care  of  them- 
selves. The  majority  were  soldiers  from  the  rear  who 
had  never  been  in  battle.  To  the  sound  of  firing  they 
were  not  accustomed,  nor  did  they  intend  to  accustom 
themselves  to  it.  In  their  parlance,  "  We  don't  want 
to  shed  the  blood  of  our  brothers."  Such  was  the  answer 
they  gave  both  when  they  were  to  be  sent  to  the  front 
and  when  they  were  to  be  used  for  suppressing  internal 
disorder.  The  hasty  flight  of  the  garrison  from  Petrograd 
was  only  a  fresh  proof  that  they  had  no  wish  to  shed 
their  own  blood  in  any  cause  whatever. 

The  next  to  go  were  the  soldiers  and  sailors  from 
Finland,  from  Cronstadt,  from  Dvinsk,  from  Reval,  from 
all  places  where  the  Russian  Army  once  formed  a  solid 
wall  against  the  enemy.  Now  the  former  unselfish  and 
courageous  defenders  of  their  country  had  become  a 
herd  of  fleeing  cowards.  From  the  Warsaw,  from  the 
Baltic,  from  the  Finland  termini,  they  made  their  way 
across  the  city,  on  foot,  on  carts,  on  trams,  directing 
their  course  to  that  same  Moscow  Railway.  Along  the 
Liteiny  Prospect,  from  the  Neva,  day  and  night,  sledges 
drove  along,  piled  high  with  every  manner  of  chattels, 
trunks,  baskets,  and  bags.  Many  of  them  bore  the  names 
or  the  initials  of  their  owners.  Sometimes  they  bore  a 
coronet.  These  were  not  sailors',  but  typical  officers' 
bags.  Beside  the  loads  marched  sullen  sailors.  The 
passers-by  knew  well  enough  that  these  were  loads  with 
plundered  officers'  property.  And  it  was  with  con- 
temptuous anger,  with  a  painful  realisation  not  only  of 


XVI  PEACE  WITH  THE  GERMANS  487 

their  own  impotence,  but  also  of  the  impotence  of  the 
whole  nation,  that  the  passers-by  turned  their  backs 
on  these  men  who  had  so  bravely  disposed  of  their 
defenceless  officers  and  were  running  like  dastards  from 
the  enemy. 

The  walls  of  the  houses  were  plastered  with  posters 
bearing  boldly  printed  appeals  to  defend  the  Socialist 
fatherland,  appeals  to  the  courage  of  the  proletariat, 
and  so  forth.  But  the  soldiers  ran  past  in  a  business- 
like way,  quickening  their  pace,  faster  and  faster,  as  if 
the  Germans  were  already  there,  so  near  that  in  another 
moment  they  would  appear  and  take  them  prisoners 
all.  The  soldiers'  feeling  of  commimity  was  already 
dead  in  these  men.  They  were  incapable  of  thinking 
either  of  the  capital  created  by  Peter  the  Great,  or  of 
Russia,  or  of  anything  abstract  or  ideal.  Only  the 
animal  instinct  of  self-preservation  now  lived  in  these 
men,  in  whom  nothing  of  the  soldier  remained  but  the 
uniform. 

During  these  gloomy  days,  besides  the  fleeing  soldiers 
there  were  other  men  in  uniform  on  the  streets  of  Petro- 
grad — the  former  officers  of  the  former  Russian  Army. 
They  wore  no  arms,  no  shoulder-straps,  no  cockades,  nor 
any  other  formal  marks  to  distinguish  them  from  the 
sea  of  soldiers  flooding  the  streets  of  the  capital.  But 
we  could  distinguish  the  officers  without  any  mistake 
by  their  military  bearing,  which  had  completely  vanished 
in  the  soldiers.  What  especially  betrayed  the  officers 
was  the  expression  on  their  faces.  There  was  a  restraint 
in  them,  a  deliberate,  almost  haughty  restraint ;  there 
was  none  of  that  mazed  consternation,  that  hurriedness 
which  gave  a  bewildered  expression  to  the  soldiers,  im- 
bued with  panic.  Looking  at  the  soldiers,  especially 
when  they  crowded  about  the  very  doors  of  the  railway- 
termini,  ready  to  strangle  one  another  if  only  they  could 


488     FEOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LIT0V8K       ch. 

escape  from  the  city,  one  might  really  believe  that  they 
were  possessed  by  devils,  paltry,  dirty  devils,  who  had 
for  the  time  crushed  out  all  human  feelings  in  these 
unfortunate  beings. 

One  day  I  was  passing  through  the  Znamensky 
Square.  A  newsvendor  next  me  was  sullenly  shouting, 
*'  Germans  in  Gatchina  !  Germans  in  Gatchina  !  " 
Some  absurd  telegrams  had  been  received  to  the  effect 
that  German  scouts  were  within  some  thirty  versts  of 
Petrograd.  A  crowd  of  soldiers  clamoured  nervously 
and  impatiently  at  the  wide  doors  of  the  railway-station, 
waiting  to  be  let  in.  Past  them  ran  Soviet  motor-cars 
in  which  workmen  sat  with  thoughtful,  anxious  faces. 
From  the  Ligovka  towards  the  Nevsky  Prospect  marched 
ranks  of  men  in  civilian  attire.  They  marched  awk- 
wardly, not  keeping  step,  evidently  unaccustomed  to 
the  ranks.  The  weapons  which  hung  on  them,  too,  were 
not  uniform  nor  worn  in  the  same  manner.  Some  had 
their  rifles  slung  muzzle  downwards,  some  muzzle  up- 
wards. One  would  be  belted  with  two  revolvers,  right 
and  left.  Another,  for  some  reason  or  other,  had  belted 
on  a  cavalry  sword. 

These  men  were  but  little  like  a  trained  unit  fit  for 
the  fighting-line.  But  there  was  none  of  the  defiant 
insolence  of  the  Red  Guards  about  them,  rather  a 
thoughtful  seriousness  and  the  consciousness  of  a  great 
responsibility. 

This  was  one  of  the  few  workmen  units  of  the  Red 
Army.  It  consisted  of  workmen  from  the  Putilofl  works, 
and  was  setting  out  in  this  state  for  the  front. 

Not  far  from  me  stood  a  short  old  man  with  a  bundle 
of  newspapers  under  his  arm.  His  soldier's  overcoat 
and  cap  could  not  conceal  his  officer's  bearing.  Judging 
by  his  grey  hair  and  moustaches,  he  was  an  officer  who 
had  seen  much  service,  most  probably  a  General.    With 


XVI  PEACE  WITH  THE  GERMANS  489 

quick,  wise  eyes  he  glanced  at  the  semi-civilian  warriors 
awkwardly  marching  past  him,  and  quickly  turned  away. 
One  could  fancy  that  if  they  had  fallen  into  his  hands 
he  would  have  turned  them  into  real  soldiers  and  led 
them  properly  against  the  Germans. 

Meanwhile,  on  the  other  side,  round  the  mounted 
statue  of  the  obstinate  and  short-sighted  autocrat, 
Alexander  III.,  among  lofty  heaps  of  snow,  several  young 
men,  also  in  soldiers'  overcoats,  swiftly  and  skilfully 
cleared  away  the  snow,  throwing  it  with  their  shovels 
into  high  sledges.  They  did  not  even  glance  at  the  Red 
Guards.  War  was  no  longer  their  business.  They  had 
been  set  aside  from  it. 

They  were  young  officers  who  had  undertaken  to 
clear  away  the  snow  from  the  streets  of  Petrograd. 
This  means  of  earning  money  was  yet  within  their  reach, 
and  enabled  them  not  to  die  of  hunger  in  Bolshevist 
Russia.  While  it  was  possible  they  had  done  their  duty 
as  soldiers  honestly,  believing  that  sooner  or  later,  along 
with  the  Allies,  they  would  crush  the  enemy  and  celebrate 
a  victory. 

But  fate  decided  otherwise.  Socialistic  agitators  saw 
in  the  army  only  a  dangerous  nest  of  counter-revolu- 
tionaries, and  feared  the  officers  more  than  anything 
else.  From  the  very  first  day  of  the  Revolution  the 
Revolutionary  -  Democracy  began  sowing  discord  be- 
tween the  soldiers  and  their  officers.  The  officers  were 
insulted,  humiliated,  and  deprived  of  power.  The  Bol- 
sheviks finished  the  evil  begun  by  Order  No.  1.  The 
officers  were  expelled  from  the  army,  or  obliged  to  fly 
to  save  themselves  from  the  savage  excesses  of  the 
soldiers,  by  which  so  many  of  their  comrades  had  per- 
ished. With  the  officers  the  Russian  Army  vanished 
too. 

The  Germans  could  not  break  it.    It  was  killed, 


490     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       oh. 

poisoned  by  the  strange  spiritual  gangrene  of  Socialism, 
poorly  assimilated  even  by  its  leaders  themselves,  to 
say  nothing  of  the  masses. 

When  the  Germans  grasped  the  fact  that  Russia 
was  paralysed,  they  simply  advanced  and  began  to 
occupy  one  territory  after  another.  There  was  none 
to  stop  their  advance  or  put  any  bound  to  it.  The 
Germans  stopped  when  and  where  they  chose  and  found 
it  convenient.  The  Russian  officers  could  only  look  with 
impotent  despair  on  the  victorious  march  of  the  foe 
against  whom  for  three  years  the  Russian  people  had 
fought  so  heroically  and  at  the  cost  of  such  terrible 
sacrifices. 

While  destroying  the  officers  the  Bolsheviks  under- 
stood at  the  same  time  that  without  them  there  could 
be  no  army,  and  tried  to  draw  them  to  themselves.  An 
order  was  given  for  all  officers  to  report  at  the  General 
Staff  Headquarters.  The  defence  of  Petrograd  was 
entrusted  to  the  well-known,  experienced  General  of 
Engineers,  Schwarz.  Several  Generals  were  kept  on  in 
the  Staff  itself.  But  all  this  was  a  mere  caricature  of 
defence,  as  at  the  head  of  it  stood  the  Bolshevist  leaders, 
who  brought  chaos  and  destruction  into  whatever  they 
touched.  The  Commander-in-Chief,  Ensign  Krylenko, 
issued  one  senseless  order  after  another.  He  once 
seriously  asked  a  British  officer  whether  it  would  not 
be  better  to  blow  up  the  Okhta  Powder  -  Works  that 
they  should  not  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy,  and 
was  much  astonished  when  the  Englishman  remarked 
that,  as  the  works  were  situated  in  a  suburb,  all  the 
population  of  Petrograd  should  first  be  removed  some 
twenty  versts  from  the  capital.  It  had  never  struck 
the  Commander-in-Chief  that  the  whole  city  would  be 
blown  up  with  the  powder-works. 

,  The  Naval  Commissary,  a  sailor  named  Dybenko, 


XVI  PEACE  WITH  THE  GERMANS  491 

celebrated  for  his  ferocity,  having  gathered  together  a 
detachment  of  some  2000  sailors,  led  them  himself  to 
Narva,  to  defend  the  *'  Socialist  fatherland  "  against 
"  the  White  Guard  bands  of  General  Hoffmann  and 
Wilhelm."  Before  departing  he  issued  a  magniloquent 
manifesto : 

"  Long  live  the  Revolutionary  War !  Death  to  all 
cowards  !  "  and  so  forth. 

But  as  soon  as  the  Bolshevist  leader  heard  the  crackle 
of  the  German  machine-guns  he  bolted  like  a  rabbit, 
creating  a  panic  among  the  other  units.  Dybenko  was 
so  terrified  that,  making  his  way  by  a  branch-line  to  the 
Nicolaievsky  Railway,  he  demanded  of  the  railwaymen, 
revolver  in  hand,  that  they  should  give  him  a  special 
train,  and  calmed  down  only  when  he  found  himself  in 
Moscow.^ 

Lenin  was  not  far  out  when  he  considered  that  with 
such  defenders  it  was  more  advantageous  for  the  Soviet 
to  agree  to  all  the  demands  of  Germany. 

On  March  3rd  the  Bolshevist  delegation  at  Brest- 
Litovsk  signed  the  Peace  Treaty,  but  accompanied  it 
by  a  declaration  in  which  they  complained  with  in- 
genuous cynicism  that  they  had  no  army,  though  they 
themselves  had  dispersed  that  army. 

"  This  is  a  peace  dictated  by  armed  force,"  said  the 
declaration.  "  This  is  a  peace  which  revolutionary 
Russia,  with  clenched  teeth,  is  driven  to  accept  per- 
force. In  the  existing  situation  Russia  has  no  choice  : 
having  demobilised  her  troops,  Russia  has  thereby  placed 
her  destiny  in  the  hands  of  the  German  people." 

And  the  German  people  took  advantage  of  the  non- 
existence of  a  Russian  Army  and  laid  down  conditions 

•  For  this  exploit  Dybenko  was  tried  and  sentenced  to  imprisonment,  but 
escaped  and  did  not  serve  out  his  sentence.  Later  he  was  again  taken  into 
favour. 


492     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

more  severe  even  than  the  original  ones.  They  in- 
cluded an  enormous  indemnity  and  annexations  both 
in  the  west  and  in  the  east  of  Russia.  The  Germans 
retained  those  territories  which  they  had  occupied  during 
their  fortnight's  advance,  including  Reval  and  Pskov, 
and  presented  the  Turks  with  a  series  of  Trans-Caucasian 
towns — Batoum,  Kars,  and  Ardagan.  As  the  Germans 
demanded  complete  demobilisation,  the  Commander-in- 
Chief,  Kjrylenko,  consoled  himself  with  the  following 
declaration : 

One  of  the  conditions  of  peace  is  the  complete  demobilisation 
of  our  Army.  We  shall  replace  it  by  the  general  training  of 
every  man  to  the  use  of  arms.  Every  workman,  every  work- 
woman, every  peasant,  man  or  woman,  must  be  able  to  use 
rifle,  revolver,  and  machine-gun.  In  the  ranks  of  the  people 
who  are  building  up  a  Socialist  community,  among  the  predatory 
capitalists  there  must  not  be  a  single  man  untrained  in  the  use 
of  arms.     (March  4th.) 

By  order  of  the  Germans  the  ratification  of  the  Peace 
Treaty  was  to  take  place  not  later  than  March  17th. 
To  escape  some  of  the  odium  the  Bolsheviks  held  an 
Extraordinary  Congress  of  Soviets  in  Moscow.  By  this 
time  all  delegates  inconvenient  and  undesirable  for  the 
Bolsheviks  had  been  eliminated  from  the  provincial 
Soviets,  and  in  the  Congress  they  had  an  overwhelming 
majority.  Out  of  the  876  delegates  gathered  together 
there  were  500  Bolsheviks  and  198  of  the  Left-wing 
Social-Revolutionaries.  The  rest  belonged  to  the  more 
moderate  Socialist  parties. 

The  Allied  Governments  were  so  poorly  informed  as 
to  the  situation  in  Russia  that  the  President  of  the 
United  States,  Woodrow  Wilson,  decided  that  the 
Congress  was  a  sort  of  Parliament  and  considered  it 
necessary  to  send  it  a  greeting,  expressing  to  it  his 
sincere  sympathy  for  the  Russian  people  : 


I 


PEACE  WITH  THE  GERMANS  493 

Though  the  Government  of  the  United  States  is  unfortunately 
unable  at  present  to  give  Russia  that  direct  and  active  support 
which  it  would  wish  to  give  her,  I  would  wish  to  assure  the 
Russian  people  through  this  Congress  that  the  Government  of 
the  United  States  will  take  advantage  of  every  opportunity 
to  guarantee  Russia  anew  her  full  sovereignty  and  complete 
independence  in  her  internal  affairs,  and  the  restoration  of  her 
great  part  in  the  life  of  Europe  and  of  contemporary  mankind. 
With  its  whole  heart,  the  people  of  the  United  States  sympathises 
with  the  Russian  people  in  its  efforts  to  free  itself  for  ever  from 
autocracy  and  to  become  master  of  its  own  destiny. 

This  greeting,  coming  from  the  head  of  a  democratic 
State,  was  sent  after  the  dispersal  of  the  Constituent 
Assembly,  after  the  brutal  murder  of  three  of  its  mem- 
bers (Shingareff,  Kokoshkin,  and  Loginoff),  after  a  whole 
series  of  illegal  acts,  assaults,  and  murders,  and,  finally, 
after  the  separate  peace  negotiations  at  Brest,  which 
were  accompanied  by  a  series  of  hostile  demonstrations 
against  the  Allies.  As  a  matter  of  course  this  tele- 
gram had  a  depressing  effect  on  Russian  public  opinion. 
Not  only  did  it  not  draw  us  nearer  to  the  Allies,  but  it 
increased  our  painful  feeling  of  being  cut  off  from  the 
rest  of  the  world. 

The  vast  majority  of  thinking  Russians  did  not 
acknowledge  the  Brest-Litovsk  peace.  In  Moscow  the 
representatives  of  all  the  Socialist  parties  lodged  a  pro- 
test with  the  foreign  consuls  against  the  treaty.  Similar 
protests  were  lodged  by  the  Cadet  party,  the  Commercial 
and  Industrial  group  and  other  organisations. 

And  at  this  moment  one  of  the  most  powerful  among 
the  Allies,  the  United  States,  greets  the  criminals  who 
had  made  peace  with  the  common  foe  as  if  they  were 
the  representatives  of  the  Russian  people. 

This  was  not  only  insulting,  it  opened  up  the  full 
depth  of  the  misunderstanding  of  Russia,  her  calamities, 
desires,  and  needs.     It  is  to  be  regretted  that  the  further 


494     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

history  of  the  relations  between  the  Soviets  and  the 
Allies  is  a  protracted  confirmation  of  this  ignorance 
and  misunderstanding  which  are  ruinous  not  for  Russia 
alone. 

War  with  Germany,  if  not  finished,  was  broken  off, 
and  no  one  knew  for  how  long. 

The  Soviet  of  People's  Commissaries,  having  fled  on 
March  II  to  Moscow  (it  was  not  so  long  since  Trotsky 
had  assailed  Kerensky  for  intending  to  transfer  the 
capital  thither),  took  up  its  quarters  in  the  Kremlin, 
which  still  bore  traces  of  the  Bolshevist  bombardment, 
that  it  might  thence,  by  blood  and  violence,  establish 
Socialism  not  only  in  Russia,  but  in  the  whole  world. 

The  first  year  of  the  Russian  Revolution  ended  with 
the  Peace  of  Brest-Litovsk.  Such  a  catastrophe  Russia 
had  not  experienced  for  centuries.  It  appeared  that 
the  psychology  of  the  Revolution  had  not  strengthened 
but  weakened,  both  in  the  army  and  in  the  people,  the 
will  to  victory,  without  which  no  defence  of  one's  native 
land  is  possible. 

The  Bolsheviks  took  advantage  of  the  prevailing 
depression  of  the  masses  to  subjugate  the  latter.  For 
this  purpose  it  was  necessary  to  betray  Russia  to 
Germany.  This  they  did  without  a  moment's  hesita- 
tion, as  peace  made  them  masters  of  the  situation. 

But  the  more  responsible  and  clear-headed  circles  of 
the  Russian  people  did  not  acknowledge  either  the  peace 
of  Brest  or  the  authority  of  the  Bolsheviks.  The  situa- 
tion was  paradoxical  and  apparently  without  any  solu- 
tion. A  vast  country,  occupying  one-sixth  of  the  dry 
land  of  the  globe,  with  a  population  of  175  millions, 
remained  without  any  government,  without  any  formal 
bonds  between  its  constituent  parts  and  in  altogether 
undefined  relations  to  its  neighbours.     It  seemed  as  if 


1 


XVI  PEACE  WITH  THE  GERMANS  495 

some  giant  hand  had  reversed  the  centripetal  force  which 
bound  together  millions  of  people  into  one  whole,  and, 
transforming  it  into  a  centrifugal  force,  had  reduced  the 
State  to  a  heap  of  separate  grains  of  dust. 

But  a  people  of  many  millions  which  under  severe 
historical  conditions  had  created  a  powerful  State,  a 
literature,  an  art,  and  a  civilisation  of  its  own  cannot 
but  fight  against  anarchy.  It  inevitably  brings  forward 
its  boldest  and  most  powerful  members,  who  will  begin 
building  up  the  wrecked  State  anew.  Again,  with  in- 
tensified will  and  enlightened  thought,  they  will  create 
for  their  people  a  fitting  and  vital  form  of  common 
life. 

The  foundation  of  such  a  regeneration  of  Russia  was 
laid  in  the  south  a  few  days  after  the  November  revolu- 
tion. It  was  not  without  grounds  that  the  Bolsheviks 
persecuted  the  Komilovists  with  such  fury.  Those  two 
Russias,  the  split  between  which  was  disclosed  with 
such  picturesque  distinctness  in  Moscow  at  the  State 
Conference  in  August,  where  the  appearance  of  General 
AlexeiefE  and  General  Komiloff  was  greeted  on  the  one 
hand  with  enthusiasm  and  on  the  other  with  mocking 
hostility,  now  found  themselves  literally  in  two  hostile 
camps,  the  victory  falling  to  the  Left — the  International 
camp. 

In  the  first  place,  all  the  material  advantages  were 
on  the  side  of  the  Bolsheviks.  They  held  the  munition 
works  and  stores,  the  factory  for  printing  paper  money, 
the  railways,  and  the  banks.  All  these  external  signs  of 
power  fell  into  their  hands  because  the  masses  believed 
that  the  Bolsheviks  held  the  secret  of  creating  an  earthly 
paradise.  They  were  going  to  arrange  matters  so  that 
there  would  no  longer  be  the  division  of  people  into  rich 
and  poor,  exploiters  and  exploited.  The  old  dream  of 
the  destitute  was  to  come  true.     All  would  be  equal. 


496     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

Abstractly  speaking,  the  world  was  beautiful,  man  was 
free,  what  more  then  was  to  be  desired  ? 

The  masses,  ignorant  and  unaccustomed  to  critical 
^  thought,  could  not  grasp  either  the  spiritual  poverty  of 
their  leaders,  nor  the  fallacy  of  their  ideas.  They  trusted 
them,  and  with  the  childish  greediness  of  men  sufficiently 
exhausted  by  Social  injustice,  awaited  the  fulfilment  of 
the  promises  which  for  months  had  issued  from  the  lips 
of  Socialist  orators. 

Strong  in  this  trust  and  in  their  possession  of  the 
material  means  of  warfare,  the  Socialist  Marxists  who, 
under  the  name  of  Bolsheviks,  had  seized  the  power  in 
Russia,  were  in  a  condition  to  carry  out  any  experiments 
they  chose  to  the  bitter  end.  All  roads  were  open  to 
them.  If  they  have  suffered  shipwreck,  if  the  vast 
Social  laboratory  called  Sovdepia^ — ^the  very  name  is 
ridiculous — ^is  not  a  glorious  kingdom  of  happiness  and 
freedom,  but  a  dark  chaos  of  crime  and  sorrow,  it  is 
only  the  Bolsheviks  and  their  ideas  that  are  to  blame. 
It  is  no  easy  work  to  separate  the  blunders  and  crimes 
of  individuals  from  the  fundamental  errors  of  the  Socialist 
system,  developed  during  dozens  of  years  by  the  theorists 
of  Socialism.  The  Bolsheviks  are  extremists.  They 
occupy  the  extreme  left  flank  of  contemporary  Socialism, 
and  the  methods  to  which  they  had  recourse  in  Russia 
compose  the  maximum  dose  of  Socialistic  medicine 
for  curing  mankind  of  the  diseased  contradictions  of 
capitalism. 

But  the  Bolsheviks  are  undoubtedly  Socialists,  and 
their  criminal  example  must  sober  many  minds.  Events 
have  already  shown  the  results  of  Bolshevist  policy. 
Terror,  famine,  ruin,  slavery,  a  terrible  deterioration  of 
morals — ^this  is  to  what  Lenin  has  brought  Russia. 

*,  A  portmanteau  nickname  given  to  Bolshevist  Russia,  from  /Soviet  of 
Deputies. 


PEACE  WITH  THE  GERMANS  497 

During  the  course  of  many  months  he  has  been 
dictating  his  will  to  the  Russian  people  and  though 
actually  enjoying  full  power  he  has  suffered  ship- 
wreck. 

To  expose  the  causes  of  the  complete  failure  of  the 
Bolsheviks  in  detail  it  would  be  necessary  to  write 
another  book,  more  than  one,  indeed.  Economists  and 
politicians  will  seek  the  explanation  of  the  Bolshevik 
failure  in  their  contempt  for  right  and  for  the  law  of 
economic  necessity,  of  which  the  followers  of  Marx 
themselves  have  always  spoken  as  of  the  prin- 
cipal law  governing  human  society.  Psychologists 
and  mystics  will  seek  it  in  their  despotism,  in  their 
contempt  for  truth  and  good,  as  an  absolute  prin- 
ciple. Undoubtedly,  the  struggle  of  the  Bolsheviks 
for  power  is  one  of  the  most  soul-stirring  pages  and 
perhaps  one  of  the  most  instructive  for  the  last  few 
centuries  in  the  history  of  the  eternal  war  between  good 
and  evil. 

Within  the  boundaries  of  Russia,  this  struggle,  at 
the  beginning  of  Lenin's  reign,  was  a  very  unequal  one. 
Non-Bolshevist  Russia  had  no  means  of  resistance. 
After  Kerensky  had  proclaimed  General  Korniloff  a 
traitor,  the  patriotic  wing  of  Russian  society  lost  its 
principal  support  and  hope — the  Army  Headquarters. 
While  the  General  Staff  was  in  existence  there  were 
hopes  of  saving  from  disruption  at  least  part  of  the 
army,  that  principal  sign  and  support  of  political  life. 
After  the  arrest  of  General  Korniloff  all  went  wrong. 
There  was  no  one  on  whom  the  Government  could  lean. 
There  was  nowhere  for  the  healthy  elements  of  society 
to  group  themselves.  Bolshevism,  and  with  it  inter- 
nationalism, was  already  victorious  on  September  12th, 
the  day  when  General  Korniloff  was  arrested.  From 
this  moment  the  Bolshevist  advance  on  the  home  front 

2k 


498     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

develops  without  hindrance.  They  capture  one  posi- 
tion after  another  without  meeting  with  any  organised 
resistance. 

The  arrest  of  the  Provisional  Government  and  the 
flight  of  Kerensky  only  confirmed  the  victory  of  the 
Bolsheviks. 

But  that  very  evening  when  Russian  guns  were  firing 
on  the  capital  of  Russia,  when  civil  war  had  unfurled 
its  crimson  banner  over  Russia,  an  old  man  of  no  great 
height,  with  grey  moustaches  and  the  calm  and  wrinkled 
face  of  the  average  Russian  shopkeeper  or  clerk,  left 
Petrograd  by  the  Nicolaievsky  railway. 

This  was  General  Alexeieff,  the  former  Supreme 
Commander-in-Chief  of  the  Russian  Army.  A  brilliant 
strategist,  he  had  carried  out  most  complicated  opera- 
tions on  a  vast  front.  During  the  summer  of  1915, 
when  under  the  pressure  of  the  splendidly  armed  German 
forces,  the  Russian  Army  was  obliged  to  retreat  all  but 
unarmed,  yet  not  broken,  it  was  saved  by  the  military 
genius  of  General  Alexeiefi.  Against  the  Germans  he 
could  defend  himself.  But  to  protect  the  Russian  Army 
from  the  turbulent  onslaught  of  the  crazy  pacifists, 
half-educated  agitators,  German  traitors  and  dishonour- 
able demagogues  who  flooded  the  front  after  the  Revolu- 
tion, was  beyond  his  power.  His  foes  gained  the  upper 
hand  not  on  the  field  of  battle,  but  by  a  deep  flanking 
movement  to  the  rear.  With  the  intuition  of  a  warrior 
patriot,  he  was  one  of  the  first  to  feel  the  coming  danger, 
and  as  far  back  as  May  1917,  when  pessimism  was  so 
freely  identified  with  counter-revolutionism,  he  said  at 
a  congress  of  officers :  "  Russia  is  perishing,  because 
unless  we  defeat  the  Germans  Russia  cannot  be  saved."  ^ 

The  victory  over  the  enemy  was  celebrated  by  the 
roar  of  cannon  and  the  rattle  of  machine-guns  in  the 

^  This  historical  speech  is  quoted  more  fully  in  Chapter  IV. 


XVI  PEACE  WITH  THE  GERMANS  499 

Palace  Square.  But  General  Alexeieff  would  not  sur- 
render, nor  would  he  acknowledge  himself  defeated. 
Attired  in  worn  civilian  garb,  with  a  few  roubles  in  his 
pocket,  lost  in  the  crowd  of  passengers  who  were  listening 
fearfully  to  the  firing,  he  made  his  way  to  the  South, 
there  to  regenerate  the  Russian  Army,  that  necessary 
pledge  for  the  regeneration  of  Russia. 

General  Alexeiei!  and  the  Russian  patriots  who 
gathered  round  him  immediately  were  without  men  or 
means.  And  above  all,  it  was  impossible  for  them  to 
attract  the  masses  at  once  by  word  and  manifesto. 
Honourable,  thinking  men  could  not  promise  the  im- 
mediate realisation  of  all  their  hopes  and  aims  when 
they  knew  that  the  War  and  the  Revolution  had  left 
the  people  destitute,  that  before  Russia  lay  difficulties, 
privations,  and  sacrifices,  and  not  the  sumptuous  festival 
of  immediate  general  prosperity. 

Duped  by  a  torrent  of  lies,  blinded  by  the  mirage  of 
impossible  promises,  the  people  turned  away  from  their 
faithful  servants,  believed  them  to  be  their  enemies, 
and  senselessly  repeated  every  slander,  every  absurdity, 
launched  against  them  by  the  Bolsheviks. 

The  news  that  General  Alexeief!  had  made  his  way 
to  the  Don  Territory  and  was  recruiting  a  volunteer 
army  at  Novocherkassk  spread  rapidly  throughout  the 
North.  Officers  and  military  cadets  streamed  towards 
him.  But  to  make  their  way  to  him  was  far  from  easy. 
The  majority  of  them  had  no  money.  They  had  to  obtain 
forged  soldiers'  documents,  as  the  Red  Guard  and  Bol- 
shevist bands  searched  the  trains  and  shot  down  all 
who  aroused  their  suspicion.  No  small  number  of  young 
men  perished  without  reaching  the  Don. 

Those  who  did  reach  the  territory  of  the  Cossacks 
found  themselves  in  no  easy  position.  General  Alexeieff 
began  his  work   with  a  capital  of  400  roubles.     To 


500     FEOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK       ch. 

organise  relations  with  Northern  Russia  was  difficult. 
The  closing  of  the  banks  upset  all  calculations  and  made 
it  impossible  for  sympathisers  to  support  the  volunteers. 
All  around  them  in  the  territory  of  the  Don  the  same 
revolutionary  ferment  and  the  same  anarchical  process 
was  going  on  as  in  the  north  of  Russia.  The  Cossack 
regiments  returned  from  the  front  infected  with  Bol- 
shevism. The  situation  was  unstable.  Their  hetman, 
General  Kaledin,  sympathised  from  the  bottom  of  his 
heart  with  the  formation  of  a  volunteer  army  which 
would  undertake  the  task  of  continuing  the  war  with 
Germany  along  with  the  Allies,  and  the  restoration 
of  a  united  Russia.  But  General  Kaledin  saw  the 
dangerous  currents  of  feeling  developing  among  the 
Cossacks  and  was  powerless  to  resist  them. 

The  arrival  in  Novocherkassk  of  Korniloff,  Denikin, 
Markoff ,  and  other  Generals  made  the  situation  still  more 
difficult.  Their  escape  from  the  prison  of  Bykoff,  full 
of  danger  and  adventure,  surrounded  them  with  a  halo 
of  legendary  heroism.  But  if  in  this  brilliant  group  of 
military  leaders  some  saw  the  incarnate  hope  of  Russia's 
resurrection,  in  others  their  name  aroused  the  old  fear  of 
counter-revolution,  though  during  the  whole  of  the  first 
period  of  the  Russian  Revolution  the  military  had  honour- 
ably supported  the  democratic  Provisional  Government 
and  had  not  made  a  single  attempt  at  the  restoration  of 
the  Imperial  dynasty. 

The  fame  of  Alexeieff's  army  went  far  beyond  its 
actual  numbers.  The  Bolsheviks  decided  that  it  would 
be  more  advantageous  for  them  to  crush  the  volunteers 
before  they  gained  strength,  and,  even  before  concluding 
peace  with  the  Germans,  began  to  concentrate  around 
Rostov  and  Novocherkassk  an  army  of  several  tens  of 
thousands  of  bayonets,  which  included  a  well-organised 
Hungariau  unit.    General  Alexeieff  was  unable  to  accept 


I 


XVI  PEACE  WITH  THE  GERMANS  501 

battle.  He  had  not  even  4000  men  at  his  back.  Again 
he  had  to  save  by  retreat  not  the  Russian  Army,  but  the 
small  though  precious  germ  of  a  future  Russian  Army. 

On  February  9th  the  Volunteer  Army,  consisting 
almost  exclusively  of  ofl&cers  and  under  the  immediate 
leadership  of  General  Korniloff,  marched  out  of  Rostov, 
crossed  the  frozen  Don,  and  departed  into  the  depths  of 
the  Kuban  steppes. 

From  that  moment  onwards  the  history  of  this  army 
has  been  a  long  series  of  difficulties  and  great  exploits. 
It  had  no  money,  no  clothing,  no  munitions,  no  base, 
no  country,  no  allies.  Ragged  and  beggared,  driven  to 
the  very  foot  of  the  Caucasian  mountains,  these  Russian 
patriots  preserved  the  banner  of  the  Russian  Army  and 
the  Russian  State.  They  experienced  privations  and 
failures  which  at  times  bordered  on  catastrophes.  On 
April  13,  near  Ekaterinodar,  General  Korniloff,  who 
had  been  their  comrade  in  the  field  and  their  heroic 
leader,  was  killed  by  a  shell.  The  following  September 
witnessed  the  death  of  General  Alexeieff,  whose  health 
had  long  been  broken. 

But  the  army  stood  it  all,  remained  whole  and  de- 
veloped into  a  real  army.  It  is  now  led  by  General 
Denikin,  one  of  the  best  representatives  of  Russian 
military  tradition.  The  whole  Kuban  territory  is  at  his 
disposal.  Already  he  has  tens  of  thousands  of  men  at 
his  command.  He  is  closely  linked  with  the  Don,  the 
Crimea  and  Siberia,  where  Admiral  Koltchak  has  suc- 
ceeded in  forming  a  strong  and  democratic  government. 
All  these  spacious  territories  of  Russia  are  now  free 
from  Bolshevism,  whose  yoke  the  North  still  suffers. 

Slowly  and  in  torment  Russia  is  living  through  that 
last  and  most  terrible  paroxysm  of  the  Revolution — 
Bolshevism.  The  process  of  healing  comes  from  the 
borders  towards  the  centre,  gradually  liberating  territory 


502    FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK   ch.  xvi 

after  territory.  It  is  a  painful  process  which  for  a 
weaker  and  less  numerous  people  might  be  mortal.  But 
there  have  already  been  great  crises  in  the  history  of 
the  Russian  people,  yet  the  national  instinct  has  in  the 
end  led  Russia  into  the  right  way.  Russia  will  find  it 
now  also. 


APPENDIX 
1917 

Sth  March. — Food  Riots  begin  in  Petrograd. 

lOth  March. — Nicholas  II.  signs  the  Ukase  for  the  dissolution  of  the 
Duma. 

I2th  March. — The  soldiers  revolt  in  Petrograd.     Ministers  arrested. 

I3th  March. — Committee  of  the  Duma  formed.  By  evening  the 
Soviet  of  Workmen's  and  Soldiers'  Delegates  formed.  Admiral 
Nepenin,  commanding  Baltic  Fleet,  murdered  by  sailors. 
Massacre  of  officers  at  Cronstadt  and  Helsingfors. 

I5th  March. — Nicholas  II.  abdicates  the  throne,  in  his  own  name 
and  that  of  his  heir  Alexis,  in  favour  of  his  brother  Michael 
Alexandrovich.  A  Provisional  Government  is  formed,  with 
Prince  G.  Lvofi  at  the  head.  The  Petrograd  Soviet  of  Work- 
men's and  Soldiers'  Delegates  issues  Order  No.  1  to  the  troops. 

16th  March. — The  Grand  Duke  Michael  Alexandrovich  hands  over 
full  authority  to  the  Provisional  Government  until  the  con- 
vocation of  the  Constituent  Assembly.  General  Komiloff 
appointed  Commander-in-Chief  of  the  troops  of  the  Petrograd 
region. 

I9th  March. — The  Provisional  Government  proclaims  a  political 
amnesty.  Manifesto  of  Home  Rule  for  the  Grand  Duchy  of 
Finland  issued. 

27th  March. — Proclamation  of  the  Petrograd  Soviet  of  Workmen's 
and  Soldiers'  Delegates  to  the  workers  of  the  whole  world  about 
peace. 

30th  March. — The  Provisional  Government  grants  independence  for 
Poland. 

Slst  March. — Abolition  of  capital  punishment  in  the  Civil  and 
Military  Law  Codes. 

12th  April. — Promulgation  of  the  Law  on  the  Corn  Monopoly. 
Opening  of  the  first  Congress  of  the  All-Russian  Soviet  of 
Workmen's  and  Soldiers'  Delegates. 

15th  April. — General  Alexeieff  appointed  Supreme  Commander-in- 

603 


504     FKOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK 

Chief.  Arrival  of  Lenin  from  abroad.  Lenin's  first  visit  to  the 
Soviet. 

Ist  May. — ^Declaration  made  by  P.  Milyukofi,  Minister  of  Foreign 
Affairs,  on  the  aims  of  the  war  which  must  be  brought  to  a 
victorious  end. 

Uh  May. — ^Armed  demonstration  of  soldiers  in  Petrograd  against 
the  Provisional  Government,  and  a  counter  demonstration  of 
confidence  in  the  Provisional  Government. 

6th  May. — ^Resolution  passed  by  the  Provisional  Government  con- 
cerning land  committees. 

9th  May. — ^Resolution  passed  by  the  Soviet  to  the  effect  that  only 
its  Executive  Committee  may  call  out  troops.  Prince  Lvoff 
applies  to  Rodrianko,  and  to  the  President  of  the  Soviet, 
Chheidze,  proposing  the  introduction  of  new  Ministers  to  the 
Government. 

10th  May. — Solemn  meeting  of  the  members  of  aU  the  four  Dumas. 

ISth  May. — The  Congress  of  Don  Cossacks  considers  it  necessary 
that  all  orders  should  be  given  exclusively  by  the  Provisional 
Government.  After  hesitating  three  weeks  the  Soviet  passes 
a  resolution  in  favour  of  supporting  the  "  Loan  of  Liberty." 

lUh  May. — Resignation  of  A.  Guchkoff,  the  War  Minister.  The 
Executive  Committee  of  the  Soviet  is  in  favour  of  participation 
in  a  Coalition  Ministry.  General  Korniloff  resigns  the  post  of 
Commander-in-Chief  of  the  troops  of  the  Petrograd  region. 

16th  May. — ^Resignation  of  P.  Milyukoff,  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs. 

18^^  May. — Opening  of  the  first  Congress  of  Peasants'  Delegates. 

19th  May. — ^List  of  new  Coalition  Ministry  published.  Kerensky 
appointed  Minister  of  War  and  of  Marine. 

20th  May. — Congress  of  Officers  at  the  Stavka.  General  Alexeieff 
makes  his  historical  speech. 

Slst  May. — The  Cronstadt  Soviet  decides  not  to  submit  to  the 
Provisional  Government. 

Srd  June. — The  Soviet  announces  that  on  21st  of  June  an  inter- 
national Socialistic  Conference  will  be  convened  at  Stockholm. 

6th  June. — General  Alexeieff  leaves  the  post  of  Supreme  Commander- 
in-Chief.     General  Brussiloff  appointed  in  his  stead. 

ISth  June. — Tereschenko,  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  hands  a  note 
to  A.  Thomas  proposing  to  convene  a  conference  of  Allies  for 
the  purpose  of  revising  agreements  on  the  aims  of  the  War. 

nth  June. — Opening  of  the  Congress  of  Soviets  of  Workmen's  and 
Soldiers'  Delegates.     Robert  Grimm  deported  from  Russia. 

21th  June. — The  Ukrainian  Central  Rada  (Parliament)  passes  an 
Act  declaring  the  Ukraine  autonomous. 

Ist  July. — Kerensky  issues  an  order  for  an  advance  on  the  South- 
western front. 


APPENDIX  606 

16th  July. — Ministerial  crisis.  Ministers  of  the  Cadet  party  leave 
the  Ministry,  in  view  of  divergence  of  opinion  on  the  Ukrainian 
question. 

I6th  July. — Bolshevist  insurrection  in  Petrograd.  With  the  help  of 
the  Cronstadt  sailors  they  try  to  seize  power. 

20th  July. — Germans  break  through  the  South- Western  front. 
Prince  Lvoff  resigns. 

2lst  July. — The  Provisional  Government  appoints  Kerensky  Prime 
Minister. 

25th  July. — Capital  punishment  restored  for  the  troops. 

3lst  July. — General  Komiloff  appointed  Supreme  Commander-in- 
Chief. 

ith  August. — The  Public  Prosecutor  publishes  results  of  inquiry  as 
to  the  Bolsheviks  receiving  large  sums  of  money  from  Germany. 

6th  August. — New  Cabinet  formed. 

7th  August. — Trotsky  and  Lunacharsky  arrested. 

26th  August. — State  Conference  opened  in  Moscow. 

3rd  September. — Germans  take  Riga. 

9th  September. — Conflict  between  General  Korniloff  and  Kerensky. 

10th  September. — Order  issued  to  arrest  KornilofE  and  other  Generals. 
Cadet  Ministers  leave  the  Government. 

10lh-l4:th  September. — Massacres  of  officers  at  Helsingfors,  Viborg, 
Reval,  Dvinsk.  Conference  of  Provisional  Government  with 
representatives  of  various  political  organisations  to  deal  with 
the  ministerial  crisis. 

ISth  September. — Kerensky  becomes  Supreme  Commander-in-Chief. 

lith  September.— Ruaaia.  is  declared  a  Republic. 

I6th  September. — Establishment  of  the  Council  of  Five. 

ISth  September. — A  General  Meeting  of  the  Soviet  passes  a  resolution 
moved  by  the  Bolsheviks. 

20th  September. — General  Alexeieff  resigns  his  post  as  Chief  of  the 
Staff,  and  is  replaced  by  General  Dukhonin. 

22nd  September. — In  the  Petrograd  Soviet  Trotsky  mentions  the 
guillotine  for  the  first  time. 

27th  September. — Democratic  Conference  in  Petrograd. 

3rd  October. — Germans  occupy  the  islands  of  Oesel  and  Dago. 

Sth  October. — Trotsky  elected  President  of  the  Petrograd  Soviet. 
The  Soviet  passes  a  resolution  against  the  Provisional  Govern- 
ment. The  General  Secretariat  of  the  Ukraine  announces  that 
the  administration  of  the  Ukraine  has  passed  into  its  hands. 

20th  October.— O^emng  of  the  Council  of  the  Republic. 

ith  November.— Bohhevika  form  a  Military  Revolutionary  Com- 
mittee. 

6th  November. — Bolsheviks  begin  to  shoot.  No  action  taken  by 
Kerensky's  (Government. 


506     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK 

Ith  November, — The  Military  Revolutionary  Committee  declares  the 
Provisional  Government  to  be  deposed.  In  the  day  soldiers 
disperse  the  Council  of  the  Repubhc.  Kerensky  leaves  Petro- 
grad.  Winter  Palace  taken  in  the  night.  Ministers  arrested 
and  placed  in  St.  Peter  and  Paul  Fortress.  Russia  declared  a 
Soviet  Republic. 

10th  November. — Beginning  of  civil  war  in  Moscow. 

12th  November. — Bolsheviks'  decree  on  the  peace  published. 

ISth  November. — Bearers  of  the  flag  of  truce  sent  out. 

Ibth  November. — General  Alexeieff  begins  to  form  a  volunteer  army 
at  Novocherkassk. 

26th  November. — Elections  to  Constituent  Assembly. 

2Sth  November. — Meeting  of  plenipotentiaries  at  Brest-Litovsk. 

5^^-11^^  December. — The  members  of  the  Constituent  Assembly 
attempt  to  open  the  Assembly.  Members  Kokoshkin  and 
Shingareff  arrested. 

16th  December. — Bolsheviks  take  the  Stavka.  Supreme  Com- 
mander-in-Chief General  Dukhonin  is  murdered  by  the  mob. 

18^^  December. — Armistice  of  twenty-eight  days. 

19th  December. — Bolshevist  Ultimatum  to  the  Ukrainian  Rada. 

27th  December. — All  private  banks  seized. 

31st  December. — Bolshevist  German  Conference  in  Petrograd  starts 
work. 

1918 

13th  January. — Rumanian  Ambassador  arrested. 

ISth  January. — Opening  and  closing  of  the  Constituent  Assembly. 

Murder  of  Kokoshkin  and  Shingareff. 
27th  January. — General  Alexeieff's  Volunteer  Army  transferred  to 

Rostov. 
30^^  January. — Rada  repudiated  by  the  Bolsheviks.    Kiev  taken 

by  Soviet  troops. 
10^^  Februa/ry. — Bolshevist  delegation  refuses  to  sign  the  peace 

treaty.     Order  issued  for  complete  demobilisation. 
l^th  February. — Germans  resimie  hostilities. 
19th  February, — The  Soviet  of  People's  Commissaries  sends  wireless 

accepting  German  terms. 
22nd  February. — Under  pressure  of  the  numerous  Red  Army  General 

Alexeieff  retreats  to  the  Kuban. 
3rd  March, — Peace  treaty  between  Bolsheviks  and  Germans  signed 

at  Brest-Litovsk. 
17th  March. — The  All-Russian  Congress  of  Soviets  ratifies  the  treaty 

of  Brest-Litovsk. 


J 


INDEX 


Abdication  of  Nicholas  II.,  23,  24,  34 

Abram,  Comrade,  306 

Adler,  110 

Aladin,  219 

Alexander  II.,  326,  382 

Alexander  III.,  326,  489 

Alexander  Nevsky  Monastery,   409, 

410,  416 
Alexandra  Feodorovna,  Empress,  2 
Alexeiefif,  General : 

and  army  reorganisation,  62,  68, 
171,  174,  176,  220,  221,  233, 
498 ;  at  State  Conference,  174, 
176,496;  defencistspeech  at  Offi- 
cers' Congress,  95,  96,  129,  498  ; 
intermediary  for  Komiloff,  216  ; 
supports  Kerensky,  220,  221 ; 
visits  Kishkin  during  November 
Revolution,  263 
Commander-in-Chief,  62,  68,  498; 

resigns,  96,  97 
leaves  Petrograd,  498,  499 
Volunteer  Army  of,  271,  273,  292, 

463  ;  campaign  begins,  600,  601 
dies,  601 
Alexinsky,  144,  146 
AlUes : 
aims  and  objects  in  war  to  be  stated 

by,  101,  123,  124,  241,  246 
ambassadors  of,  remain  in  Petro- 
grad, 425, 426 ;  are  insulted,  461, 
462 
attacked  as  counter-revolutionary 
and  capitalistic,  84, 303  ;  Trotsky 
on,  473-476,  481 
Bolshevist     Government's     peace 
negotiations  and,  302,  303,  307, 
308,   318 ;    blame    for   separate 
peace  laid  on,  318,  474,  476,  493 
Constituent  Assembly  proposes  con- 
ference with,  369 
ignorant  of  Russian  situation,  492  • 
494 


Socialist  leaders  of,   visit  Russia, 
101-104;  distrusted  for  defencist 
views,  102,  103  ;  and  Stockholm 
Conference,  111,  112 
America  enters  war,  100,  101,  303 
Presidential  message  from,  493 
Social  -  Revolutionaries       receive 

money  from,  290  (note) 
Trotsky's  propaganda  in,  78  ;  views 
on, 303 
Annexations :     revolutionary    policy 
opposes,    70,    86,   90,    123,  168, 
233,  354,  356 ;  practised  by  Bol- 
sheviks,  380 ;  by  Germans,  468, 
470,  471,  492 
Apter  executed,  451 
Arbitration  Courts,  190 
Armenia  and  Turkey,  469,  477 
Armistice  negotiations  by  BolshevlBt 
Government,   301-308,   316-319; 
Constituent  Assembly   confirms, 
360 
Army  demobilised,  472, 473, 482, 492  ; 

remobilised,  483 
Army  Committees,  60  ;  discipline  and, 
91,    130,    236;     interference    in 
strategy  by,  130,  160,  171,  174, 
213;    Kerensky  and,  211,  243; 
Komiloff   and,    169,    212,    213; 
resist  Soviet   Government,   308, 
309,  390  ;  Trotsky  abolishes,  134 
{note) 
Army  disorganisation  at  front,  130, 
134,    230,    236;    lets    Germans 
through,  146-160,  161,  162,  484- 
'  490 

j       Alexeiefif  on,  95,  96,  129,  233 
I       caused    by    abolition    of    capital 
I  punishment,  148,  149,  210  ;  Bol- 

shevist  propaganda  and  Soviet 
I  methods,  69,  73,  77,  87,  91,  122 

(noU),  128,  133,  134,   146,   169. 
I  208,  238,    241,313,314;    Com- 


607 


508     FKOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK 


mittees,  91, 130,160, 178;  German 
activities,  73,  77,  122,  128,  146, 
211 ;  Order  No.  L,  60,  61,  128  ; 
peace  talk,  59,  91,  114,  177 
(note),  313 ;  persecution  of  officers, 
61,  73,  129,  174,  222,  236,  306 ; 
politics  introduced,  22,  178,  221, 
313 
Kerensky  and,  145,  179,  210,  211, 

221,  235 

Komiloff's  struggle  with,  87,  148, 

169,  171,  209,  211-218 
Medical  service  and,  153,  164 
Army  of  Ukraine,  139,  140 
ArzubieflE  on  November  Revolution, 

260-255 
Austria : 

Bolshevist   emigres    in,   290,   291 ; 
Lenin    and    Zinovieff    in,    288 ; 
Trotsky   appeals   to    proletariat 
of,  475 
ferment  in,  466 
propaganda  of,  66,  78,  165 
Socialist  agents  from,  104,  105 
Ukraine  and,  127,  138 
Autonomy  of  races :  autocracy  and, 
466,  457 ;    Bolsheviks  and,  455, 
457-462   (see  under  Independent 
Republics  and  Self-determination) 
Avksentieff  in  Kerensky  Government, 
161,  249  ;  on  counter-revolution, 

222,  223  ;  opposed  by  Bolsheviks 
in  Constituent  Assembly,  336, 
338,  359 ;  Soviet  orders  arrest 
of,  349 

Bagratuny,  General,  252,  264 

Baltic  Fleet,  127,  128,  228 

Banks,  nationalisation  of,  69,  79,  92, 

371,  375,  431,  476,  600;    State 

Bank  seized  by  Bolsheviks,  277, 

278,  286,  426,  427 
Bar  abolished,  386 
Bassoff,  Private,  366 
Bauer,  Otto,  104 
Bebel,  293,  333 
Berdichev,  218 
Bematsky,  M.,  361 
Bleichman,  93 
Boldyreff,  General,  389-391 
Bolsheviks : 
autonomy  as  understood  by,  455, 

457-462 
beginnings  of   party,  45,   46,   63 ; 

non-Russians    among,    47,    297- 


300 ;     Shingareff's    analysis    of, 

287,  288 

Cadet    party    oppose,    249,    267 ; 
persecuted  by,  284,  342-347,  348, 
362,  386 
Congress  of  Bolsheviks,  162 
Congress  of  Soviets  and,  121,  132 
Constituent  Assembly  demanded  by, 
333,   334 ;    election  disorganised 
by,  334;    election  results,  339 
obstructions  arranged   by,    339- 
341 ;  persecution  of  members  by, 
341-343 ;      proclaimed    counter- 
revolutionary by,  344-348,  350; 
sitting  interrupted  and  dissolu- 
tion proclaimed  by,  363-361 
Council  of  Republic  abandoned  by, 
167,  232,  286  ;  dissolved  by,  249 
economics  and  finance  of,  370-373, 

375,  376  {see  under  Banks) 
elections   controlled    by,    197-199, 

321,  322,  334-336,  339 
German  advance  and,  478-483 
contempt  for,  468 
help  to,  in  men,  288,  292,  462- 
464  ;  in  money,  61,  73,  74,  106, 
145,  154,  162,  268,  289,  290, 
291,  368;    in  propaganda,  78, 
106,  166,  290-292,  316 
Grimm,  Robert,  and,  108 
Growth  of  power  of  : 

Revolutionary  Democracy  misled 
by,  61,  74, 79,  91, 113, 143, 162, 
207 
Social  Democrats  influenced  by, 
66,  67,  70,  71,  87,  98,  99,  120, 
135,  136  ;  Lenin  on,  79-82 
Social     Revolutionaries,      their 
**  comrades  in  ideas,"  55,  56, 
68,   135,   136,    166,   224,   365, 
366  ;    Lenin  criticises,  79-82  ; 
split  after  November  Revolu- 
tion, 266,  268;    struggle  with 
Soviet,  341,  362,  363 
Soldiers  corrupted  by,  73,  74,  87, 
88,    142,    169,   238,   241,   248, 
257-259,  287,  309,  337,  342 
July  insurrection  of,  136,  141,  142- 
146,  164,  216 ;  arrests  after,  146, 
162,  208,  224 ;  German  help  in, 

288,  289 

Kerensky  and  Bolshevist  prepara- 
tions, 238-243 ;  expected  to  attack 
Petrograd,  263,  264,  285,  300 

Labour  under,  322,  371-374 


INDEX 


609 


Land  nationalisation  policy  of,  45, 
69,  79,  186,  195,  196,  204,  223  ; 
estabUshed,  249,  286,   300-302, 
364,  371.  376 
Law  Courts  aboliBhed  by,  382,  384  ; 
Bar  abolished,  385 ;  revolutionary 
tribunals  established,  384,  385 ; 
their  methods,  385-391,  394,  395 
Marxist  doctrines  of : 
class- war,  46,  55,  63,  94,  116, 117, 
193-195,  293,  458;  control  of 
industry,  119,  293,  371;  dic- 
tatorship  of    proletariat,    46, 
117,  136,   156,   185,  287,  293, 
321-324,  325,  379,  407,  496; 
expropriation,  64,  79,  118,  150, 
354, 359, 371 ;  internationalism, 
72,  80,  88,  100,  101,  108,  162, 
316,  317,  458 
November  Revolution  by  : 

Military  Revolutionary  Commit- 
tee seizes  power,  238,  248,  249  ; 
Ministers  imprisoned,  258-260  ; 
Moscow  bombarded,  273,  285, 
286 ;  opposition  parties  after, 
266,  267,  269  ;  Petrograd  cap- 
tured, 251,  264,  285,  286  ;  pro- 
clamation of  new  Government, 
261 ;  Smolny  Institute  head- 
quarters, 261  -  263  ;  Winter 
Palace  captured  and  plundered, 
251-258,  260 
Orthodox    Church   and,    407-413, 

469 
Peace    negotiations    by,    301-307, 
315-319,    464   (see    under  Brest- 
Litovsk) ;     Allies     blamed     for 
separate  peace,  318,  474,  475,  493 
Petrograd   Municipal   Council   op- 
poses, 268,  269 ;    overcome  by, 
329-331 
power  and  peril  of,  495,  497,  498 
Press  freedom  destroyed  by,  322, 
398-407,  481,  482,  483  ;   printing 
offices  wrecked  by,  263,  336,  401, 
402,406 
principles  actuating :    fanatics   in 
revolution,     294,     295 ;      moral 
standards  lacking,  295,  299,  300  ; 
ruthlessness  in  methods,  319,  320, 
369,  397,  398,  453,  454 
propaganda  of,  73,  74,  78,  84,  290, 

291,  292,  316,  322,  458,  459 
Provisional  Government  Ministers 
denounce.  282,  283 


Socialists  and:  Allied,  102,  103, 
109;  enemy,  104-108,  114,  115 

Soviet  power  demanded  by,  79,  80, 
85,  87,  88,  89,  119,  166,  166; 
established  by  insurrection,  142, 
249,  266,  286,  321,  355,  371 

State  Conference  excludes,  168, 169, 
183  ;  agitation  against,  183,  207 

Stockholm  Conference  opposed  by, 

tyranny  of,  worse  than  Tsardom, 
431,  432 

Ukraine  and,  348,  463 

Volunteer  Army  begins  struggle 
with,  463,  464,  500,  501 

War  opposed  by,  76,  87,  88,  122, 
123,  131,  132,  232,  286,  301,  302 

Zemstvos  closed  by,  328 
Bonch-Bruevich,  299,  350 
Borgbjerg,  110 
Bourgeoisie : 

Bolsheviks  denounce  counter-revo- 
lutionary intrigues  of,  158,  159, 
163,  232,  344,  345,  359,  360,  473, 
479-481 ;  encourage  plunder  of, 
379-381 ;  preach  overthrow  and 
suppression  of,  117, 120, 162,  321, 
372  -  375,  452  ;  suppress  news- 
papers of,  398-400 

includes  every  one  outside  prole- 
tariat, 193-195,  286 

qualities  of,  193, 194,  206 

Socialist  attitude  towards,  36,  56, 
58,  61,  83,  85,  118,  156,  158,  182 
Bran  ting,  110 

Breshko-Breshkovskaia,  Mme., 
"Grandmother  of  the  Revolu- 
tion,"  175,  176,  182;  in  Con- 
stituent  Assembly,  336;  Social 
Revolutionary,  44,  165,  182,  353 
Brest-Litovsk  Peace  Treaty : 

armistice  arranged,  307,  318 

chronology  of,  469 

delegates  sent,  306,  307 

negotiations,  315-318, 329, 460, 461, 
470  -  475  ;  German  behaviour 
during,  316-318, 468 ;  suspended, 
466 

protests  against,  329,  493,  494 

secret  clauses,  313  (note) 

signed,  491 

Stavka  and,  308,  309;  Dukhonin 
murdered,  310-312 

terms  of,  470-472, 476, 476, 477, 491, 
492 


510      FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK 


Brzezany  advance,  132-134 
Buchanan,  Sir  George,  92,  237,  307 
BurtzefiE,  Vladimir,  236,  237,  239 
Bykhov  prison,  218,  273,  600 

Cachin,  M.,  102 
Cadet  party : 

autonomy  of  races  and,  141,  456, 

457 
Bolsheviks  declared  traitors  by,  246, 
267 ;  Bolsheviks  arrest  members 
of,   284 ;   attribute  pogroms   to, 
441,    442 ;    persecute    them    as 
counter-revolutionary,    342-347, 
348,    362,    386;    suppress    their 
newspapers,  402,  403 
Coalition  Government,  Lvoff's,  and, 
89  ;  Cadets  resign  from,  141,  143, 
158  ;  Kerensky's,  161,  226,  230 
Constituent  Assembly  elections  and, 
336,  337,  347;    Assembly  their 
tool,  333,  342-347 
Council  of  Republic,  anti-Bolshevist 

motion  in,  216 
defencism  of,  41,  48,  118,  132,  234, 

347 
food  control  and,  201 
formation  and  policy  of,  27,  36,  39- 

41,  117,  118 
Kornilojff  and,  219,  220 
Land  policy  of,  40,  117 
Lenin  and,  81,  333  ;   his  arrest  de- 
manded by,  144 
Municipal  council  elections  and,  199 ; 
in  Petrograd  Municipal  Council, 
162,  268,  337 
Peace  Treaty  protest  by,  493 
Provisional  Government  and,   29, 

31,  39,  135 
State    Conference   declaration    by, 

173 
Ukraine  question,  resignation  over, 

141 
Universal  suffrage  and,  166,  197 
Cadets,  military : 

Bolsheviks  resisted  by,  250, 252, 254, 
255,  259,  263,  264,  288  ;  Bolshe- 
viks massacre,  448 
Generals  defended  by,  218 
Municipal  Council  obtains  release 

of,  270,  271,  329 
Volunteer  Army  formed  of,  271, 272, 
499 
Capital    punishment,    Komiloff    de- 
mands restoration  of,  148,  149, 


151,169;  Tsereteli  and  Kerensky 
on,  151,  208,  210,  224,  233,  357 
Capitalism  the  cause  of  war,  54,  70, 
71,  78,  82,  87,  88,  375,  380,  381  ; 
Socialism  no  improvement  on, 
372,  373 
Centre  party  of  Duma,  38 

of   SociaUsts,    116-118,    135,    136; 
defeated     and     repudiated      by 
Bolsheviks,  224,  284,  285,   301, 
302 
Centro-Flot,  228,  270 
Chaikovsky,  N.,  247 
Chemoff ,  Victor : 

Bolsheviks  receive  help  from,  55, 

68,  73,  136,  224,  290  ;  opposition 

from,   142,  266,  273,  274,  359, 

order  arrest  of,  349 

career  and  character  of,  44, 165, 166 

Coalition  Government,  Lvoff's,  and, 

89  ;  Kerensky's,  161,  165 
Constituent    Assembly    candidate, 

336,  338 ;  speech  by,  356 
defeatist,  166,  173.  175 
Land  Bill  by,  156,  157 
State  Conference  and,  173 
Zimmerwaldist,  338,  356 
Chheidze,  N.  : 
Constituent    Assembly    candidate, 

331,  336 
defeatist,  16,  18,  49,  72,  96,  97,  224 
member  of  Contact  Commission,  60  ; 

Provisional  Committee,  8 
President  of  Soviet,  15-17,  30,  166  ; 

faUs,  224,  228,  297 
State  Conference,  declaration  in,  by, 
171,  175,  176 
Chhenkeli,  227 
Chicherin,  299,  467 
Chinese  troops  used  by  Soviet,  323, 

454 
"  Chresvychaika,"  322,  323 
Chudov  monastery,  414 
Church  and  State  separated,  410-413 
Church    Council    in    Moscow,    408 ; 

anathematises  Bolsheviks,  411 
Church  processions,  418-420 
Civil  war : 

Bolsheviks  responsible  for,  74,  88, 
236,279,373,452,479;  Soviet  de- 
mands, 348,  349  ;  victories,  with 
German  help,  in,  461-463,  473 
Lenin  and,  85,  86 

secession  movements  provoke,  127, 
348 


INDEX 


611 


Class  war : 

Bolsheviks  aim  at.  88.  293,  452; 
KoQovalof!  on,  187 ;  Marxist 
dogma  of,  116,  117,  293;  pro- 
paganda for,  185,  195,  196; 
Socialist  policy  intensifies,  94, 96, 
121,  176,  189;  Zimmerwald 
formula  includes,  90 

Coalition  Government : 

Kerensky's  first,  161-167;  Army 
and,  170,  171,  174,  178-190,  210, 
211;  Army  leaders  arrested  by, 
213-219 ;  Cadets  leave,  219,  220 ; 
Mensheviks  support,  223,  224 
Kerensky's  second,  230 ;  confusion 
in,  234,  235;  defended  by 
Kerensky,  241-243 ;  deposed  by 
Bolsheviks,  249 
Lvoff's,  89 ;  fall  of,  141,  142 

Commission  for  Fighting  Counter- 
Revolution,  etc.,  223,  224,  322, 
366,  367 

Committee  for  Saving  the  Motherland, 

283,  284 

of  Defence  of  Constituent  Assembly, 

284,  350,  351 

of  Public  Safety,  245  ;  formed,  256, 

257,    270;     Moscow,   272,    273; 

Provisional     Government     and, 

283 

Communist  Manifesto,  117,  118,  379, 

413  ;   party,  Lenin  demands,  69 
Conciliation  Councils,  190 
Congress  of  Bolsheviks,  162 

of  Officers,  95,  96,  129,  498 

of  Socialists,  167 

of  Soviets,  55-57,  60;  parties  in, 
121  ;   war  policy  and,  121-124 

of  Soviets,  Second,  320 ;  Third,  369, 
464, 466 ;  Fifth,  320,  376  ;  Extra- 
ordinary, 492 
Constantinople,  196,  459 
Constituent  Assembly : 

authority  to  be  supreme,  22,  25, 
141 ;  and  not  to  be  anticipated, 
155,  156,  157,  166,  172,  302; 
Trotsky's  lip-service  to,  296,  331, 
333 

Bolsheviks  demand,  81,  82,  159, 
240,  241,  333,  335  ;  a  menace  to, 
279,  283 ;  pretend  respect  for, 
155,  326,  331 ;  prevent  meeting 
and  persecute  members  of,  339- 
341,  342-347 ;  dissolve  sitting 
of,  320,  360,  361,  369 


Cadets  accused  of   treason  under 

cover  of,  342-347 
elections  for,  197.  332,  334-339 
land  question  to  await,  166.  157. 

302 
League  for  Protection  of,  341,  342 
Provisional  Government  defers  to. 

156,  157  ;  fixes  date  of,  339 
Rodzianko  and,  19,  331 
sits  and  is  dissolved  by  Bolsheviks, 

350,  351,  352-360 
Soviet  to  control,  348,  353-355 
Contact  Commission,  60,  79,  81,  82 
Control  of  food-supply,  201,  202,  206 
of  production  and  distribution,  177, 

178,  188,  189,  293 
Copenhagen,  110,  289 
Cossacks  : 

Bolsheviks  opposed  by,  242,  246, 

247,  252  ;  successes  against,  461. 

500 
Kaledin  protected  by,  219,  500 
land  of,  not  confiscated,  302 
March  Revolution  and.  4 
Red  Guards  resisted  at  Gatchina  by, 

265,  288,  292 
Council  of  the  Republic  convened,  167. 

231 ;  Bolsheviks  desert,  167, 232, 

286;  Bolsheviks   dissolve,    167. 

249 ;  Kerensky's  speech  in,  238- 

244 ;   military  position  and,  233- 

237 
Counter-revolution : 

Bolsheviks  play  on  fears  of,  118, 

120, 155,  184,  278,  280,  285,  319 ; 

against    Cadets,    344-347,    441 ; 

and  Constituent  Assembly,  359. 

360 
Commission  for  Fighting.  223.  224. 

322,  323 
Generals  accused  of.  218.  219.  221. 

273,  500 
Provisional  Government  and,  169 ; 

accused  of,  184 
Socialist  fears  of,  49,  60,  62,  118. 

157 
Soviet  fears  of,  132,  146,  169,  168, 

169, 209, 210, 222;  decree  on,  480 
Tribunals  to  combat,  384,  386 
Courland,  127,  470,  476,  477 
Courts  of  justice  abolished,  383,  384. 

397 
Crime  waves.  160.  151.  167.  394-396 
Cronstadt : 
importance  of,  128,  142,  144,  291  ; 


512     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK 


independence  declared  by,  126» 
128  ;  massacres  of  ofl&cers  at,  73, 
127,  128,  448;    sailors,  73,  215, 

231,  349,  486  ;  Soviet,  230 
Czernin,  Count,  474 

Dago  occupied,  230 

Danish  Socialists,  110 

Dardanelles,  28,  196 

Declaration  of  Aug.  27, 175-178 

Defeatism  of  Social  Democrats,  16,  18, 
48,  49 

Defencist  policy : 

AlexeiefE  supports,  52,  95,  96,  233, 
498;  Allied  Socialists  support, 
102,  103, 109 ;  Bolsheviks  oppose, 
76,  87,  88,   122,  123,  131,  132, 

232,  286,  301,  302 ;  Cadets  sup- 
port, 41,  48,  118,  132,  234,  347; 
Kerensky  wavers  over,  121,  122, 
130,  146,  151,  174,  179,  347; 
Korniloff  supports,  148,  151, 154, 
174,  209,  215,  217  ;  Kropotkin 
supports,  90, 91, 158, 182 ;  Lenin 
opposes,  66,  70,  80,  82,  122,  162, 
347,  475,  476;  MilyukofiE  sup- 
ports, 28,  33,  90,  91,  158,  160, 
174,  344,  347  ;  Plekhanoff  sup- 
ports, 90,  123,  132,  158,  234; 
Shulgin  supports,  84,  174 ;  Soviet 
opposes,  48, 49, 54, 58, 59, 145, 223 

Delegates  at  Brest -Litovsk,  115,  306, 
315,  316,  471,  478 

Democratic  Conference,  225-228 

Denikin,  General :  arrested  for  defence 
of  Komiloff,  217,  218,  219  ;  with 
Volunteer  Army,  273,  500,  501 

Deutch,  Leo,  78,  114 

Dictatorship  of  proletariat,  Bolsheviks 
estabUsh,  46,  117,  136,  156,  185, 
287,  293,  321-324,  325,  378,  407, 
466  ;  Lenin  and,  67,  68, 136,  293, 
325,  475;  liberty  destroyed 
under,  321-324, 407, 413  ;  Marxist 
dogma  of,  68,  117,  156,  193,  293, 
325  ;  Tsereteli  supports,  86 

Directory  of  Five,  220 

Disabled  Men's  Union,  75-77, 132, 143 

Dolgorukoff,  Prince,  361 

Donetz  coalfields,  186,  204,  229 

Dukhonin,  General : 

Commander-in-Chief,  265, 304 ;  dis- 
missed, 305 ;  disobeys  Krylenko's 
orders,  308, 309 ;  murder  of,  310- 
312,  393 


Duma : 
abdication  edict  presented  by,  24, 

25,  34,  39 
Fourth,  27,  29,  30, 166;  declaration 
in  State  Conference  by,  171-173, 
175 
ignores  order  to  dissolve,  7 
pre-revolutionary,  2-4,  37-47 
Provisional  Committee  formed  in, 

7,  14,  19 
Provisional  Government  agreement, 

19,  22,  23 
Soviet     of     Workmen's     Deputies 

formed  in,  14-16 
Third,  27,  29,  30 
Zemstvo  members  in,  326 
Dutoff,  344 
Dvinsk,  massacres  in,  222  ;  taken  by 

Germans,  478,  485,  486 
Dybenko,  365,  490,  491 
Dzhugashvili,  459 

Economic  chaos,  191,  192,  199,  200, 
370-373 

Economic  Committee,  189 

Efremoff,  161 

Egorievsk,  198 

Ekaterinburg,  126 

Election  Commission  for  Constituent 
Assembly,  331,  332;  arrested, 
339 

Elections : 
Bolsheviks  interfere  with,  197-199, 
321,  322,  334-336,  339;  Consti- 
tuent  Assembly,  331,  332,  334- 
339 ;  Provisional  Government, 
327 ;  universal  suffrage  in,  197- 
199 

Elective  principle  in  Army,  50,  81,  91, 
130,  213,  314  ;  in  industry,  119  ; 
in  Navy,  228 

Electoral  Commission,  334,  335 

England,  Bolshevist  propaganda 
against,  78,  84,  88, 296,  303, 473  ; 
Chicherin  on  revolutionary  fer- 
ment in,  467  ;  SociaUst  delegates 
from,  101-103,  109,  112,  467; 
Stockholm  Conference  and,  112 

Erdeli,  General,  218 

Esthonia,  127,  470,  477 

Executive  Committee  of  Soviet : 
Allied  Socialists  and,  103 
Bolsheviks  opposed  by,  142,  169 ; 
their   power   complete   in,    266, 
316,  320 


J 


INDEX 


513 


enomy  Socialists  and,  104 

Grimm  in,  106 

Kerensky  and,  146 

peace  delegates  chosen  from,  316 

policy  announced  by,  90 

Provisional  Government  Ministers 

and.  47,  60,  87,  106 
Socialist  conference  called  by,  111 
Soviet  dissatisfied  with,  224,  226 
State  Conference  and,  168,  169 

Feigelson,  446  (note) 
Figner,  Vera,  247,  363 
Filipovsky,  60 

Finance  of  Bolsheviks,  376,  376 
Finland: 
Germans    landing    in,    223,    228 ; 
their  spies  in,  293 ;  support  in 
war  for  independence   by,  462, 
478,  484 
independence  claimed  by,  127,  228, 

467 
regiment,  86 

war  of   Reds  and  Whites  in,  461, 
462,  478,  484 
Five,  The,  220 
Food: 
control  of  supply,  201,  202,  381, 

446  ;   its  cost,  206 
expeditions  to   commandeer,   423, 

447 
failure  of  supply,  1, 4, 124, 187, 189, 
348,446;  causes  of ,  200,  204 
France : 
Socialist  delegates  from,   101-103, 
109,  111;  Stockholm  Conference 
and,  112 
Fraternisation  advocated,  72,  77,  80, 
88  ;  condemned,  128,  130 

Qalicia :  evacuated,  148,  164  ;  Komi- 

lofif  in,  212  ;   Ukrainians  of,  137, 

138,  139 
Ganetsky-Fiirstenberg,  73,  104,  106, 

114,  146 
Gatchina  fighting,  264,  265  ;  Germans 

in,  288,  292,  488 
George,  Lloyd,  474,  476 
Georgia:    Bolsheviks  and,  86  (note), 

460 ;  independence  of,  16  (note), 

457 
Germans  : 
advance  into  Russia,  136,  142,  146- 

149;     towards   Petrograd,    209, 

478,  483-485,  488,  490 


agenU  of,  and  Soviet,  104, 106, 108, 

110,  111,   122   {note),  146,  298; 

possible  murderers  of  Shingareff, 

366-368 
armistice   negotiations   with,    301- 

308,    316-319;     declared    ended 

by,  476 
Bolsheviks  supported  by,  with  men, 

288,  292,  462-464;    money,  61, 
73,  74,  106,  146,  164,  162,  268, 

289,  290,  291,  368  ;  propaganda, 
78,  106,  165,  290-292,  316 

Brest-Litovsk  negotiations  with, 
316-318,  329,  460,  461,  470-476 ; 
behaviour  of,  316-318;  peace 
needed  by,  468 ;  terms  imposed 
by,  470-472,  476,  477,  491,  492 
Empress  and,  2 

Finland  assisted  by,  462,  478,  484  ; 
invaded  by,  223,  228 ;    spies  in, 
293 
Georgians  and,  46,  462 
Grimm  acting  for,  106-108 
in  Petrograd,  426,  426, 468 
Lenin  allowed  to  reach  Russia  by, 
62,  64,  66,  73,  106,  289  ;  receives 
money  from,  73,  293,  294 
propaganda  by,  78,  79,  106,  166, 

291,  292,  316,  498 
revolution  among,  Bolsheviks  an- 
nounce, 466,  467,  468 
Schneur  and,  391,  393 
Ukraine  and,  138,  141 
Godneff,  26  (note),  29,  31,  89  (note) 
Gorbachevskaia,  361 
Gorky,  Maxim,  98,  165,  231,  271 
Government  of  Workmen  and  Peas- 
ants, 301,  354 
Government  officials*  strike,  274-282, 

342 
Grimm,  Robert :  agent  of  Germany, 
106-108;    expelled  from  Russia, 
107,    108;   on    Executive    Com- 
mittee,  106,    114;    Zimmerwald 
Conference  called  by,  90, 104, 1 1 1, 
113 
Group  of  Unity,  47,  48 
Grushevsky,  Professor,  140 
Guchkoff,  A.  T. :  abdication  edict  and, 
24,    34,    39;     Bolsheviks    force 
resignation  of,  86,  87,  88,  89; 
defencism    of,    33,   62,   63,    80; 
Lenin  on,  80 ;  Minister  for  War, 
26  (noU),  29,  33,  62,  53 
Guenglezy  murders,  450,  451 
2l 


514     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK 


Guillotine,  Trotsky  mentions,  224, 226 

Gukovsky,  M.,  376 

Gvozdeff,  K.,  75,  230,  244,  246,  282 

Hecker,  E.,  106 
Helfand-Parvus,  106,  110,  289 
Helsingfors,  126, 127, 291 ;  massacres, 

73,  222 
Henderson,  103,  112 
Hoffmann,  General,  107,  460,  474 
House-committees,  429,  430,  482 
Huysmans,  94 

Imperialism  the  enemy,  84,  87,  88,  94, 
98,  101,  123,  176 ;  German  and 
AUied,  88,  472,  474,  476,  477,  481 

Indemnities  to  Bolsheviks,  380 ;  to 
Germans,  478,  492 

Independent  Labour  Party,  103 

Independent  Republics  formed,  126, 
137-141,  228,  467,  462 

India,  British  rule  of,  attacked,  468, 
469 

Industrial  control  by  Labour,  249, 376- 
379,  380;  disorganisation,  204, 
229,  377-379 

Intelligence  Department,  250 ;  Bol- 
sheviks seize,  142,  143,  289 

Intelligentsia : 

Bolsheviks  opposed  by,  193,  274, 
280,  299,  300 ;    Bolsheviks  per- 
secute, 371,   423,   431-433,  462, 
454 
demands  not  made  by,  193 
franchise  lost  by,  321 
under  Tsarism,  36,  37,  456 

International  Socialist  Conference,  318 

Internationale,  Bolshevist  ideal,  69, 
71,  104,  111,  113,  180 

Internationalism :  of  Bolsheviks,  72, 
80,  88,  100,  101,  108,  162,  316, 
317, 468 ;  of  Lenin,  66,  67, 69, 71 ; 
of  revolutionaries,  16,  18,  48,  49, 
64, 76 

Internationalist  group,  46, 47;  friendly 
with  Bolsheviks,  166,  162;  op- 
pose Bolsheviks,  266,  267,  270 ; 
in  Congress  of  Soviets,  121 

Irkutsk,  126,  461 

Italian  Socialists,  109,  111 

Jzvestia:  on  Army,  52, 68, 77, 209,210; 
Cadet  pogroms,  441 ;  Constituent 
Assembly  elections,  336 ;  counter- 
revolution, 156 ;  industrial  dis- 
putes, 119,  120;Kameneff,  162; 


Kerensky,  300,  301 ;  Lenin,  66 ; 
Milyukoff,  86,  87  ;  Nicholas  II., 
69,  60 ;  peace  negotiations,  66, 
302,  308,  319,  472  ;  war,  66,  94 ; 
world-revolution,  465 ;  Wilson's 
Note,  100,  101 

Jassy,  77 

Jaur^s,  293 

Jews  among   Bolsheviks,   298,   299'; 

toleration  for,  411 
July  insurrection  of  Bolsheviks,  136, 

141,    142-146,    154,    216;     Ger- 

man  help  in,  288,  289 

Kaiserling,  Count,  426 
Kaledin,  General: 
Army  reorganisation  and,  171,  227  ; 
Cossacks     protect,     219,     500 ; 
counter-revolutionary  plans    at- 
tributed to,  222,  344,  346,  347  ; 
Volunteer  Army  and,  273,  500 
Kaledinists,  decree  against,  480,  481 
Kalush,  160 

Kameneff-Rosenfeldt,  114;  arrest  of, 
146 ;  Bolshevist  ovation  to,  162 ; 
Bolshevist  resolution  carried  by, 
223, 224 ;  a  Jew,  299 ;  at  Smolny, 
262 
Kamkoff,  245 

Kartasheff,  A.  V.,  Bolsheviks  arrest, 
258,  259,  361,  362,  408 ;   church 
reforms  by,  362,  408;    in  Ker- 
ensky Governments,  161,  230 
Kazan,  292 

Kchesinska's  house,  73,  77,  142,  144 
Kerensky,  A.  F.  : 
Army  administration  and,  97,  98, 
130,  145,  221,  235 ;   Army  Com- 
mittees    support,    243 ;     Army 
leaders  oppose,  206, 208,211,216- 
218 
Bolsheviks  denounced  by,  145,  241, 
242 ;     measures    against    them, 
237,  238 ;    they  prepare  against 
attack,  263,  264,  285,  300,  301 
capital  punishment  and,  161,  224 
career  and  character  of,  29-31,  32, 

33,  96,  97 
clemency  of,  25  (note),  30,  261 
Commander-in-Chief,  220,  221,  236, 

266,  266 
Constituent    Assembly    candidate, 

336 
Cossacks  and,  247,  266 


INDEX 


515 


Council  of  Republic,  speech  in,  239- 
244 

counter-revolutionary,  169, 300.  301 
defenoist  policy  of,  121,  122,  130, 

146,  151,  174,  179,  347 
Directory  of  Five  appointed  by,  220 
disappears,  260,  268,  264,  498 
Duma  speeches  by,  18,  29,  96 
Executive  Committee  supports,  132 
fail  of,  249,  250,  268,  264,  300,  301 
Front  visited  by,  98,  130,  131,  143, 

146,  250 
Governments  formed  by  : 
First  Coalition,  146, 156, 158, 161, 

167  ;  Cadets  leave,  219,  220 
Second  Coalition,  230;  deposed, 
249,  328 
Grimm  and,  108 
Komiloff's  conflict  with,  130,  181, 

206,  208,  213,  214,  217-219,  497 
Lenin  and,  121,  122  {note),  240 
Lvoff,    v.,   and   alleged   Komiloff 

ultimatum  to,  213-215 
Minister  of  Justice,  26  {note),  384 ; 

for  War,  89  {note),  96,  130,  131 
offensive  prepared    by,    121,    122, 

130,  131,  132,  133 
oflficers  supported  by,  179,  210,  211 
Premier,  142,  146,  230 
Provisional  Government  includes, 
26  {note),  30,  36,  60 ;   his  speech 
in  defence  of,  241-244 
reappears  abroad,  285 
Soviet  suspicious  of,  167,  205,  221 
State  Conference  speech  by,  178, 

179-181 
Stockholm  Conference  and,  112 
Trotsky  opposes,  224,  225 
Ukraine  agreement  signed  by,  140 
War  and,  18, 96  {see  above,  defencist 

policy) 
Women's  Battalion  and,  255,  256 
Kexholm  regiment,  5,  257 
Kharkov,  200,  423 
Kherson,  126 
Khvostoff,  260 
Kienthal  Conference,  106 
Kiev,  137  ;   disorganised,  200 ;   mas- 
sacres in,  448,  452  {note),  461, 
463;    Ukrainian  rising  in,   139, 
140 
Kirpiohnikoff,  128 
Kirsanov,  126 
Kisliineff,  462 
Kishkin,  N.  M. :  in  Kerensky  Govern- 


ment, 230 ;  left  to  defend  Winter 
Palace,  250,  252-266 ;  a  prisoner, 
361 
Kochuroff,   Father  John,  murdered, 

266" 
Kohan,  198 
Kokoshkin,  F.F. : 

Bolsheviks  imprison,  342,  343,  361, 
363 

Cadet,  41,  161,  332 

character  of,  365,  367 

in  Kerensky  Government,  161 ;  re- 
signs on  Komiloff  question,  219, 
220 

murdered,  364-369,  450,  493 

President  of  Committee  for  Con- 
stituent   Assembly,    331,    332 ; 
resigns,  334  {note) 
Kollontai,  Mme.,  Church  administra- 
tion of,  409,  411;    Minister   of 
Public  Welfare,  405,  409;    pro- 
paganda in  America  by,  78 ;    a 
Russian,  299 
Kolomna  works  food-train,  447 
Koltchak,  Admiral,  391  {note),  501   . 
Kondurushkin,  S. ,  describes  No  vem  ber 

Revolution,  259,  260,  261-263 
Konovaloff,  A.  L  : 

Bolsheviks  imprison,  361,  363 

career  and  character,  187,  188 

class-war  and,  187 

in  Kerensky  Government,  230,  250  ; 
supports  Kerensky,  32 

Minister  of  Commerce,  26  {note),  29, 
89  {noU),  187 
Korniloff,  General : 

Army  reorganisation  efforts  of,  87, 
130,  160,  171,  174,  181,  209,  212 ; 
capital  punishment  to  be  restored, 
148,  151,  169  ;  committees  merely 
economic,  213 ;  meetings  pro- 
hibited, 154 

arrest  of,  216,  218,  219,  497 

career  of,  211,  212,222 

counter  -  revolutionary  charges 
against,  216,  222,  344,  346 

Denikin  defends,  217 

Dictatorship,  alleged  attempt  at, 
214-216,  222 

escapes,  310 

Kerensky  and :  conflict  over  Army 
administration,  130, 181,  206, 208, 
213,  217-219, 497  ;  Lvoff  presents 
ultimatum,  213-215;  Komiloff 
arrested,  215,  216 


SI  6     FEOM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK 


Order  by,  216 

State  Conference  and,  170,  171,  174, 

180,  212,  213,  495 
Turkomans  protect,  212,  218 
Volunteer  Army  of,  217,  273,  463, 

500 
kiUed,  501 
Komilovists : 
Bolshevist  decree  against,  480,  481 ; 

hatred  for,  285,  464 
considered    counter  -  revolutionary, 
226,  227,  231 
Korolenko,  V.,  49,  91 
Kostroma,  126 
Kozlovsky,  145 
KrasnofiF,  General,  264,  288 
Kremlin:   bombarded  by  Bolsheviks, 
272,  408,  414,  417,  494  ;  Germans 
at  siege  of,  288  ;  plundered,  412  ; 
processions  in,   418-420;   Soviet 
in,  494 
Kresty  prison,  8 
Kropotkin,  Prince,  defencist,  48,  90, 

91,  158,  182 
Kruser,  Ensign,  77 
Krylenko,  Ensign : 

armistice  ordered  by,  304,  305,  307 
Army  demobilised  by,472, 473, 492  ; 

remobilised,  482,  483 
career  of,  306 

Commander-in-Chief,  122,  392 
Petrograd  defence  under,  490 
Schneur  and,  392,  393 
Stavka  refuses  to  obey,  308  ;  is  taken 
by,  310-312 
Kuehbnann,  von,  474,  477,  478 
Kuskova,  Mme.  Ekaterina,  226,  227, 

233 
Kutler,  174 


Labour : 

conditions  of,  under  Bolsheviks,  322, 

371-373;   under   Socialists,    118, 

186,  192,  199,  200 ;  under  Tsar, 

189 

control  of  industry  by,  249,  376-379, 

380 
demands  of,  125,  126,  192 
group,  8 
Lafont,  E.,  102 
Land  confiscation  by  peasants,  173, 

195,  196,  204 
Land  nationalisation : 
Bolsheviks  advocate,  45,  69,  79, 186, 


195, 196,  204,  223  ;  establish,  249, 
286,  300-302,  354,  371,  376 
Cadets  and,  40,  117 
ChemofE's  BiU  for,  156, 157 
Congress  of  Soviets  and,  124 
Lenin  and,  45,  69,  79 
Lvoff's  attitude  to,  156,  157 
Populist-Socialist  poUcy,  42 
Social  Revolutionaries  demand,  43, 
68,  118,  198  ;  ChemofTs  BiU,  156, 
157 
Soviet  programme  for,  124,  177 
Law,   Bolshevist   administration    of, 

382,  384,  385-391,  394,  395 
League  for  Protection  of  Constituent 

Assembly,  341,  342 
Lebedeff,  44,  161,  165 
Lemberg,  138,  140 
Lenin,  Vladimir  Ulianoff : 
aims  of,  64,  65,  67-70,  72,  85,  94, 

293,  458,  464 

Allies'  war  aims  demanded  by,  123, 

124 
arrival  in  Petrograd,  62,  65 
assassination  of,  attempted,  350 
Austria  releases,  288 
Bolshevist  group  established  by,  45, 

63,  1 14 ;  July  insurrection  and, 

142, 144, 240 ;  programme  by,  245, 

250;  November  Revolution  makes 

leader,  261,  262,  365 
Brest-Litovsk  peace  advocated  by, 

475,  476,  477,  491 
Cadet    party    hostile    to,  81,  144, 

333 
career  and  character  of,  42,  63,  64, 

98  ;  moral  principles  unknown  to, 

294,  295,  369,  454 
Constituent  Assembly  and,  155, 240, 

333 
Deutch  denounces,  114 
Disabled   Soldiers'    Union    demon- 
strates against,  74,  75 
disappears  to  avoid  arrest,  155,  162, 

232 
Dukhonin    refuses    to    obey,    304, 

305 
enemy  Socialists  and,  105 
Germany:  passes  through,  62,  64, 

65,  73,  105  ;  receives  money  from, 

73,  293,  294 
Lidependent  States  and,  127,  458 
Kerensky    opposed    by,    121,    122 

{note),  240 
Land  policy  of,  45, 69, 79 


INDEX 


617 


Biarxism  of,  293,  464 ;  diotatorahip 
of  proletariat,  67,  68,  136,  293, 
320,  475 
Blilyukoff  oppoeed  by,  76, 122  (note), 

337  (note) 
Moslems  addressed  by,  407,  411 
November    Revolution    establishes 

power  of,  261,  262 
Proas  restrictions  by,  405 
Provisional      Government      orders 
arrest    of,     145 ;    Ministers    not 
murdered  by,  365,  367 
a  Russian,  299 

self-determination  and,  127,  458 
Shingarefifs  murder  and,  365,  367 
Shulgin  attacks,  84 
in  Smobiy,  261,  262,  365 
Social  Democrats  and,  79,  80,  81 
"  Social  experiment  "  by,  304,  374 
Social  Revolutionaries  and,  79,  80, 

81 
Soviet  power  upheld  by,  79,  80,  85, 

93,  142,  329  ;  RepubUc,  329 
Trotsky  linked  with,  297 
War  opposed  by,  66,  101,  122,  162, 
347;  as  capitalistic,  70,  71,  82; 
as  preventing  reorganisation,  475, 
476,  491 
World-revolution  gospel  of,  64,  67, 
293,  295,  458,  464 
Letts  used  as  Soviet  troops,  323,  454 
Liberalism,  39,  40 
Liberty  Loan,  59 
Lieber,  125 
Lithuania,  470,  476 
Litoveky  regiment,  6 
Little  Russia,  137,  138 
Liverovsky,  A.,  282 
Livonia,  470 
Loans  repudiated,  380 
Loginoflf,  351,  493 
Lopatin,  Herman,  48 
Lukomsky,  General,  218 
Lunacharsky,  299 
Lvoff,  Prince  George : 
Army  reorganisation  and,  53 
Bolshevist  insurrection  and,  143 
career  and  character  of,  26,  27,  33, 

34 
Coalition  Government  of,  89 ;  and 
independent  republics,  127,  128, 
457;  financial  measures  of,  188  ; 
industrial  control  and,  118,  119; 
resignation  of  Cadets  causes  fall 
of,  141,  142 


Land  policy  of,  168,  159 
Provisional  Government  of,  19,  26 

(noU) 
resigns,  141,  142,  156 
Lvoff,  V.  N.,  26  (noU),  29 ;  Kerensky 
supported  by,  29,  31  ;  Komiloff 
ultimatum  brought  by,  213-215 
Lvov  language,  138 


Maohine-gim  regiment,  132, 144 
Maklakoff : 
Army  and,  173,  174  ;  Bolsheviks  im. 
prison,  260 ;  a  Cadet,  41 ;  Komi- 
loff defended  by,  215 
Marie  Palace  : 
Bolsheviks  surround,  249 ;  Council 
of  Republic  in,  237  ;  Provisional 
Government  in,  35,  60,  86 
Markoff,  General,  218,  500 
Martoff-Zederbaum,  46,  47 
Marx,  Karl,  42,  94,  117,  193,  224,  293, 

413,  458 
Marxism  : 
appearance  of,  42,  44,  45 
doctrines  of : 
class-war,  52,  55,  63,  94, 116,  117, 

193-195,  293,  458 
control  of  industry,  293,  371 
dictatorship  of  proletariat,   117, 

136,  156,  293,  325 
expropriation,  118,  150,  371 
Masloff,  A.,  282 

Mensheviks:  Army  reorganisation  and, 
233 ;  beginnings  of  party,  45,  63 ; 
Bolsheviks  and,  45,  46,  73 ;  in 
Congress  of  Soviets,  121 ;  Grimm 
and,  106, 107  ;  Kerensky  Govern- 
ment supported  by,  223,  225; 
on  Municipal  Council,  337 
Miakotin,  B.,  43,  406 
Michael  Alexandrovich,  Grand  Duke, 

24,25 
Military   Revolutionary    Committee : 
Chemoff  opposes,  266;  coup  cTitat 
by,  248,  249;   food-supply  and, 
278;   formed,   238;  Moscow   re- 
sists, 272,  273,  274  ;  papers  sup- 
pressed by,  404;    troops   called 
out  by,  238,  243,  244,  248 
Milyukoff,  P.  N. : 

Bolsheviks  oppose,  86,  87,  88 
a  Cadet,  27,  28,  39,  41 
career  and  character  of,  27,  28 
Dardanelles  and,  28 


518     FEOM  LIBEETY  TO  BEEST-LITOVSK 


defencism  of,  41,  90,  91,  112  {note), 

160,  174,  344,  347 
Duma  speeches  of,  3,  27,  28 
Grimm  and,  106 
Komiloff  defended  by,  215 
Krylenko  attacks,  306 
Lenin  opposed  by,  76,  337  (note) 
Provisional   Government   Minister, 
26  (note),  28,  29,  32,  33;  word 
"  victory  "  causes  fall,  86 
resigns,  87,  89 

Social  Revolutionaries  abuse,  344 
Soldiers    pass    resolutions    against, 

346,  347 
State   Conference    declaration    by, 

173,  174 
Soviet  power  opposed  by,  160 
Miners,  229 
Ministry  of  Cults,  408 
Minor  Council  of  Ministers,  275 
Minsk :   Congress  dispersed  by  Bol- 
sheviks, 164,  423,  460 ;  Germans 
take,  478,  485 
Mirbach,  Count,  425,  468,  470 
Mohilev,  214,  216,  310-312 
Monarchists  attempt  to  purify  auto- 
cracy, 3,  17,  38  ;  in  Duma,  38,  40 
Moscow : 
Allied  Socialists  in,  102 
Bolsheviks   agitate   in,    183,    207 ; 
bombard,   167  (note),  272,  273; 
capture,  273,  285,  286,  461 
Church  Council  in,  408,  411 ;  pro- 
cessions in,  418-420 
crime  in,  444,  445 
disorganisation  in,  186,  187,  200 
employers'  party  of,  135 
famine  in,  446 
Government  to  be  removed  to,  232, 

494 
Municipal  elections  at,  198 
Officers' Congress  at,  95,  96, 129, 498 
Social-Democratic  Conference  in,  71, 

72 
Soldiers  from  Rumania  in,  434-436 
State  Conference  : 
Army  discussion  in,  170-174,  179- 

181 
Bolsheviks    oppose,    168,     169 ; 
make  separate  declaration  in, 
184;  organise   strikes    during, 
183,  207 
strikes  in,  207,  236,  237 
Moslems,  Lenin's  address  to,  407,  411 
Mouthey,  M.,  102 


Mstislavsky,  S.,  describes  peace  nego- 
tiations, 315-318 
Municipal  Council : 

elections,  197-199,  337 

food  policy  of,  200,  201 

industrial  policy  of,  199,  200 

Moscow,  272 

Petrograd  :  Bolsheviks  opposed  in, 
267-269,  278,  328,  329 ;  defends 
cadets,  270,  271,  329 ;  dissolved, 
330 ;  members  arrested,  284 ; 
secret  meetings  of,  448 

Nabokoff,  V.,  41,  334 

Nationalists,  38 

Navy  Committee,  228,  230 

disorganisation,  German  help  in,  293 
NechaefE,  294 
Neither    peace    nor    war,    Trotsky's 

formula,  123,  473 
Nekrasoff,  N.  V.  : 
in  Coalition  Government,  89 
in  The  Five,  220 
on  financial  position,  204,  205 
Kerensky  supported  by,  31, 32,  204; 

in  Kerensky  Government,  161 
in  Provisional  Government,  26  (note), 

29  ;  intrigues  in,  31,  32 
railway  administration  of,  192 
Ukraine  question  and,  140,  141,  204 
Nicholas  II.  : 

abdication  of,  23,  24,  34,  39 ;  Army 
commanded  by,  220 ;  and  Brzez- 
any  advance,  132  (note) ;  Bol- 
sheviks on,  88 ;  Duma  and,  2,  6, 
24,  25  ;  monarchists  and,  3,  17, 
24 ;  political  liberty  and,  327 ; 
prevented  from  reaching  Eng- 
land, 59,  60 ;  Rasputin  and,  234 ; 
sale  of  wine  prohibited  by,  440 
Nikitin,  A.,  161,  230,  282 
Nikolai  Nikolaievich,  Grand  Duke,  26, 

220,  385 
Non-Russians  among  Bolsheviks,  47, 

297-300 
November  Revolution : 

begins,  248 ;  contrasted  with  March 
Revolution,  260,  261;  Govern- 
ment of  Workmen  and  Peasants 
proclaimed,  261 ;  Military  Re- 
volutionary Committee  seizes 
power,  238,  248,  249;  Ministers 
imprisoned,  [258-260;  Moscow 
bombarded  and  taken,  273,  285, 
286,    461;    Petrograd    captured. 


INDEX 


519 


261,    264,    286.     286;     Smolny 
Institate  Bolshevist  headquarters, 
261-263;     Winter    Palace    cap- 
tured, 261-268,  260 
Novocherkassk,  219,  273,  499,  600 
Nurses  in  disorderly  Army,  163,  164 

Octobrists,  24,  29,  31,  38,  48 

Odessa  Congress,  77 

Odiet,  M.,  107 

Oescl  occupied,  230 

OflBcers : 
Bolsheviks  massacre,  72,  127,  128, 
222,  226,  309,  314,  366,  448,  463, 
490 ;  in  Brzezany  advance,  134 ; 
Congress  of,  95,  96,  129,  498; 
Delegates,  Soviet  of,  235,  236; 
election  of,  81 ;  during  German 
advance,  487  -  490  ;  Kerensky 
supports,  131,  179,  210,  211; 
labourers,  432,  433,  489 ;  League 
of,  129 ;  letters  from,  152,  153  ; 
Provisional  Government  sup- 
ports, 52,  63;  training  of,  211; 
Union  of,  177  {note),  214,  218  ; 
Volunteer  Army  composed  of, 
217,  273,  499 

O'Grady,  Mr.,  103 

Okhrana  men  among  Bolsheviks,  64, 
116,  296,  300 

Okhta  Powder  Works,  490 

Oldenburg,  161,  219,  220 

Order  No.  1,  60,  61,  69  {note),  129 

Orenburg,  461 

Orloff,  General,  218 

Orthodox  Church,  Bolsheviks  perse- 
cute, 407,  408,  410-418,  459 

Paltchinsky,  361 

Panin,  Countess  Sophia,  276  ;  tried  by 

Bolsheviks,  342,  385-389 
Paukratiefif,  48,  145 
Paper  money,  376,  496 
Paris  Conference,  241 
Parvus-Helfand,  105,  110,  145,  289, 

294,464 
Patriarch  defies  Bolsheviks,  408,  411, 

419 
PavloflF,  362 

Pavlovsky  Regiment,  251 
Peace  promises  of  Bolsheviks,  67,  66, 

88,  348,  354,  356,  369,  360 
Peasants :    Bolshevist    promises    win 

over,  300-302;  land  confiscated 


by,  173,  196,  196,  204;  Union, 
168 
People's  Palace,  386,  387  ;  Tribunal, 

386 
Pereveraeflf,  89 

PeshekhonoflF,  A.,  43,  89,  124,  161 
Peter  and  Paul  Fortress  : 

Bolsheviks  capture,  261 ;  ultima- 
tum from,  254 

Ministers  imprisoned  in,  268,  282, 
343,  361,  382 
Petliura,  140 
Petrograd : 

Bolsheviks  oaptttie,  261,  264,  286, 
286 

crime  in,  395-397,  446 

defence  of,  490 

disorganised,  186,  200 

famine  in,  446 

flight  from,  484,  486 

garrison,  10,  22,  439,  486,  486  ;  Bol- 
sheviks win  over,  50, 76,  260,  349 , 
corrupts  other  troops,  437,  438 ; 
flies,  486,  486 

Germans  advance  on,  209,  478, 483- 
486,  488,  490  ;  in  city,  425,  426, 
468 

labour  conditions  in,  118,  186,  187 

Lenin  arrives  in,  62,  66 

March  Revolution  in,  1,  6-14,  19-21, 
194 

Mayor  of,  143 

Municipal  Council,  Bolsheviks 
opposed  in,  267-269, 278, 328, 329, 
defends  cadets,  270,  271,  329; 
dissolved,  330  ;  members  of, 
during     November    Revolution, 

266,  257;    arrested,    284,    330; 
secret  meetings  of,  448 

munition  works,  292 

November  Revolution  fighting  in, 

267,  268,  264 ;  in  hands  of  Bol- 
sheviks, 251,  264,  285,  286 

Officers'  Congress  in,  129,  130 
population  falls,  378 
Soviets  of,  430,  431 
winter  of  1917-18  in,  438-443 

Petropavlovsk  massacre,  365 

Plekhanoff,  G.  : 

Bolsheviks  opposed  by,  78,  208; 
class-war  opposed  by,  182;  de- 
fencism  of,  90, 123, 132, 168 ;  enemy 
agents  attacked  by,  104;  Execu- 
tive Committee  excludes,  47,  106; 
Marxist,  evolutionary,  42,  47 


620     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK 


Poland,  127,  467,  470,  476 

Police  during  March  Revolution,  5,  9, 
13,  14,  20,  194 

Political  parties  before  Revolution,  37- 
47 

Polkovnikoflf,  Colonel,  238 

Populist  Socialists : 

Bolsheviks  opposed  by,  267  ;  cleav- 
age in,  42, 43 ;  def encists,  48, 234 ; 
in  Congress  of  Soviets,  121 ;  in 
Kerensky  Government,  161 

Potresoff,  90, 165 

Press,  freedom  of  the,  destroyed  by 
Bolsheviks,    322,    398-407,    481, 
482,  483 
Soviet  justice  condemned  by,  389 

Printing  offices  wrecked  by  Bolsheviks, 
263,  336,  401,  402,  406 

Prisoners  of  war  as  Soviet  troops,  288, 
463 ;  propaganda  among  Russian, 
290 

Profiteering : 

Commission  for  Fighting,  322,  323 
decrees  against,  324,  384,  480 
mob-law  punishes,  385, 396,397, 445 

Progressive  bloc,  18,  29,  32,  39 

Prokopius,  Bishop,  409 

Prokopovich,  S.,  161,  204,  230,  282, 
339 

Proportional  representation,  332,  338 
(note) 

ProtopopofiF,  5,  14,  194 

Provisional  Committee  of  Duma : 
considered    coimter  -  revolutionary, 
160 ;  defencist,  16-18, 48 ;  formed, 
7,  8,  14;  Soviet  and,  18,  19,  48 

Provisional  Government : 
Lvofif's: 

Army  manifesto  by,  52,  53 ; 
Bolsheviks  overthrow,  86,  87 ; 
defencist,  21,  52,  58,  59  ;  estab- 
lished, 19,  22,  23,  25;  Grand 
Dukes  support,  25,  26 ;  Lenin 
opposes,  69,  70,  76,  80  ;  members 
of,  26  (note),  29-34;  MilyukoflE 
and  Guchkoff  resign  from,  87 ; 
Soviet  attacks  as  bourgeois,  56, 
57,  59,  60,  61 ;  Soviet  power  in, 
89 
Lvoflfs  Coahtion : 

Bolshevist  July  insurrection 
agaiQst,  131,  132,  136,  141,  142, 
143,  144 ;  Cadets  leave,  141  ; 
independent  republics  and,  126- 
128,  139-141 ;    July  insurrection 


crushed  by,  143,  144 ;  Kerensky 
as  War  Minister  in,  96-98,  121, 
131,  145;  members  of,  89; 
officers  support,  130 ;  Socialist 
Ministers'  pacifism  in,  89,  90,  92- 
94,  113  ;  Ukraine  question  causes 
faU  of,  139-141 

Kerensky's  Coahtion  : 

Army  reform  and,  170, 171, 174, 
178-190,  210,  211,  213-219;  Bol- 
sheviks plan  overthrow  of,  183, 
208,  209  ;  Cadet  Ministers  resign 
from,  219, 220  ;  Directory  of  Five 
formed,  220 ;  Generals  arrested 
by,  213-219;  industrial  chaos 
and,  188-192,  201-205,  229; 
Kerensky  takes  command  of 
Army,  220,  221,  235  ;  Komiloff's 
struggle  with,  181,  206,  208,  213, 
214,  217-219  ;  members  of,  161 ; 
State  Conference  summoned  by, 
167,  168,  170-184 

Kerensky's  Second  Coahtion : 

Army  out  of  control  of,  230, 

235  ;  arrest  of  Ministers  of,  258 
260,  282,  343,  361-363;  Bol 
sheviks  prepare  coup  d'etat  against, 
231,  236,  237,  239-242,  246 
Council  of  Repubhc  convened  by 
231-234,  238;  Constituent  As 
sembly  decreed  by,  331,  332,  339 
farewell  decree  of,  282,  283 
Kerensky's  speech  in  defence  of, 
238-244;  members  of,  230 
Moscow  strike  against,  237 
November  Revolution  overthrows 
249;    Officers'  Soviet  and,  235, 

236  ;  officials  plot  to  restore,  275, 
276,  281 

Pskoff,  23,  24,  34;    Germans  take, 

478,  485 
Purishkevich,  V.,  3,  38 

Rada  of  Ukraine,  139,  140,  460,  461, 

463 
Radek,  Karl : 

Bolshevist  Commissary,  298 ;  Brest- 

Litovsk     delegate,     471,     473; 

career  of,  104,  105,  298 ;  Soviet 

and,  47,  114 
Railway  sabotage,  264  ;    Union  helps 

Bolsheviks,  264 
Rakovsky,  C,  298,  461 
Rasputin,  Gregory,  2 ;    assassinated, 

3,  4,  17,  38  ;  Church  and,  411 


I 


INDEX 


521 


Red  Anny  formed,  134  (noU),  354, 
481 ;  murders  by,  448  ;  Troteky 
and,  134  (noU),  227  ;  workmen 
unita  of,  488 

Red  Guard: 
Cadets  attacked  by,  271,  272; 
Constituent  Assembly  and,  329, 
330, 361 ;  Dukhonin  murdered  by 
310-312 ,  elections  controlled  by, 
321 ;  formation  of,  249 ;  Ger- 
mans in,  288,  292 ;  lives  not  to 
bo  risked,  475 ;  Ministers  mur- 
dered by,  364-366,  450;  money 
for,  277  ;  murders  by,  450-452  ; 
pogroms  and,  441  ;  printing 
offices  wrecked  by,  401-403,  406  ; 
robberies  by,  449,  450;  State 
Bank  raided  by,  426,  427 ;  trains 
searched  by,  499 ;  Tsarkoe  Selp 
raided  by,  265,  408;  Winter 
Palace  taken  by,  257,  258; 
Women's  Battalion  and,  257, 
270,  386 

Republic  :  advocated  by  Cadets,  41 ; 
Federal,  declared,  359  ;  form  of, 
127  ;  Kerensky  proclaims,  220 ; 
Kropotkin  proposes,  182  ;  Rodzi- 
anko  and,  19 ;  Soviet,  299,  335, 
354 

Republics,  independent,  formed,  126, 
137-141,  228,  457,  462 

Reval,  222,  478,  486 

Revolution,  March  :  effect  on  public 
mind  of,  10-13,  125,  126,  194, 
443  ;  intelligentsia  and,  193, 194  ; 
outbreak  in  Petrograd  of,  1,  5-14, 
19-21 
of  1906:  Bolsheviks  in,  45,  46; 
Tsereteli  in,  367  ;  zemstvos  and, 
326 
(See  under  November  Revolution) 

Revolutionary  Democracy : 
Army  disorganised  by  methods  of, 
33,  50-52,  114,  121,  147,  233; 
Bolsheviks  gain  control  over,  61, 
74,  79,  91, 113, 143,  155, 162,  207  ; 
bourgeoisie  and,  156, 158  ;  Council 
of  Republic  resolution  by,  245, 
246 ;  Democratic  Conference  of, 
225,  226;  Duma  attacked  by, 
166 ;  Kerensky  supported  by, 
135  ;  Milyukoff  opposes,  29,  90 ; 
Navy  disorganised  by,  73,  128, 
129  ;  November  Revolution  over- 
throws, 260;    State   Conference 


manifesto  by,  175-178  ;  universal 
suffrage  demanded  by,  197  ;  war 
and,  49,  61,  90-96,  98,  121,  209 

Revolutionary  tribunals,  382-385 

Riaboff,  Colonel,  272 

Riabushinsky,  174 

Riazanof!,  122 

Riga,  209,  291 

Rittikh,  4 

Robins,  Mr.,  290  (yiote) 

Rodicheff,  41,  438 

Rodzianko,  M.V.  : 

Chheidze  and,  18,  19 ;  Constituent 
Assembly's  authority  and,  19, 
331 ;  President  of  Duma,  6,  17- 
19 ;  President  of  Provisional  Com- 
mittee, 7,  17,  18,  23,  160 ;  State 
Conference  declaration  by,  171, 
174,  176 

Rostoff,  461,  473 

Rouble  falls,  225 

Rozhdestvensky  Soviet,  462 

Rudneff,  Mayor  of  Moscow,  272,  284, 
395  (note) 

Rumania :  peace  negotiations  with, 
298,  304  ;  soldiers  from,  434-437  ; 
war  with,  461,  462 

Russian  languages,  137,  138 

"  Russian  Messenger,"  78 

Russo-German  Conference,  470 

Ruthenians,  137 

Rybinsk,  292 

Sabotage  :  Commission  against,  223, 
322,  323,  384  ;  on  railways,  378 

Sailors  :  Alexander  Nevsky  Monastery 
attacked  by,  409  ;  Cronstadt,  73, 
215,  231,  349,  486 

Sanders,  Mr.,  103 

Saratoff,  203 

"  Save  the  Revolution  "  Qovemment, 
161,  164 

Savinkoff,  Boris  :  Army  disorganisa- 
tion described  by,  148-151  ;  capi- 
tal punishment  demanded  by,  148, 
149  ;  in  Kerensky  Grovemment, 
161,  165;  Komiloff  affair  and, 
214-216  ;  Minister  of  War,  214  ; 
Social  Revolutionary,  44,  148 

Savinkoff,  Mme.,  149-151 

Scheidemann,  110,  289,  293 

Schneur,  115,  306 ;  trial  of,  391-394 

Schreider,  Gr.,  143,  284 

Schwarz,  General,  490 

Sebastopol,  448,  452  (note) 


522     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LIT0V8K 


Secret  diplomacy,  Bolshevist,  313,  316 

Secret  treaties  :  annulment  of,  223, 
354  ;   publication  of,  66,  304 

Self-determination  :  Bolshevist  inter- 
pretation of,  364,  422,  468,  460, 
471,  476  ;  Germans  on,  470,  471 ; 
Russian  provinces  and,  127,  457  ; 
Soviet  adopts  formula  of,  90,  158, 
354 

Separate  peace  :  Allies  blamed  for, 
318,  474,  475,  493;  Bolsheviks 
deny  desiring,  88,  92,  114,  302, 
308,  359,  360 ;  Congress  of  Soviets 
rejects,  123  ;  Germany  and,  106, 
107 ;  Provisional  Government 
opposes,  282,  283  ;  Revolutionary 
Democracy  shrinks  from,  114 ; 
signed,  491-494 ;  Ukraine  con- 
cludes, 141,  463 

Separation  of  Church  and  State,  410- 
413 

Separatist  movements,  126,  127,  136, 
137-141 

Sergei  Alexandrovich,  Grand  Duke,  148 

Shakhovskoy,  Prince,  89  (note) 

Shcheglovitoff,  382,  388 

Shcherbatcheff,  130 

Shevchenko,  138 

Shingareff,  A.  I. : 

arrest  and  imprisonment  of,  288, 
342,  343,  361,  363  ;  Bolsheviks 
attacked  by,  267,  268;  Bolshevist 
party  analysed  by,  287,  288 ; 
Cadet  leader,  41, 141,  267  ;  career 
and  character  of,  32,  267,  365, 
366,  368;  Lvoff  Government 
Minister,  26  (note),  89  (note),  141, 
267  ;  MilyukoflF  supported  by,  32, 
33;  Minister  of  Agriculture,  26 
(note),  267  ;  Minister  of  Finance, 
89  (note),  267;  mistaken  about 
revolution,  248  (note) ;  murder  of, 
364-369,  460,  493;  Petrograd 
Municipal  CouncU  speeches  by, 
267,  268 

Shliapnikoff,  373 

Shulgin,  V.  V. :  abdication  edict  pre- 
sented by,  24,  34,  39  ;  Bolsheviks 
attacked  by,  83-85 ;  at  State 
Conference,  173,  174 

Siberia :  Army  of,  391  (note) ;  civil 
war  in,  292 ;  Koltchak  Govern- 
ment in,  501  ;  revolutionaries 
from,  44,  46,  64 ;  Soviet  power 
in,  463 


Simferopol,  448,  461 
Skalon,  General,  318 
Skipetroff,  409 

SkobelefE :  capitalists  threatened  by, 
120,  189  ;  Constituent  Assembly 
and,  357  ;  Grimm  and,  106-108  ; 
in  Kerensky  Government,  161  ; 
labour  questions  and,  92-94,  118, 
120,  124  ;  Minister  of  Labour,  89, 
92-94,  120,  124;  Soviet  leader, 
60,  75,  191 
Smirnoff,  230,  361 

Smolny  Institute :    Bolshevist  head- 
quarters, 213,  237,  238,  365,  367, 
401,   405 ;     during   German   ad- 
vance, 478 ;   Petrograd  disorders 
and,  441, 450;  used  as  prison,  343, 
448,  450 
Snowden,  Philip,  103 
Sobelson  (Radek),  471 
Social  Democrats  : 
Austrian  Congress  of,  105 
Bolshevist  influence  on,  66,  67,  70, 

71,  87,  98,  99,  120,  136,  136 
Central  Committee  of,  73 ;  in  Ker- 
ensky Government,  161,  230 
Lenin  on,  68-70,  80,  81,  114 
Lvoff  Government  and  programme 

of,  188 
Marxism  of,  46,  68,  117 

dictatorship    of    proletariat,    42, 
135,     325 ;      internationalism, 
48,  66,  231 
Moscow  Conference  of,  71 
newspapers  of,  suppressed,  404 
Petrograd  Conference  of,  68,  70 
Tsarism  and,  357,  358 
War  and,  48,  66,  80,  87 
Social  Revolutionaries : 

Americans  finance,  290  (note) 
Bolsheviks  "  comrades  in  ideas  "  of, 
55,  56,  68,  135,  136,  165,  224,  355, 
356 
Congress  of  Soviets  and,  121,  492 
Constituent  Assembly  majority  of, 

337,  340,  352,  359 
factions  of,  44,  166 
Kerensky  and,  132,  161 
land  programme  of,  43,  68,  118, 157, 

195,  198,  356 
Lenin  on,  79-81 

Marxist  tendencies  of :  class-war, 
55,  117  ;  dictatorship  of  prole- 
tariat, 136, 136 ;  internationalism, 
48 


INDEX 


623 


Municipal  elections  and,  199 

Petrograd  Conference  of,  56,  132 

Petrc^rad  Municipal  Council  and, 
268,  270,  337,  338 

propaganda  of,  165,  290 

Red  Guards  disperse,  341 

Soviet  opposes,  352,  353 

split  in,  after  November  Revolu- 
tion, 266,  268 

terrorism  of,  30,  34 

Tsarist  persecution  of,  30 

war  and,  48,  80,  81,  338 
Socialists:  Allied,  101-104,  109,  111, 
112,  467;  Bolsheviks  attempt 
agreement  with,  286 ;  Coalition 
Government  includes,  89,  93, 
94,  135 ;  Constituent  Assembly 
groups  of,  338,  340;  defencists 
among,  16,  47,  48,  49,  80,  83,  90, 
182 ;  economics  of,  199-201 ; 
elections  won  by,  327 ;  enemy, 
104-108,  114,  115;  foreign,  at 
Congress  of  Soviets,  466  ;  groups 
and  factions  of,  42-47,  66,  56,  117, 
121,  338,  340  ;  Kiev  Congress  of, 
139  ;  Petrograd  Congress  of,  167  ; 
protest  against  Brest  -  Litovsk 
treaty,  493  ;  Tsarist  persecution 
of,  64,  116;  Wilson  and,  100, 
101 
SokoloflF,  N.,  69,  60 
Soldiers  :  armistice  negotiations  by, 
304,  305;  Bolsheviks  supported 
by,  73,  74,  87,  88,  142.  169,  238, 
248,  267-269,  260,  287*  290,  309, 
337,  342  ;  Cadets  and,  346,  347  ; 
Committees  of,  formed,  60  ;  Con- 
stituent Assembly  and,  340,  341, 
342,  362,  353,  360 ;  elections  and, 
197,  198 ;  flight  from  Petrograd 
of,  484-487  ;  from  Rumania,  434, 
437  ;  Panin,  Countess,  and,  388, 
389;  religion  and,  415-418; 
Soviet  Government  proclamation 
to,  306 ;  State  Conference  and, 
170 ;  Stavka  taken  by,  310-312 
Sosnovka  murder,  394,  395 
Sovdepia,  401,  496 

Soviet  control  of  food-supply,  447  ; 
production,  69,  92,  93,  119,  177, 
178,  249 
Soviet  Government  announced,  303, 
304  ;  principles  of,  320,  321,  323 
Soviet  Justice,  383-396 
Soviet  Republic,  299,  336,  364 


Soviet :  of  Delegates  of  Armenian 
People,  460;  of  Officers'  Dele- 
gates, 236,  236;  of  Peasants' 
Delegates,  133,  168  (noU) ;  of 
Soldiers*  and  Officers*  Deputies, 
77 
Soviet  of  People's  Commissaries : 
armistice  negotiations  by,  304- 
308,  316-317 ;  bourgeoisie,  de- 
crees against,  by,  479,  480 ; 
Cadets  attacked  by,  343-348; 
Church  persecuted  by,  407,  408, 
410,  412  ;  civil  war  provoked  by, 
348  ;  Constituent  Assembly  dis- 
credited and  dissolved  by,  339, 
346-347,  360,  361;  Cossacks 
submit  to,  461 ;  Dukhonin  resists, 
304,  306  ;  elections  to,  320-322  ; 
finances  of,  376,  377;  flight  to 
Moscow  of,  494 ;  formation  of, 
301,  320, 334 ;  Ministers'  murders 
and,  366-368  ;  officials  resist,  280 ; 
peace  negotiations  by,  461,  462, 
466,  476-478  ;  Press  freedom  de- 
stroyed by,  398-407 ;  prisoners 
of  war  used  as  troops  by,  288,  292; 
Rumanian  legation  dismissed  by, 
461,  462 ;  Stavka  opposes,  308, 
309  ;  supreme  power  of,  321,  322, 
326,  348,  362-366,  371 
Soviet  of  Workmen's  Deputies  :  anti- 
defencist,  16,  48;  delegates  of, 
20 ;  in  1906,  296  ,  international- 
ism of,  16,  48,  49;  Provisional 
Committee  and,  18,  19,  48,  49; 
Provisional  Government  and,  22, 
36 
Soviet  of  Workmen*s  and  Soldiers* 
Deputies  : 
aims  of,  90 

Allied  Socialists  and,  101-103 
Army  reorganisation  hindered  by, 

68-60,  169,  170,  171,  206,  221 
Bolsheviks  demand  complete  power 
for,  79,  80,  87,  88,  142,  166,  249 ; 
gain  influence  in,  65,  66,  90,  116, 
122  (note),  132,  142,  164,  161,  208, 
231,  238;    leniently  treated  by, 
after  July  insurrection,  144-146 
capital  punishment  and,  208,  224 
Coalition  Government  and,  89,  90 
Commission   on    separation   allow- 
ances, 205 
counter-revolution  accusations  by, 
168,  159,  209 


524     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK 


Cronstadt  riots  and,  128 

Duma  attacked  by,  166,  172 

enemy  Socialists  and,  104-106,  114 

Federal  republic  supported  by,  127 

formation  of,  60-52 

industrial  disputes  and,  119,  120 

International  Conference  called  by, 
111 

Kerensky  and,  98,  132,  133  ;  Coali- 
tion and,  161,  162,  167,  205 

Komiloff's  struggle  with,  212,  213, 
219 

Lenin  on  powers  of,    79,  80,    85, 
93 

Manifesto  to  Peoples  of  the  World 
by,  54,  94 

Order  No.  1  creates,  50,  51 

Provisional  Government  coerced  by, 
55-61,  89 

Smolny  Institute,  headquarters  of, 
213,  237,  238 

State  Conference  and,  170, 171, 183, 
205 

supreme  power  in  hands  of,  249 

Trotsky  on,  93,  227 

War  and,  54,  86,  90,  96,  100,  123, 
133,  144,  166,  176,  209,  223 
Soviets  :  Conference  of,  56,  57 

Congress  of:  Bolsheviks  at,  121- 
124;  Chemoff  at,  55,  56; 
Kerensky  and,  121,  122,  132; 
TsereteU  at,  122,  124 
Speculation :  Commission  on,  223, 
480 ;  decrees  against,  384,  385, 
480 ;  mob  law  punishes,  396,  397, 
445,446 
Spiridonova,  Marie,  44,  338,  339,  353, 

354 
State  Bank  seized,  277,  278,  286,  426, 

427 
State  Conference,  Moscow : 

Army  discussion  in,   170-174,  179- 
181,  495 

Bolsheviks  oppose,  168,  169  ;  make 
separate     declaration     in,    184; 
organise  strikes  during,  183,  207 
Stavka:   Krylenko  resisted   by,  308, 
309,  310-312;    Nicholas  II.   at, 
6  ;   Provisional  Government  sup- 
ported by,  25,  51 
Stekloff-Nakhamkes,  51,  60,  299 
Stockholm  Conference  :  Allies  opposed 
-^      to,  112  ;  Bolsheviks  against,  113  ; 
•^^     German  interest  in,    110;    pro- 
posed, 101,  109 


Stolypin,  Peter,  38,  357,  358,  368 

Struve,  Peter,  42 

Stuchka,  338 

Sturmer,  2,  3 

Sukhanoff-Gimmer,  60,  98 

Sukhomlinofif,  27 ;  Bolsheviks  im- 
prison, 260;  Kerensky  spares, 
25  (note),  261 

Sumenson,  145 

Sverdloff,  352,  353 


Taganrog,  461 

Taurida  Palace :  Bolsheviks  attack, 
142 ;  Constituent  Assembly  in, 
339,  340,  341,  344,  349,  350-360 ; 
Revolutionary  headquarters  in, 
5,  7-9,  14,  19-21,  25  (note),  26,  41, 
194  ;  Soviet  in,  35,  55,  75 

Tchemomazoff,  115 

Tereshchenko,  M.  :  Bolsheviks  im- 
prison, 361 ;  Grimm  admitted 
by,  106  ;  Kerensky  Government 
includes,  161,  220;  Minister  of 
Finance,  26  (note),  29,  31,  32; 
Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs,  89 
(note),  101,  106,  112;  Ukraine 
question  and,  140,  141 

Terror,  under  Bolsheviks,  225,  350, 
448,  496 

Thomas,  Albert,  101,  103,  112 

Thome,  Mr.,  103 

Toil,  Party  of,  30,  42,  43 

Tretyakoff,  361 

Tribunals,  Bolshevist,  382-385 

Trotsky  (Bronstein) : 
Allies  and  peace  negotiations  by, 
303,  307,  318;  American  pro- 
paganda by,  78,  296 ;  American 
war-aims  exposed  by,  303  ;  arrest 
of,  145,  162 ;  Bolsheviks  joined 
by,  297 ;  Brest-Litovsk  peace 
and,  227,  350,  460,  472-474; 
career  and  character  of,  295-297, 
369,  454  ;  Constituent  Assembly 
and,  331 ;  Council  of  Republic 
declaration  by,  232 ;  dictator- 
ship of  proletariat  and,  136,  325  ; 
England  hated  by,  297,  303  ;  flies 
to  Moscow,  232  ;  guillotine  men- 
tioned by,  224,  225,  448  ;  Jewish 
origin  of,  296,  299;  Kerensky 
opposed  by,  224,  225,  228,  232, 
240,  245,  285,  494 ;  Lenin  and, 
297,  475 ;   Marxism  of,  296,  297, 


INDEX 


525 


826;  Milyukoff  oppoaes,  122 
(note);  Minister  of  Foreign 
Affairs,  308;  neither  peace  nor 
war,  formula  of,  123,  473 ;  Pre- 
sident of  Soviet,  228,  237,  297  ; 
Press  freedom  destroyed  by,  400, 
406  ;  proclamation  to  belligerents 
by,  308,  476 ;  Red  Army  organ- 
ised by,  134  (noU),  227,  391 
(note) ;  release  of,  224 ;  Schneur 
and,  392  ;  Smolny  headquarters 
of,  261,  262  ;  Soviet  power  and, 
93,  227  ;  world  -  revolution  the 
aim  of,  464,  466 

Trubetskoy  Bastion,  362 

Tsar  {see  under  Nicholas  IL) 

Tsarism  :  Bolshevism  worse  than,  431, 
432 ;  decayed  from  within,  2,  3, 
13,  24,  38;  Press  under,  399, 
400, 406, 406  ;  repressive  methods 
of,  36-38,  64,  94,  138;  Revolu- 
tion dearer  than,  204,  206  ;  work- 
men under,  189 ;  zemstvos  and, 
326,  327 

Tsaritsin,  126,  200,  292 

Tsarskoe  Selo,  266,  408 

Tsereteli,  Prince  : 

Allies  approached  by,  92,  124 ; 
Bolsheviks  attack  in  Constituent 
Assembly,  357,  368;  Bolshevist 
danger  realised  too  late  by,  85 
{note) ;  capital  punishment  de- 
manded by,  208,  210,  357; 
Coalition  Government  includes, 
89,  92 ;  Constituent  Assembly 
speech  by,  357,  358,  372 ;  counter 
revolution  feared  by,  159,  160, 
163;  defencist  speech  by,  122; 
Grimm  vouched  for  by,  106,  107, 
108 ;  industrial  disputes  and,  120, 
186 ;  July  insurrection  opposed 
by,  142 ;  Kerensky  supported  by, 
122,  223,  224;  Lenin  and,  76, 
82, 86  ;  Minister  of  Interior,  159 ; 
Provisional  Government  sup- 
ported by,  66,  60;  State  Con- 
ference speech  of,  171,  181 ; 
Stolypin's  persecution  of,  357 ; 
Soviet  Congress  speech  by,  122 ; 
Ukraine  question  and,  140,  141 ; 
War  opposed  by,  83-86 

Tugan-Baranovsky,  42 

Turkomans  protect  Komiloff,  211, 
212,  218 

Turks  and  Armenia,  459,  460,  477,  492 


Ukraine  :  Bolshevist  war  with,  348, 
460,  461 ;  Germans  support,  462, 
478;  secession  of,  127,  136-141, 
164,204,467,462,478;  separate 
peace  by,  141,  463 

Union :  of  Liberation,  39, 40 ;  of  Russ- 
ian people,  38 ;  of  Towns,  449, 
460 ;  of  Unions,  276,  276,  279 

United  States  (see  under  America) 

Universal  suffrage :  Bolsheviks  violate, 
321,  322,  348;  Cadets  demand, 
197,  322;  elections  under,  197- 
199 ;  Provisional  Government 
establishes,  197-199,  327,  332 

Uritsky,  339,  349 

Vandervelde,  E.,  103,  111 
Verderevsky,  Admiral,  220 
Verhovsky,  General,  220 
Viboig,  291 ;    massacres,  222,  448 ; 

prison,  343 
Victory  a  counter-revolutionary  word, 

86,  87,  98 
Vikzhel,  264 
Vinichenko,  140 

Vladimir,  Metropolitan  of  Kiev,  412 
Volikoff,  General,  6 
Volodarsky,  335 
Volunteer  Army  :  Alexeieff  forms,  271, 

273,  499  ;  Cadets  join,  271,  272  ; 

campaign  of,  500,  601 ;  KomilofE 

and,  217,  273,  463,  600 ;  Magyar 

division    against,    292 ;     officers 

join,  217,  273 
Volynsky  regiment,  5,  9,  128,  248 
Vorenezh,  461,  463,  473 
Vyborgsky  riots,  4 

War  with  Germajiy,  continuation  of : 
Bolsheviks  oppose,  76,  87,  88,  122, 
123,  131,  132,  232,  286,  301,  302  ; 
Cadets  and,  41,  48,  118,  132,  234, 
347 ;  Kerensky's  attitude  to- 
wards, 18,  96,  121,  122,  130,  146, 
151, 174, 179, 347;  Lenin  opposes, 
66,  70,  71,  82,  101,  122,  162,  347, 
476,  476,  491 ;  Revolutionary 
Democracy  and,  49, 51,  90-96, 98» 
121,  209  ;  Social  Democrats  and, 
48,  66, 80, 87  ;  Social  Revolution- 
aries and,  48,  80,  81,  338  ;  Soviet 
and,  64,  86,  90,  96,  100,  123,  133, 
144,  166,  176,  209,  223 

White  Guards,  344,  430,  435,  460 
Russians,  423,  460 


526     FROM  LIBERTY  TO  BREST-LITOVSK 


Whites,  opponents  of  Bolsheviks,  272 

Wilhelm  II.,  Kaiser,  Bolsheviks  on, 
88,94 

Wilson,  President :  Soviet  answer  to 
Note  by,  100,  101 ;  Soviet  Con- 
gress  message  by,  492,  493 

Winter  Palace :  Bolsheviks  capture, 
257,  258,  260 ;  ceUars  of,  looted, 
440,  441 ;  Kerensky  in,  167,  213, 
237  ;  Ministers  in,  255, 256,  343  ; 
November  Revolution  and,  250- 
255,  257,  258,  260;  women 
soldiers  in,  255,  256 

Women's  Battalion :  Kerensky  reviews, 
255,  256 ;  Municipal  Council  de- 
fends, 270,  329  ;  Red  Guards  and, 
257,  270,  386;  Winter  Palace 
defended  by,  250,  252,  255,  257, 
259 

Workmen :  appeal  to,  by  Bolsheviks, 
373,  374;  Bolsheviks  supported 
by,  299,  300  ;  control  of  industry 
by,  354,  356,  376-380 ;  demands 
of,  180,  186,  187-190,  199,  200, 
229,  433;  disappearing,  322; 
Municipal  Council  and,  329,  330  ; 
self -restrained  section  of,  203 ; 
SkobelefE's  appeal  to,  189,  190; 
Tsarism  and,  189 

World-revolution :  Lenin  preaches,  64, 


67,  293,  295,  458,  464 ;   Trotsky 
and,  464,  466 
Wrzosiek,  Lt.-Col.,  177  (note) 

YurenieflF,  161,  219,  220 
Yusupoff-Sumarokoff-Elston,  Count,  3 

Zarudny,  161 

Zavoiko,  219 

Zemstvos:  Bolsheviks  close,  328,  331 ; 
councils  of,  under  Socialists,  199  ; 
Tsarism  and,  36,  326,  327,  328 

Zemstvo  Union,  26,  34,  183 

Zhelezniakov,  369 

Zimmerwald  Conference :  Chemoff 
and,  165,  356;  formula  of,  90, 158, 
298  ;  Grimm  convenes,  90,  106, 
108,  111 ;  Kerensky  on  German 
intrigue  behind,  122  ;  Kropotkin 
against,  182  ;  MaklakofE  on,  174  ; 
Milyukoff  on,  122  (note),  158, 160 ; 
Socialist  Ministers  misled  by, 
102,108,113,224 

Zinovieff  ( Apfelbaum  -  Radomysloff) : 
arrest  evaded  by,  145,  155,  162 ; 
Deutch  denounces,  1 14  ;  Jewish 
origin  of,  299;  Lenin  and,  in 
Austria,  105,  288  ;  Soviet  leader, 
47,  61,  262,  350;  Trotsky's 
deputy,  350 


THE   END 


Printed  by  R.  &  R.  Ci.ARic,  Limited,  Edinburgh. 


Macmillan  and  Co/s  New  Books 

The  Life  of  Lord  Kitchener  of  Khartoum.     By 

Sir  George  Arthur,  Bt,  M.V.O.,  Private  Secretary  to 
Lord  Kitchener,  19 14-16.  With  Portraits.    3  vols.   8vo. 

Life  of  William  Booth,  the  Founder  of  the  Salva- 
tion Army.  By  Harold  Begbie.  With  Photo- 
gravure Portraits  and  other  Illustrations.     2  vols.     8vo. 

The  Letters  of  Henry  James.     Edited   by  Percy 

Lubbock.      With  tv^ro  Portraits.      2  vols.      8vo. 

Samuel  Butler.  Author  of  "Erewhon"  (1835-1902). 
A  Memoir.  By  Henry  Festing  Jones.  With  20 
Illustrations,  including  two  Facsimile  Letters.  2  vols. 
8vo.     £2  :  2s.  net. 

The  Correspondence  of  the  Hon.  Emily  Eden. 

Edited  by  VIOLET  DICKINSON.  With  four  Photo- 
gravures.     8vo. 

A  Private  in  the  Guards.  By  Stephen  Graham, 
author  of  "  With  the  Russian  Pilgrims  to  Jerusalem," 
"  Priest  of  the  Ideal,"  etc.      8vo.      los.  net. 

A  History  of  the  British  Army.     By  the  Hon.  J.  w. 

Fortescue.     Vols.  IX.  and  X.     With  Maps.      8vo. 

The  Grenadier  Guards  in  the  Great  War  of  1914- 

I918.  By  Lieutenant-Colonel  the  Right  Hon.  Sir 
Frederick  Ponsonby  (late  Grenadier  Guards).  With 
Photogravure  Portraits  and  Plans.      2  vols.      8vo. 

OFFICIAL  HISTORY  OF  THE  WAR. 

Prepared  under  the  direction  of  the  Historical  Section  of  the 
Committee  of  Imperial  Defence. 

Military  Operations.  Vol.  i.  (To  December  1 9 14.) 
Western  Theatre.  Mons  to  the  Aisne  and  the  first 
Battle  of  Ypres.  By  the  Hon.  J.  W.  Fortescue, 
author  of  "  A  History  of  the  British  Army,"  etc.  With 
Maps.     8vo. 

LONDON :  MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  Ltd. 


Macmillan  and  Co/s  New  Books 

Democracy.  By  the  Right  Hon.  Viscount  Bryce,  O.M., 
P.C,  D.C.L.,  LL.D.,  F.R.S.      8vo. 

Europe  in  the  Melting  Pot.     By  R.  w.  Seton- 

Watson,  D.Litt.  With  Maps.  Crown  8vo.  4s.  6d. 
net. 

Europe  in  the  Nineteenth  Century.     By  F.  j.  c. 

Hearnshaw,  LL.D.,  Professor  of  History  in  King's 
College,  London.     Crown  8vo. 

Pan-Islam.  By  G.  Wyman  Bury,  author  of  "The  Land 
of  Uz,"  and  "  Arabia  Infelix :  or  the  Turks  in  Yamen." 
With  Map.     8vo. 

French  Ways  and  their  Meanings.  By  Edith 
Wharton.     Crown  8vo. 

Through  Deserts  and  Oases  of  Central  Asia. 

By  Miss  Ella  Sykes,  F.R.G.S.,  author  of  "  Through 
Persia  on  a  Side- Saddle,",  etc.,  and  Brigadier-General 
Sir  Percy  Sykes,  K.C.I.E.,  C.M.G.,  author  of  "A 
History  of  Persia,"  etc.  With  Illustrations  and  Map. 
8vo. 

Profit  and  Sport  in  British  East  Africa.     Being 

a  Second  Edition,  revised  and  enlarged,  of  "  A  Colony 
in  the  Making."  By  Captain  the  Lord  Cranworth, 
M.C.     With  Maps  and  Illustrations.      8vo. 

THE  BLUE  GUIDES.    New  Volume. 

England.  Edited  by  FiNDLAY  MuiRHEAD.  With 
numerous  Maps  and  Plans.     Globe  8vo. 

HIGHWAYS  AND  BYWAYS  SERIES.    New  Volume. 

Highways   and    Byways   in   Northumbria.     By 

P.  Anderson  Graham.  Illustrated  by  Hugh 
Thomson.     Extra  Crown  8vo.     7s.  6d.  net. 

LONDON  :  MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  Ltd. 


i 


PLEASE 


CARD 


REMOVE 
THIS  POCKET 


ONTO  LIBRARY 


DK  Williams,   Ariadna  Tyrkova 

2^5  From  liberty  to  Brest- 

W^7  Iltovsk 


/ 


