
Published by 

GOPALDAS MaJUMDER, 
D. M. Library, 

42, Cornwallis Street, 

CALCUTTA 


Printed by 
P. C. Roy, 
eri gouranga press, 

5, Chtntamanl Das Lanc.t 

CALCUTTA 



THE 

RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 

A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 


M. N. ROY 


D. M. LIBRARY 

42, CORNWALLIS STREET 
CALCUTTA 



THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 


A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 


Twenty years ago, tlie world experienced 
the most important event of modem history. 
It was the Russian Revolution. The event 
is the most important in our time because it 
opens up a new chapter of human history. 
Lately, doubt regarding the historical signi- 
ficance of the Russian Revolution has been 
gaining ground even among its ardent 
supporters and admirers. It was hailed from 
one side, and feared from the other, as the 
death-knell of Capitalism and the first 
triumph of the revolutionary forces striving 
for the establishment of Socialism. 

The development in Russia during the 
recent j^ears has bewildered many, dis- 
couraged some revolutionary enthusiasts and 
aroused hopes in the capitalist world. To- 
day, very few people outside of that country, 



2 


THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 


however loyal supporters of tlie Revolution 
they may he, can claim to have a clear under- 
standing of what is happening there. The 
recent arrests, trials and severe punishments 
of a large number of men and women, occupy- 
ing high positions in administrative, indus- 
trial and political organisations of the 
country, have naturally added to the bewilder- 
ment. Staunch and tried supporters of the 
new experiment have been compelled to 
become critics, in many cases very bitter. 

Taking all the conceivable necessities 
into consideration, one finds it difficult to 
explain why practically all the old leaders of 
the revolution should be eliminated, either 
politically or physically. It is very difficult 
to believe that they turned traitors to the 
revolution to the initial success of which they 
made their contributions having had devoted 
their entire life in preparations for that 
success. On the other hand, it is equally 
difficult to believe that, in a democratic State 
with effective mass control, the power has 
been captured by a small group of people 
given to sadistic morbidity. Anybody with 
some knowledge of the structure of the 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 8 

Russian Communist Party and acquaintance 
with the actual functioning of the Soviet 
sj^stem must dismiss the idea of a personal 
dictatorship or of the autocracy of a ruling 
clique. 

Competent writers with no bias in 
favour of the new system of state organisa- 
tion, and frankly hostile to the principles and 
programme of Communism, have come to the 
conclusion that there is no dictatorship in 
Russia; that the Soviet system represents a 
form of democratic administration far in 
advance of the most democratic of the parlia- 
mentary States ; and that internally the Com- 
munist Party itself is a democratic organisa- 
tion. This being the case, it must be 
admitted that, whatever may be happening in 
Russia is happening with the consent of the 
majority, if not of the entire people. 

As regards the crucial question whether 
the Russian Revolution has failed or succeeded 
as a Socialist Revolution it is much too early 
to offer a definite answer in one way or the 
other. The arguments advanced in support 
of either contention have more or less force. 
Rut a conclusive judgement pronounced to-day 



4 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 

in favour of either side is bound to be pre- 
mature and prejudiced. 

The historical significance and positive 
achievements of the Russian Revolution are 
to be estimated not by its immediate results. 
Because these, great as they are, do not 
necessarily preclude a line of development 
away from the goal of Socialism. It is not 
suggested that there is the least desire on 
the part of the present leaders of the Revolu- 
tion to strike out such a course. I personally 
emphatically reject the contention that the 
present leaders of the Russian Communist 
Partj^ have quietly discarded the ideals they 
still publicly profess, or that the Soviet Union 
to-day is in no way distinct from any other 
national State. There are many things which 
are apparently contradictory to fullfledged 
Socialism or unadulterated internationalism. 
All these regrettable things may not be al- 
together necessary. Some of them may be 
avoidable. But it is not a matter of detail. 
The crucial question is : Under the given 
conditions, internal as well as external, is it 
possible to follow any other policy ? No 
criticism, however dispassionate or sjnn- 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 5 


pathetic may be the motive, however firm 
may be the revolutionary conviction of the 
people advancing it, can claim relevancy 
unless the critics are able to suggest an alter- 
native course of action. Impractical criticism 
is no better than uncritical conformity. 

Historically, it would be much too pre- 
mature to pass the adverse judgement even 
if all the evidences in support of it were 
relevant and reliable. Granted that the econo- 
mic structure and industrial organisation of 
the Soviet Union are not strictly according 
to the principles of Socialism, it does not 
necessarily follow that the revolution has dis- 
owned its original ideals. On the other hand, 
it is simply absurd to assert that the respon- 
sibility for the failure of the working class 
in other European countries to make a revolu- 
tion belongs to those who captured the leader- 
ship of the Russian Communist Party after 
the death of Lenin and downfall of Trotzky. 
Neither the slow progress towards genuine 
Socialist economy, nor the retarded triumph 
of revolution in other countries is due to any 
subjective factor. The one as well as the 



6 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 

other is historically determined, the former 
being the inevitable consequence of the latter. 

This does not imply endorsement of the 
Trotzkyst theory of permanent revolution 
and the associated doctrine that Socialism 
cannot be built in one country. The contra- 
diction of Trotzky’s position is obvious. Of- 
course, a country in the midst of capitalist 
world cannot have a fullfledged Socialist 
economy. But what is the working class in 
power in that country to do when revolution 
does not take place in other countries ? Strict 
adherence to Trotzky’s theory would demand 
of the working class in the revolutionary 
country to lay down the power rather than to 
carry on the work of economic reconstruction 
which must necessarily be contaminated to 
some extent by the surrounding capitalist 
conditions. This has necessarily taken place 
in the Soviet Union. But only revolutionary 
romanticists would have advocated the differ- 
ent course, which logically would have been 
to lay down the power. 

The policy followed by the Russian 
Communist Party under the leadership of 
Stalin is eminently realistic ; and realism is 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 7 

the fundamental principle of Marxist philo- 
sophy. The proletariat with the aid of the 
peasantry captured power in Russia. The 
expectation that revolution would take place 
in other countries was not fulfilled. The 
joint effort of the capitalist world to defeat the 
Russian Revolution fortunately did not 
succeed. What was the leadership of the 
revolution to do in that situation? For a 
Marxist, the answer should be obvious : 
Carry on doing what can be done under the 
given conditions while waiting for the revo- 
lution to take place in other countries, and 
doing whatever possible to hasten the process. 

But a Marxist must bear still another 
point in mind. External aid may be useful, 
but unless the internal conditions of a country 
are favourable for the victory of the revolu- 
tion, it can be of very little avail. A dis- 
passionate view of things must bring us to 
the undesirable conclusion that the revolu- 
tionary movement did not succeed in the 
West-European countries because conditions 
necessary for the purpose were more or less 
absent there. By this it is not meant that 
Capitalism had not played out its progressive 



8 


THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 


role; that the working class had not been 
driven to a position where it must bid for the 
capture of power with the object of reorganis- 
ing society on the basis of a new mode of pro- 
duction. All the conditions of capitalist decay 
and disorganisation were more or less there. 
But the decisive factor in a revolutionary 
situation is the State, the breakdown of which 
is the decisive condition for the victory of the 
revolution. This condition has been absent in 
all the leading European countries except for 
a short period immediately after the war, and 
that also only for the central European 
countries. 

In the face of the danger of revolution, 
even the intensely nationalistic bourgeois 
States develop an international solidarity, on 
the basis of class interest. So the temporary 
breakdown of the capitalist State in Austria 
and Germany was quickly repaired with the 
help of those very powers which had con- 
tributed to the breakdown. The result was 
the defeat of the working class in Germany. 
Once the prospective of an immediate revolu- 
tion in anjr of the leading West-European 
countries disappeared, the development in 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 9 

Russia was predetermined. There is no use 
quarreling with history. Man makes history ; 
but can do so only -with the material available. 

Already in 1921, the perspective of 
future development was sufficiently clear to 
Lenin. The New Economic Policy was not 
only a new policy for Russia. It was a new 
orientation for the entire international revolu- 
tionary movement. The policy of United 
Front was dictated by the long perspective 
of revolutionary development. Nor was the 
policy surely “economic’ 5 for Russia herself. 
For her too it was a new political policy. It 
is realised by very few even to-day that the 
policy inaugurated by the sagacity of Lenin 
implied quietly setting aside the idea of the 
dictatorship of the proletariat. From that 
time on, the social foundation of the revolu- 
tionary State was continually broadened to 
embrace classes which can be involved in a 
process of economic reconstruction which, 
given the necessary political guarantee, 
would develop eventually into Socialism, but 
was not Socialistic by itself. Only non- 
critical conformists can make the obviously 
absurd assertion that even to-day a Socialist 



10 


THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 


societ3’’ has . been established in the Soviet 
Union. We need not be ashamed of making 
that admission. Because that does not mean 
that the Russian Revolution has miscarried 
itself. It has been as successful as it is 
possible to be under the given world condi- 
tions; and the success until now has been so 
great that it can be characterised as the most 
brilliant monument to the creative genius of 
man, in the realm of material progress. 

A revolution is not made in a day. 
Society experiences not isolated instances of 
revolution, but entire periods of revolution. 
And the periods usually embrace centuries. 
It took the bourgeoisie more than two hundred 
years to liquidate feudal social relations, and 
the autocratic State. Even the French Revo- 
lution, which represented the culminating 
point of the process, was not fully successful 
before nearly hundred years had passed after 
feudalism had been destroyed and monarchy 
overthrown by the Jacobines. 

The historical significance of the Russian 
Revolution is that it opens the period of 
proletarian revolution. Only twent}^ years 
have passed. Is it not obviously premature 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 11 


to pass a conclusive judgement? Apparent 
set-backs, or even reaction, do not necessaril}’- 
imply the defeat of a revolution which stands 
on the order of the day. The rise of 
Napoleon was apparently a victory of reaction. 
But at the same time, Napoleonisiu was the 
child of the revolution inasmuch as it 
dcstnyed feudalism in a number of leading 
European countries — a historical^ necessaiy 
task which could not be accomplished 1y the 
native social forces. So, what if the prole- 
tarian revolution of our da}' is going to have 
its Napoleonism ? It may be a necessary 
stage. 

Marx said that, with all its internal 
contradictions, decay and disintegration, 
Capitalism would be able to earn,' on unless 
the proletariat overthrew it. Proletariat is 
an international force. Therefore, it is not 
prescribed that the working class of one 
particular country must accomplish the 
revolutionary task in that country. It is 
quite conceivable that the process will take 
place on a really internationally scale, not 
according to the schematic idea of a simul- 
taneous world revolution, but the proletariat 



12 


THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 


victorious in one country, and having acquired 
sufficient strength in consequence of that 
victory, carrying the revolution to other 
countries where difficulties of the local con- 
dition may prevent the native working class 
performing the task by itself. Indeed, that 
appears to be the prospective of the present 
international situation. And all the develop- 
ments in Russia, the apparently nationalistic 
policy of the Soviet State, become comprehen- 
sible if we try to approach it from the point 
of view of this perspective of the present 
European situation. 


II 

It is contended by the opponents of Socia- 
lism that the Russian Revolution has revealed 
the fallacy of the Marxian reading of history. 
Ify analysing the development of the capitalist 
mode of production, Marx came to the conclu- 
sion that Socialism would be the logical 
consequence of that development. He further 
prophesied that Socialism would be established 
upon the overthrow of the decayed capitalist 
system by the proletariat. From this pers- 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 13 


pective of history it follows that the revolution 
should take place first in the most developed 
capitalist countries. According to the 
Marxist doctrine, the conditions for the 
success of the revolution are riper in those 
countries. With these arguments, the oppo- 
nents of Socialism maintain that the Marxian 
theory regarding the internal mechanism of 
the capitalist mode of production is all wrong, 
and, consequently the establishment of 
Socialism is not an historical necessity. 
Contrary to the prediction of Marx, the 
revolution took place in a very backward stage 
of capitalist development, which fact proves, 
it is maintained, that revolutions are not 
inherent in the process of social progress, but 
are brought about forcibly by malicious or 
misguided minorities. 

The experience of the Russian Revolu- 
tion supplies arguments to another set of 
people who, while professing Marxism, have 
the tendency of relapsing into the utopian 
notion of Socialism combated by Marx him- 
self. These people seem to believe that 
Socialism can be established anywhere or at 
any time, if the working class, whatever may 



14 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 

be its relative strength, can only manage to 
capture State power. These Marxists do not 
realise that their romantic idea of revolution 
corroborates the position taken up by the 
opponents of Marxism. On the one hand, it 
is identical with the contention of bourgeois 
•economists that Socialism is not a historical 
necessity, but an ideal of naive humani- 
tarians, or a mischievous plan hatched out of 
fanatical class hatred. On the other hand, 
the romantic interpretation of the success of 
the Russian Revolution falls in line with the 
anarcho-syndicalist theory, that a revolution 
is brought about by the determined action of 
an organised minority. 

The history of the Russian Revolution 
bears out neither the contention of the 
bourgeois critics of Marxism, nor the revi- 
sionism of its uncritical admirers. As 
regards the former, the fault is not of the 
Marxian reading of history, but with their 
reading of Marxism. The Marxian outlook 
of history precludes predeterminism or any 
mechanical process of development. While 
forecasting the most probable line of develop- 
ment, it does not rule out unforeseen events, 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 15 

which maj^ be pregnant of tremendous possi- 
bilities, taking place in consequence of more 
or less accidental combination of circum- 
stances. The Russian Revolution was such 
an event. It does not disprove the determinist 
laws of History discovered by Marx, any 
more than the formation of the solar system 
can be regarded as a negation of physical 
causality. 

Moreover, Marx never pretended to cast 
the horoscope of humanity. He did not make 
any prophecy about the actual happening of 
the revolution. He simply said that it was 
bound to happen in the future as it had 
happened repeatedly in the past. Then, all 
the arguments of the bourgeois critics of the 
Marxian conception of history become irrele- 
vant as soon as the Russian Revolution is 
regarded in its correct historical significance. 
Strictly speaking, the Russian Revolution is 
not a proletarian revolution, not of the kind 
which, according to Marx, should begin in the 
most highly developed capitalist countries. 
The Russian Revolution was a belated 
bourgeois revolution. While opening up the 



16 


THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 


era of proletarian revolution, it was the last 
event of the period of bourgeois revolution. 

As a matter of fact, if we take the whole 
world into account that period has not yet 
definitely come to a close. In many countries, 
the bourgeois revolution is still to take place. 
For a time, the leaders of the Russian Revolu- 
tion lost the Marxian historical perspective 
and forgot that history develops unequally. 
Lately, they seem to have regained the 
historical sense ; and curiously, for this 
welcome reversion to realism, they are accused 
of having deviated from Marxism. Under 
the leadership of the Communist Party of 
Russia, the revolutionary working class 
throughout the world is to-day fighting with 
the significant slogan ‘‘Defence of Demo- 
cracy”. In Spain, the Communist Party is 
leading the working class in a revolutionary 
struggle for democratic freedom. Spain is in 
the throes of a democratic revolution. In 
China, the slogans of the proletarian revolu- 
tion have been set aside so that the working 
class may take its rightful place in the 
bourgeois-democratic revolutionary movement. 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 17 

Since the Russian Revolution, histori- 
cally, and to a very large extent actually, was 
not a proletarian revolution, it does not in any 
way disprove the correctness of the Marxian 
perspective of history. But this defence of 
Marxism shocks the catholicity of the 
romantic Marxists who believe that the suc- 
cess of the Russian Revolution has proved the 
anti-Marxist notion that a revolution can be 
made to order. The lessons drawn from the 
experience of the Russian Revolution should 
enable us to develop Marxism on the basis of 
the principles laid down by its founder. The 
lesson is that revolutions cannot be classified 
strictly into a limited number of categories. 
One revolution may have the bourgeois as 
well as the proletarian character; and this is 
bound to happen when it takes place in a 
transition period of history. The Russian 
Revolution is of this mixed type. We cannot 
mechanically put a label on it. If that is 
done, we are sure to have a distorted view of 
things and fail to appreciate its achievements 
correctly. 

Another lesson of the Russian Revolution 
is that the social character of the revolu- 

2 



18 


THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 


tionary State is not theoretically predeter- 
mined. Experience has shown that denial of 
formal parliamentarjr democracy need not 
necessarily be expressed through the dictator- 
ship of the proletariat; that a new type of 
a revolutionaiy State, unforeseen in the 
Marxian theory of State, majr arise under 
certain circumstances. In other words, the 
experience of the Russian Revolution has 
demonstrated that, in the circumstances in 
which it took place, the State created by it 
was a dictatorship in so far as it rejected 
formal parliamentary democracy, but, on the 
other hand, it was not the dictatorship of the 
proletariat in the strict theoreical sense, 
because it had a broader social foundation. 
These lessons are perfectly compatible with 
the Marxian theory of State, the fundamental 
principle of which is that the social character 
of the State, is determined by the class com- 
position of the forces involved in the revolu- 
tion. 

Still another lesson is that, under certain 
circumstances, the dictatorship of the prole- 
tariat is not a necessary condition for the 
establishment of Socialism. This, perhaps, 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 19 


is the most far-reaching lesson to be derived 
from the experience of the Russian Revolu- 
tion. Only on the strength of this lesson, is 
it possible to reject the contention that the 
Russian Revolution has disproved the 
Marxian theory of history. Because, what is 
implied in Marxian theory is that proletarian 
dictatorship can be established as the transi- 
tion to Socialism only in the most advanced 
capitalist countries. Marx did not say that 
in the twentieth century, revolutions could 
take place only in highly developed capitalist 
countries. Therefore, the revolution taking 
place in Russia before England or Germany, 
was no more excluded from the Marxian pers- 
pective of history than a revolution taking 
place in China or in India. The Russian 
revolution belongs to a different period of 
history. It would l>c erroneous to regard it 
in priority in the scheme of revolutions 
belonging to a different period. What 
happened in 1917 was not a proletarian revolu- 
tion taking place in an industrially backward 
country, instead of where it should have taken 
place according to the Marxian perspective 
of history ; it was bourgeois-democratic revolu- 



20 


THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 


tion taking place in a country which, though 
sufficiently advanced in the process of 
capitalist development, had not yet passed 
through the bourgeois revolution. Being 
historically a bourgeois -democratic revolution, 
it should take place before proletarian revolu- 
tions in other countries. Of course, Marxism 
does not say that the proletarian revolution 
could not have taken place in industrially 
advanced countries before the Russian Revolu- 
tion. We are living in a period of transition 
in which revolutions of different character, 
belonging to two different periods of history 
are bound to overlap. 

The thesis that the State created by the 
Russian Revolution was not a proletarian 
dictatorship, even when it claimed that 
character, will be established in a following 
article. Preparatory to that, it is necessary 
to state facts which disclose the real nature of 
the Revolution. 

What is known as the February Revolu- 
tion was a bourgeois revolution of the classical 
type. The movement causing the downfall 
of the monarchy was led by the Constitutional 
Democrats, the party of the big bourgeoisie. 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 21 

Before long, the leadership of the revolution 
passed on to the petit-bourgeoisie ; that means, 
the social character of the revolution still 
remained bourgeois. When the working 
class occupied the centre of the State, even 
then the character was not changed except on 
the surface. It appeared on the scene and 
captured the leadership of the revolution with 
the slogan “Peace, Land and Breed”. The 
solgan represented neither the sentiment nor 
the demands of any particular class. It 
represented the sentiment and the demands of 
the entire people with the exception of the 
feudal aristocracy and military adherents of 
the overthrown monarchy. 

Thus, when the working class captured 
the leadership of the revolution, it did so 
without in any way transforming its social 
character and historical role. As a matter of 
fact, until July, even the Bolsheviks including 
Lenin himself did not conceive of the possi- 
bility of the revolution developing as it 
subsequently did. The demand for the Con- 
stituent Assembly was not a mere propa- 
gandist slogan. Even the Bolsheviks were 
striving for the establishment of the broadest 



22 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 

form of parliamentary democracy. Tjtie 
counter-revolutionary coup of the Cossack 
general Kornilov was warded off by the prole- 
tariat under the leadership of the Bolsheviks 
in defence of democracy. 

The Bolsheviks conceived the idea of 
capturing power only when the genius of 
Benin perceived that the decisive condition 
for the ^possible success in that effort was 
maturing. The State apparatus was breaking 
down; the army was disintegrating having 
suffered severe defeats on the front. The 
failure of the petit-bourgeois government of 
Kerenski, to introduce any agrarian reform, 
had accentuated the discontent of the peasan- 
try. So, the perspective was that, while 
there would be practically no resistance to the 
proletariat bidding for capturing the State- 
power, it could count on the support of the 
peasantry. While “bread” was the demand 
of the urban toilers “peace” and “land” were 
the demands of the peasantry. And it was 
with these slogans that the revolution became 
victorious. “Band to the peasant” is not the 
programme of the proletarian revolution. 
The great French Revolution fought for this 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 23 

programme. The fact that in Russia the 
revolution with the identical programme came 
under the leadership of the working class did 
not change its social character. 


Ill 

Although the Bolsheviks began bidding 
for power with the slogans “Bread, Land 
and Peace”, the factor that united the 
majority of the people in a revolutionary 
upheaval was the desire to put an end to the 
war which had meant wholesale death and 
destruction unmitigated by the satisfaction of 
victory. Defeat after defeat had not only 
demoralised the army, which constituted the 
main-stay of the Tzarist State ; they had 
greatly impaired the prestige of the monarchy 
and the classes allied with it. The defects in 
the front were due not so much to the strength 
of the enemy as to bad organisation and 
corruption at home. In hundreds and 
thousands, peasants and workers were sent to 
the front to defend the fatherland against 
foreign invasion; but they were not properly 
equipped for the purpose. The discontent 



,24 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 

against the corrupt court which paralysed 
national defence and the inefficiency of those 
entrusted with the organisation of supply, 
was first felt by the officers of the lower rank. 
Consequently, there was demoralisation, and 
discipline began to disappear. The discon- 
tent spread to the ranks. 

At that psychological moment, the news 
of the Tzar’s abdication reached the fronts. 
The soldiers, recruited mostly from the 
peasantry, had been taught to identify the 
State with the Tzar. The passing of the 
Tzar, therefore, meant to them the end of all 
government. While coming to fight for the 
fatherland, they had left behind what little 
belonged to themselves. In the absence of 
any government, who was to protect that? 
So, they were eager to go home to look after 
their families and whatever little they pos- 
sessed. The downfall of the Tsar deprived 
the war of all meaning. They had been sent 
to fight for Tzar. He was gone. So, the 
war must also end. On the other hand, the 
idea, that with the Tzar the Government had 
also disappeared, freed the soldiers from the 
fear of authority which alone maintains 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 25 

discipline imposed from above. Conse- 
quently, there began mass desertions. The 
demand for peace, put forward by the 
Bolsheviks, was the concrete expression of the 
prevailing sentiment and, therefore, hastened 
the process of the distintegration of the army 
•and breakdown of the State. 

As a matter of fact, Lenin conceived the 
idea of capturing power only when the news 
■of the disruptive development in the fronts 
began to reach the rear. The Kerensky 
Government was swept away not so much by 
an organised revolutionary action on the part 
of the proletariat, as by the insubordination 
of the army. The downfall of Kerensky was 
due to his effort to disregard the popular 
demand for peace. It is not correct to say 
that his efforts to continue the war were 
inspired by the motive of checking revolu- 
tionary developments at home. He acted as 
a petit-bourgeois patriot, eager to organise 
resistance against foreign invasion. He was 
not a conscious counter-revolutionary. The 
German armies were sweeping in, and were 
sure to occup}^ the major part of Russia, if 
there were no military resistance. A mis- 



26 


THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 


guided patriot, he acted as an instrument of 
the allied Imperialism which wanted to check 
the German conquest of Russia. 

But whatever might be his purpose, or 
the pretext for acting as he did, Kerensky 
undertook to do the impossible. He wanted 
to continue the war when the army was 
clamouring for peace. And he failed to do 
what might have enabled him to accomplish 
what he had undertaken. Under the pressure 
of the reactionary upper classes, who had 
placed him in power, he went back on the 
programme of his own party, to give land to 
the peasants. Had he done that, the 
peasants might possibly be persuaded to go 
back to the front, no longer to fight for the 
Tzar, but for the defence of their new posses- 
sion. Kerensky’s Napoleonism proved to be 
an abortion because the revolutionary founda- 
tion on which French Napoleonism flourished, 
was not laid in Russia. The Jacobins had 
given land to the peasants; in return, these 
supplied Napoleon with soldiers. In Russia, 
Jacobinism rose only after the downfall of 
Kerensk}', which was brought about, like the 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 27 

downfall of the monarchy, by .military defeat, 
and disintegration of the army. 

When Kerensky, in power, foolishly 
went back on the fundamental clause of the 
programme of his party, the Bolsheviks came 
forward with the solgan “Land to the 
Peasants”. So they began the struggle for 
the capture of power rather as the revolu- 
tionary vanguard of the peasantry than of the 
proletariat; and they succeeded only when 
they had secured the support of the peasant 
masses. The signal for insurrection was 
given by the Central Committee of the 
Bolshevik Party only after it had captured a 
majority in the Congress of Peasants’ Soviets. 
And that strategic position was captured not 
under the banner of Socialism, not as a con- 
quest of the proletarian revolution, but by 
insisting on the fulfilment of the bourgeois 
revolution, namely, abolition of feudalism, 
not in favour of the collective ownership of 
land, but for giving the land to the cultivator. 

Kerensky’s effort to counter the general 
demand for peace had transformed mass 
desertion into a rebellion against authority. 
The slogan “Land to the Peasants”' 



•28 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 

strengthened the desire for peace. The soldiers 
were eager to return home not only to defend 
the little they had left, but to take possession 
•of more. Moved by a powerful new incen- 
tive, they were ready to break down any 
authority which would send them back to the 
front. 

Originally, they wanted to flee towards 
home, throwing away their guns, as un- 
necessary encumbrance, and to insure dis- 
guise. In the new situation, they decided to 
•take the gun along, — first to fight their way 
through, and then to defend their new posses- 
sion back home more effectively. 

Thus, out of the disintegration of the 
army, brought about by the breakdown of the 
decayed and corrupt monarchist State, there 
arose an unexpected revolutionary force, 
which helped the Bolsheviks to defend their 
position of power in Petrograd and Moscow, 
in the meantime captured by the proletariat, 
the former with the aid of mutineers marines. 
The capture of the capital cities was mainly 
due to the fact that they were without any 
organised authority, and there was no counter- 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 29 


revolutionary force to put up an effective 
resistance. 

This does not in any way minimise the 
revolutionary determination of Bolsheviks and 
the great heroism of the workers who 
captured power. But in view of the historical 
facts, we must come to the conclusion that the 
triumph of the Bolsheviks was due mainly 
to extraordinarily favourable objective con- 
ditions. Indeed, according to a correct under- 
standing of Marxist revolutionary strategy, 
so cleverly practised by Lenin, insurrection 
can be successful only under such a favour- 
able combination of objective circumstances. 
The Bolsheviks organised the insurrection; 
but they did not undertake the task before 
they were satisfied that it could possibly be 
accomplished in the given relation of forces. 
The main point to be borne in mind is that 
they did not undertake the task relying solely 
on the proletariat. Before it appeared certain 
that power captured in the capital cities could 
be maintained, thanks to the possibility of a 
considerable number of soldiers coming over 
to the side of the revolutionary action of the 
peasantry, inspired with the prospect of 



30 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 

•owning the land they cultivate, the Bolsheviks 
did not give the sign for insurrection which 
placed the working class in power in 
Petrograd and Moscow. 

The Soviets, which constituted the basic 
units of the revolutionary State, were councils 
of workers, peasants and soldiers’ deputies. In 
an overwhelmingly agricultural country like 
Russia, the proletariat, except in the indus- 
trial centres, could not possibly have majori- 
ties in the Soviets. The soldiers were mostly 
peasants. Consequently, outside the indus- 
trial districts, the Soviet's were bound to be 
dominated by the peasantry, and as such 
could not be very dependable instruments for 
the dictatorship of the proletariat. In the 
earlier stages of the revolution, efforts were 
made to prevent peasant predominance of the 
Soviets, on the one hand, by enfranchising 
only the poorer strata of the peasantry, and, 
on the other hand, by alloting a larger quota 
to the workers. But in the villages, even 
those precautions could not guarantee prole- 
tarian majorities in the Soviets. There was 
simply no proletariat in the village. So, 
taking the country as a whole, the revolu- 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 31 

tionary State could not be called a proletarian 
dictatorship in the strict sense of the term. 
As a matter of fact, it was called the 
Workers’ and Peasants’ Republic. 

Proletarian dictatorship was established 
in industrial centres, particularly in Petrograd 
and Moscow. But it was rested upon the 
support of the peasantry, given through the 
Soviets throughout the country. The social 
structure of the country determined the nature 
of the revolutionary State. In so far as the 
initiative for capturing power was taken by 
the proletariat, the central State organisation 
assumed the character of dictatorship of that 
class. Traditional^ ' accustomed to accept 
the authorhy of the Government established 
in Petrograd and Moscow, the peasantry 
throughout the country recognised the new 
government in Moscow, as the central autho- 
rity. That looked like the establishment of 
the dictatorship of the proletariat throughout 
the country. 

But the proletarian dictatorship visua- 
lised in the Marxist theory of State as a 
transitional feature in the process of develop- 
ment of the revolution, is not a relation 


32 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 

between the working class and the peasantry. 
The victorious proletariat exercises dictatorial 
power in relation to the bourgeoisie which, 
overthrown from political power and deprived' 
of economic privileges, are sure to carry on 
subversive activities against the new State. 
Therefore, the Soviets set up by the Russian 
Revolution in rural areas were rather organs, 
of the revolutionary peasantry engaged in the 
task of beating down the vanquished forces 
of feudalism, than dictatorship of the prole- 
tariat. As a matter of fact, the peasantry, 
whose revolutionary action guaranteed the 
success of the revolution, were not at all con- 
cerned with the class character of the State 
established in the capital cities, nor were 
they sympathetic to the Socialist programme 
of the Bolshevik Party. 

It was an alliance of two classes fighting- 
on two different fronts, with two different 
revolutionary ideals belonging to two periods, 
of history. The forces fighting for the ideal 
of Socialism were limited to a small part of 
the countrjq while in the rest of the country 
the revolution was of predominantly bour- 
geois-democratic character. And it was the 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 38 

victory on that wide front on which the 
peasantry was fighting for the programme of 
bourgeois -democratic revolution, that secured 
the triumph of the revolution as a whole. 
Organised and led by the Bolshevik Party, 
the civil war was fought and won bjr the 
peasants, and the peasants fought to defend 
the land that revolution had given them. 
They were fighting against the Tzarist 
generals, whose victory would mean the 
return of the landlords. Therefore, the 
battles fought on the front, where the fate of 
the revolution was decided, were battles 
between the revolutionary peasantry and 
feudalism. 

The Soviet State established on the basis 
of such a class relation in the revolutionary 
struggle could not be proletarian dictatorship. 
It was established by a revolutionary alliance 
of the workers and peasants, and therefore 
could not be the dictatorship of one class. 
The leadership of the Communist Paily was 
not the dictatorship of the proletariat. The 
party was leading two classes in the revolu- 
tionary struggle. Through it, the working 
class acted as the driving force of the 
3 



34 


THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 


bourgeois democratic revolution. But the 
class, primarily involved in this revolution 
was the peasantry, after the bourgeoisie had 
declined to play their revolutionary role. 
This being the relation of classes underlying 
the revolutionary alliance, the Soviet State, 
while retaining formally the title of prole- 
tarian dictatorship, virtually represented the 
establishment of a new type of democracy in 
which political power is actually exercised by 
the great majority of the population. 


IV 

Just as the breakdown of the established 
State and the consequent disorganisation of 
all its branches enabled the Bolshevik Party 
to capture power, just so, a similarly favour- 
able combination of external factors made it 
possible for them to retain it. The news of 
events in Russia terrified the allied powers. 
They had welcomed the downfall of Tzarism, 
hoping that the new bourgeois Government 
would be able to conduct the war more 
efficiently. But when the revolution swept 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 35 

away also the Bourgeois Governments, hope 
was replaced by fear and anxiety. 

After the Treaty of Brest-Litowsk, the 
Soviet Government was regarded as an enemy 
of the allied powers, and to engineer its over- 
throw became a part of the plan “for making 
the world safe for democracy”. But the pro- 
blem was how to do that. The Russian 
counter-revolutionaries were unable to accom- 
plish the task. They require external aid 
which, under the given international circum- 
stances, could not be made available to them. 
All the resources of the allied powers had to 
be concentrated on the Western front to check 
the last desperate German offensive which was 
undertaken with troops released by the sus- 
pension of large-scale operations in the Bast. 
The only external force which could come 
immediately and effectively to the aid of the 
Russian counter-revolutionaries was German 
Imperialism. But the menace of German in- 
tervention was partially checked by the saga- 
city of Lenin who had the Treaty of Brest- 
Litowsk concluded in the face of the opposi- 
tion of manj’’ other Bolshevik leaders. 



36 


THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 


That brilliant strategic move served three 
far-reaching revolutionary purposes. In the 
first place, the general demand of the Russian 
peasantry for peace was fulfilled. The new 
Government thereby won the confidence of 
the peasant masses which, since then, became 
the bulwark of the revolution. Released from 
the military service in the front, hundreds of 
thousands of trained soldiers were scattered 
throughout the country, to bear arms for the 
defence of the revolution. In the second 
place, its expansionist ambition at least 
partially satisfied by territorial concessions 
made in the treaty, German Imperialism 
relaxed its offensive in the East, thus giving 
the new Government in Russia the breathing 
space for entrenching itself. The third pur- 
pose served was to keep the allied powers busy 
with checking the German offensive on the 
West and thus to make it impossible for them 
to intervene actively in Russian affairs in 
favour of the counter-revolution. The cumu- 
lative result was that, until the middle of 
1919, the Soviet Government did not have to 
face any other resistance than that of the 
native forces of counter-revolution which 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 37 


were disorganised and demoralised. The 
farther extremities of the defunct empire re- 
mained under the control of counter-revolu- 
tionary armies helped with supplies from 
abroad and reinforced by foreign expedi- 
tionary forces. But the revolutionary Gov- 
ernment had time enough to entrench itself 
in the heart of the country, and thus there 
was created an impregnable base from where 
the forces of revolution could operate advant- 
ageously and beat back the hordes of inter- 
national counter-revolution. 

The Bolsheviks captured power with the 
expectation of revolution breaking out in 
Western Europe, particularly in Germany. 
In the beginning, that expectation appeared 
to be on the point of being fulfilled. The 
next year saw the downfall of the German 
monarchy. The Austrian Empire disinte- 
grated in consequence of severe militaiy 
defeats. There was a revolution in Hungary. 
But in none of these countries, the situation 
was quite favourable for the triumph of the 
revolution. In German}’-, the revolution 
failed to go beyond the establishment of a par- 
liamentary democratic State. Upon the down- 



38 


THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 


fall of tlie monarchy, the bourgeoisie with 
the aid of the army could take possession of 
the State machinery and prevent its complete 
breakdown as in Russia. The Treaty of 
Brest-Litowsk had given time to the revolu- 
tionary Soviet Government to organise and 
entrench itself for beating down counter- 
revolutionary resistance. In Germany, the 
termination of war meant an accession of 
strength for counter-revolution, which was 
reinforced by the army released from military 
service at the fronts. 

As a matter of fact, the Treaty of Brest- 
Litowsk, which was so very helpful for the 
triumph of revolution in Russia, proved to be 
harmful for the revolution in Germany. But 
that was only a secondary and contributory 
cause. The main cause for the defeat of the 
revolution in Germany was the existence of 
a powerful bourgeoisie, which, thanks to the 
co-operation of the Social-Democratic Party, 
and the conservativeness of a fairly well-to-do 
class of peasant proprietors, could reorganise 
the partially dislocated State machinery and 
set going ruthlessly against the revolution. 
In other words, the main cause for the defeat 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 39 

of tlie revolution was the fact that the 
peasantry was not involved in a subversive 
movement and the great bulk of the working 
class was not prepared to go beyond the esta- 
blishment of a parliamentary democratic State. 
The Social-Democratic Party could not have 
betrayed the revolution if the majority of the 
organised workers following its leadership 
were determined to go ahead. They rejected 
proletarian dictatorship in favour of parlia- 
mentary democracy. That is a lesson of 
history which revolutionaries should not 
forget. 

Objective conditions for the establish- 
ment of the proletarian dictatorship as visua- 
lised by Marx as a contingency of the transi- 
tion period existed in Germany more acutely 
than in any other country. Nor can we attri- 
bute the failure to the absence of a revolu- 
tionary party of the working class. The left 
wing of the Social-Democratic Part}’ - , which 
during the revolutionary crisis operated as 
the Spartakists, was no less revolutionary 
than the Russian Bolsheviks. There was no 
Lenin in Germany ; but Marxists do not 
believe that history is made by great men. 



40 


THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 


Then, who knows that Rosa Luxemburg 
would have not played the role if the stage 
was set in Germany as it was in Russia? 

In Hungary the revolution collapsed not 
only because of the absence of a competent 
leadership. That defect was undoubtedly 
there. But the real cause of the defeat of the 
Hungarian revolution was foreign military 
intervention. The other cause was the hosti- 
lity of the peasantry. In Bavaria also, the 
revolution was killed by the peasantry. And 
the French army of occupation in the Pala- 
tinate was the standing menace. If necessary, 
it would have marched in to overthrow the 
revolutionary Government just as the Ruma- 
nian army did in the case of Hungary. 

Thus owing to the absence of the favour- 
able internal and external conditions, which 
enabled the Bolsheviks to capture and retain 
power in Russia, their expectation of the re- 
volution breaking out successfully in other 
countries was not fulfilled. In that deplor- 
able international situation, the Russian 
Soviet Government, naturally, appeared as 
the vanguard of the international revolu- 
tionary movement. Nevertheless, its social 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 41 

character and revolutionary functions, as far 
as Russia itself was concerned, had to be ad- 
justed to the conditions of the country. In 
spite of the fact that it succeeded under the 
leadership of the working class party, the 
Russian Revolution is not to be regarded 
strictly as the first fact of the drama of pro- 
letarian world revolution. Nor was the 
Russian proletariat, when it captured power, 
qualified to be the leader of the proletarian 
world revolution. Lenin himself knew it and 
did not make a secret of it. He always said 
that, as soon as the revolution would be 
successful in a West-European country, 
Russia would recede to the background. The 
delay of the proletarian revolution in countries 
where it should have taken place earlier could 
not change the social character of the Russian 
Revolution. On the other hand, it is precisely 
owing to the failure of the proletariat to cap- 
ture power in more advanced industrial 
countries, that the Russian Revolution has 
opened up a new perspective of the establish- 
ment of Socialism, not expressly indicated by 
Marx. 



42 


THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 


Tlie new perspective opened np already 
in 1920, when the New Economic Policy was 
introduced. It meant surrender of the dicta- 
torship of the proletariat, while the leadership 
of the working class party remained. As a 
matter of fact, the virtual surrender of the 
dictatorship enabled the working class party 
to establish its leadership over the peasant 
masses without whose support the revolution 
could not be successful. The New Economic 
Policy was to sacrifice the immediate interests 
of the proletariat, so that substantial conces- 
sions could be made to the peasantry as well 
as to the petty traders. The New Economic 
Policy implied that the Socialist mode of pro- 
duction could not be introduced before the 
country had been industrialised on a large 
scale, for which purpose the capitalist mode 
of production had to be retained. 

It was no retreat. That was the only line 
of advance under the given conditions of the 
country. We can profitably remember 
Lenin’s memorable speech^ introducing the 
new polic 3 ^ in the All-Russian Congress of 
Soviets. Addressing those who were afraid 
that the dictatorship of the proletariat would 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 43 

be weakened the new policj^, be said : 
“We want dictatorship of the proletariat. 
But where is the proletariat? Ours is an in- 
dustrially backward country. The proletariat 
was always very small numerically. Most of 
it have been killed, either in the war or in 
the revolution. And in the latter case, the 
most advanced elements have been the victims. 
So, if we want to strengthen the dictatorship 
of the proletariat, let us begin by creaing the 
proletariat. And for that purpose we shall 
have to adopt any policy that will hasten the 
industrialisation of our country. The policy 
advocated by me will serve that purpose.” 
This is not a verbatim quotation. But that 
is the substance and the spirit of the memor- 
able speech. 

That turning point in the development of 
the Russian Revolution was reached not only 
under the pressure of internal conditions, but 
also in consequence of the international situa- 
tion. Given the conditions of the country, 
the Russian Revolution could not by itself 
develop as a pure proletarian revolution. 
When Lenin said that upon the capture of 
power by the proletariat in more advanced 



44 


THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 


capitalist countries, the Russian Revolution 
would recede to the background, he meant that 
in that case Russia would become a secondary- 
factor in the world socialist economy. In the 
situation in which she actually found herself, 
it was necessary to strike out an independent 
line of development. She had to create the 
conditions which would enable her to establish 
Socialism without the aid of the victorious 
proletariat in more advanced capitalist 
countries — even when Socialism was not 
established in those countries. The object of 
the New Economic policy was to create those 
conditions. The expectation of the proletariat 
capturing power in the more advanced capi- 
talist countries having receded farther, the 
Russian Revolution must fall back on its own 
resources'. 

But that was not done before the final 
effort was made to help the proletariat in 
West-European countries to capture power 
and thus shift the responsibility of leading the 
Socialist Revolution ion others objectively 
more qualified for the role. Germany was 
the country where objective conditions for the 
success of revolution still appeared to be 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 45 

favourable. Militarjr defeat bad accentuated 
the economic crisis. The conditions of the 
working class were growing worse. Even the 
peasantry were feeling the pinch. But the 
army had not joined the revolution. Why 
not fill up that gap from outside ? In 
Russia, the revolution had already created an 
army, which could be placed at the disposal 
of the German working class. On the other 
hand, the allied powers had begun to inter- 
vene actively in Russia. In the earlier part 
of 1920, the .military position of the Soviet 
Government appeared to be very precarious. 
In that situation, it became necessary to make 
a desperate effort to promote revolution in 
Western Europe. But the defeat of the Red 
Army near Warsaw brought that initial 
chapter of the Russian Revolution definitely 
to a close. The perspective of world revolu- 
tion disappeared for the time being. The 
Russian Revolution was left alone to look for 
itself. 

The immediate task was to win the civil 
war. That could not be done b\ r direct 
military operations. The counter-revolu- 
tionary armies, closing in upon the centre of 



46 


THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 


the country from all sides, were very well 
equipped and liberally supplied bjr inter- 
national capitalism. Frontal attack would be 
disastrous. The Red Army was very badly 
equipped. Morale alone cannot win battles. 
Soldiers were not only without boots and coats, 
but many of them had no guns, and all of 
them very little to eat. The only effective 
strategy in that situation, was guerilly opera- 
tion, and for that purpose active support of 
the peasantry was essential. Peace and land 
had won the support of the peasantry. But 
in the meantime, much of it had been alienat- 
ed by “war communism”. The new 
Economic Policy gave the peasants full right 
of ownership of the product of the land they 
cultivated. They were no longer obliged to 
deliver their crop to the common stock. They 
were given the right to sell their produce in 
the open market and thus derive greater 
benefit from increased produce. The new 
policy regained the confidence of the peasantry 
and consequently contributed to the organisa- 
tion of effective resistance to foreign military 
intervention. Once again the peasantry 
proved to be the decisive factor. It was noth 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 47 

their aid that the proletariat had captured 
power; and it was again the peasantry which 
won the civil war. 


-V 

Dictated by the disappearance of the 
perspective of immediate revolution in the 
industrially advanced countries of Europe, 
the New Economic policy of the Soviet Gov- 
ernment provoked differences of opinion inside 
the ranks of the Communist Party about the 
immediate tasks of the revolution and the 
perspective of its development. Those who 
had believed that the victory of the revolu- 
tion under the leadership of a working class 
part} 1 - would mean the establishment of the 
dictatorship of the proletariat and the direct 
beginning of the construction of Socialism, 
regarded the New polic}' as a deviation from 
the programme of the party. Tliej' opposed 
the polkw of making concessions to the petit- 
bourgeoisie (rural as well as urban), and pro- 
spective compromise with the capitalist mode 
of production. Lenin’s answer to them was 



48 


THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 


the following j “Whoever expects a 'pure’ 
social revolution will never live to see it. 
Such a person pays lip service to revolution 
without understanding what revolution is.” 
Lenin, obviously, meant a pure socialist revo- 
lution. In no revolution, the parties involved 
are arrayed strictly according to an immut- 
able scheme of class distinction. In indus- 
trially backward countries particularly, the 
line of differentiation is bound to be zigzag 
and shifting. 

In his famous book on “Left Wing Com- 
munism”, which he condemned as an 
“infantile sickness”, Lenin indicated the per- 
spective of the revolutionary development in 
Russia as well as abroad. He wrote : “We 
in Russia have been convinced by long and 
bloody experience of the truth that revolu- 
tionary tactics cannot be built up on revolu- 
tionary words alone. Tactics must be based 
on a sober and strictly objective estimation 
of all the class forces in a given State (in 
neighbouring States and in all States, that 
is, on a world scale) as well as on an evalua- 
tion of the experience of revolutionary move- 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 49 

ments.” Lenin was not deviating from 
Marxism in the least. He not onty demon- 
strated extraordinary realism but therebj’’, 
won the distinction of the greatest revolu- 
tionary leader of our time. He did that 
because of his clear understanding of the 
Marxian analysis of class relations in a revo- 
lutionary crisis, which alone enables one to 
follow a realty Marxian revolutionary tactics. 

The first programme of proletarian revo- 
lution had been adopted bj^ the German Social- 
Democratic Party. According to that pro- 
gramme of Gotha, “the liberation of labour 
must be the work of the working class, 
opposed to which all other classes form merely 
a homogeneous reactionary mass.” Criticis- 
ing this mechanical view of class relations, 
Marx wrote that it was a mistake to regard 
the middle classes artisans, small indus- 
trialists, peasants etc. — “as a homogeneous 
reactionar3 r mass.” Lenin saw that in the 
given situation in Russia, it was indispensable 
for the working class to secure the co-opera- 
tion of the non -proletarian masses in order 
to secure the victory of the revolution. And 
what he proposed was not an opportunist 
4 



50 


THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 


alliance. The new policy was based on the 
recognition that, under the given situation, 
the urban as well as rural middle classes were 
an integral part of the social basis of the revo- 
lution, Therefore, he ridiculed the “left- 
wingers” for their insistence on ‘pure’ social 
revolution. 

The Russian Revolution was not a pure 
proletarian revolution. The State established 
by it, even in the beginning, was not the 
dictatorship of the proletariat in the strictest 
sense of the term. After the introduction of 
the New Economic Policy, its social founda- 
tion was broadened progressively. The 
social foundation of the State was a revolu- 
tionary alliance of the workers and the petit- 
bourgeoisie against the feudal aristocracy and 
by capitalists. One of the fundamental 
lessons of the Russian Revolution is that the 
establishment of proletarian dictatorship is 
not an indispensable condition for the con- 
struction of Socialism. 

Lenin carried the party with him. But 
he died before the entire party had been fully 
convinced of the correctness of his strategy. 
Trotzky appeared as the leader of the dissen- 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 51 


ters. As a matter of fact, even when Lenin 
was alive, Trotzky had remained sceptical 
about the new line. But Lenin’s leadership 
was supreme. Trotzky’s theory of perma- 
nent revolution does not permit the realistic 
view of class relations formulated by Marx 
already in 1875. This theory, advocated b}'- 
Trotzky even before the Russian Revolution, 
in opposition to Lenin and the Bolsheviks, 
regards the peasantry as the reserve force of 
counter-revolution. Of course, Trotzky also 
would differentiate the semi-proletarian land- 
less peasantry from the upper strata of their 
class. But that is a mechanical approach to 
the problem. It is a wrong approach as well. 
The peasantry is regarded as the enemy. It 
is to be destroyed, only b} 7- instalments. This 
apparently revolutionary theory becomes ex- 
trcmely dangerous for the revolution in a 
country where the revolution, even under the 
leadership of the proletariat, cannot under- 
take socialist construction without the co- 
operation of the peasantry. 

The fundamental purpose of the New 
Economic Polic}^ was to industrialise the 
country so that, on the one hand, the working 



52 


THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 


class could grow numerically and, on the 
other hand, pre-conditions for the establish- 
ment of Socialism would be created. The 
capital necessary for the purpose could be had 
only from the surplus produce of the premier 
industry which was agriculture. Russia was 
not yet in a position to manufacture machi- 
nery required for the programme of rapid 
industrialisation. It had to be imported. 
The problem was of payment. International 
trade bills are seldom paid in cash. In those 
days, the Soviet Government was not at all 
in a position to pay its bills in cash. The 
urgentfy needed means of production could 
be imported from abroad only by stimulating 
exports ; and in those days, Russia could 
export only the produce of agriculture and 
allied industries. So, a relentless, though 
strategic, warfare against the peasantry, 
according to the theory of permanent revolu- 
tion, was incompatible with the purpose of 
creating conditions for the establishment of 
Socialism in Russia. 

The poor and landless peasantry consti- 
tuted the majority of the class. But they con- 
trolled only a small fraction of agricultural 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 53 


produce. Import could be stimulated onfy by 
persuading the upper strata of the peasantry 
to increase their production. And that could 
be done only b} r conceding to them the right 
of ownership of the produce of the land held 
by them. In other words, private trade as 
regards the produce of the primary industry 
of the country had to be allowed so that the 
revolutionary State could be socialty reinforced 
and modern industries could be quickly built 
under its control as an integral part of socialist 
construction. 

The economic concessions made to the 
peasantiy as a whole, not for making an 
opportunist alliance, but as a token of the 
recognition of their revolutionary significance 
in the given situation, inevitably had the poli- 
tical counter-part. Larger and larger numbers 
of peasants were enfranchised. The kulaks, 
that is the rich peasants, still remained 
formally deprived of the franchise, but 
economic freedom enabled them to exercise 
considerable influence over the local Soviets. 
While the State kept strict vigilance over 
their activities and all pronounced counter- 
revolutionary tendencies were suppressed, the 



54 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 

general policy was to make the rich peasants, 
occupying the strategic sector of the agricul- 
tural industry, feel that they were not molest- 
ed under the new regime. The influence of 
the Bolshevik Party was extended to the 
villages by admitting an increasing number 
of peasants into its fold which theoretically 
should be the monopoly of the proletariat. 
This process went so far as to drive some old 
Bolshevik leaders into the opposition and 
make common cause with Trotzky whom they 
had combated previously. 

The defeat of Trotzky did not put an 
end to the conflict of opinion inside the 
Bolshevik Party. After Trotzky, Zinoviev 
and Kamenev appeared as the leaders of a new 
opposition against <f the transformation of the 
Bolshevik Party into a peasants party”. 
The new opposition was also bound to be 
defeated, because it disapproved of the logical 
consequences of the New Economic Policy 
which had been accepted by the party as a 
whole. If the party was really being trans- 
formed into a peasants party, the process 
simply reflected the necessary shifting of class 
relations in the course of the development of 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 55 


the revolution. Therefore, the process could 
not be checked, unless the New Economic 
Policy was discarded. And that would mean 
disruption of the revolutionary alliance of 
classes which constituted the social founda- 
tion of the Soviet State. 

The world has been puzzled by the fact 
that, in course of time, one old Bolshevik 
leader after another came out in opposition to 
the policy of the party ever since Stalin 
succeeded Lenin as its leader. The elimina- 
tion of the “old guard” from the leadership 
of the party has been ascribed to Stalin’s love 
for power and bureaucratic control of the party 
machinery. The real reason for these facts, 
however, is to be sought in the exigencies of 
the revolution. The opposition of old leaders 
was due to their failure to understand the 
nature of the revolution. They expected “a 
pure social revolution”, and therefore were 
doomed never to see it, as Lenin had pre- 
dicted. Blind loyalty to an ideal made them 
unable to find the path that alone led to the 
ideal. Under the given conditions of the 
country, the proletariat alone could not under- 
take the task of constructing Socialism. The 



56 


THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 


effort to establish a pure dictatorship of the 
proletariat was bound to fail. Lenin had 
written that “Socialism cannot be victorious 
unless it introduces complete democrac }^ 5 
(“Socialist Revolution and the Right of Self- 
Determination”). In those days, the task of 
the revolution was to create pre-conditions for 
socialist construction. Producing classes 
other than the proletariat were interested in 
the accomplishment of that task. Therefore, 
even if hostile to Socialism, under the given 
situation, they were revolutionary factors in 
so far as the accomplishment of that task 
was concerned. They had to be given their 
rightful place in the political regime and the 
scheme of economic reconstruction. 

The Five Years Plan and the brilliant 
success of its execution have commanded the 
admiration of the world, — even from those 
who are not friendly to the political regime 
in Russia. The accomplishment of the Five 
Years Plan, strictly speaking, only a prepara- 
tion for the establishment of Socialism, can 
nevertheless be regarded as an integral part 
of the process of Socialist construction. But 
th successful introduction of planned economy 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 57 


•was possible onl}' after the country had been 
sufficient!}* industrialised in consequence of 
the execution of the New Economic Policy. 
Prosperity of the peasantry, constituting the 
bulk of the population, was the primary con- 
dition for a quick development of industry and 
a rapid exchange of commodities, resulting 
in the accumulation of capital necessary for 
the production of the means of production. 
The New Economic Policy, stimulating agri- 
cultural production, brought about two very 
salutar}' consequences. First, expansion of 
■export enabled the Soviet Government to re- 
equip the battered industrial plants by im- 
porting new machinery. That increased the 
production of manufactured commodities 
demanded by the peasantry in exchange of 
their produce. Secondly, expansion of agri- 
cultural produce brought down the price of 
food stuff. This enabled State industries to 
carry on with lower wages without causing 
much hardship for the workers. The result 
was larger accumulation of capital which 
quickened the process of industrialisation. 

The years 1925 to 1928 were the period 
of remarkable economic improvement and 



58 


THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 


consequently, of political stability. General 
economic improvement meant increased pro- 
duction of national wealth which constituted 
the foundation of planned economy. Thus, 
the New Economic Policy, while representing 
the recognition of the fact that the Russian 
Revolution was not a pure Socialist Revolu- 
tion, did not, on the other hand, mean be- 
trayal of the interest of the working class or 
rejection of Communism in favour of 
Capitalism. 


VI. 

The years-long controversy over the 
nature of Soviet economy was largely 
academic. The question was not of theory, 
but of actual experience. Owing to peculiar 
national and international conditions, a new 
type of economy developed in the Soviet 
Union, which could not be fitted into any pre- 
conceived theoretical category. It was neither 
capitalist nor socialist. It contained elements 
of Capitalism, while it was a process of 
socialist construction. The question to be 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 59 

answered is not whether Soviet economy was 
capitalist or socialist ; the question is whether 
under the given conditions, the revolution 
could immediately create any form of economy 
than it did create. Those who regarded the 
economic development in the Soviet Union, 
after the Communist Party came under its 
present leadership, as degeneration into Capi- 
talism, supported their point of view with ® 
purety theoretical assertion that Socialism 
could not be built in one country. The argu- 
ment was altogether irrelevant. And the 
attitude of those advancing the argument was 
defeatist. 

The working class in alliance with the 
peasantry captured power in one country. 
The revolution did not spread to other- 
countries. In that situation, Socialism could 
not be established in Russia. What was the 
revolutionary Government to do? What 
should be the economic policy of the party 
of the proletariat? Theory would not help. 
The coat had to be cut according to the clotli 
available. The policy must be determined 
by the regard for the realities of the situa- 
tion. What could be done, was the only 



>60 


THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 


tiling to do. Since Socialism could not be 
established, and the classes in power were not 
interested in Capitalism, a new type of 
•economy was bound to develop. 

The line of social development is not 
theoretically predetermined. Marxism gives 
us a perspective of history, but it does not 
make a rigid scheme for the future. It does 
not exclude unforeseen developments. The 
Russian experience helps us to grasp the true 
relation between theory and practice. 

A dogmatic adherence to the theoretically 
•correct dictum that Socialism cannot be built 
in one country, would compel the Communist 
Party of the Soviet Union to act as no sane 
.group of people could act. It should lay down 
power and go back to emigration where it 
could preserve the pristine purity of its 
theories. Meanwhile counter-revolution would 
triumph in Russia. This is no caricature. It 
would be the logical conclusion of the argu- 
ments advanced by “Marxist” critics of 
Soviet economy like Trotzky and his 
followers. 

Former opponents of Trotzky, like 
.Zinoviev, Kamenev and others, who had 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 61 

rejected tlie theory of permanent revolution, 
also failed to have due regard for the class 
relations which constituted the background, 
and contributed to the triumph, of the 
Russian Revolution. Therefore, they were 
eliminated from the leadership of the party, 
in which the}' had occupied prominent places 
before and after the revolution. The point of 
their argument was that, since Socialism can- 
not be built in one country, the economic 
policj’- of the Soviet Union was a deviation 
towards Capitalism. Granted that the danger 
of the deviation was there, could that be 
avoided if the Communist Party of the Soviet 
Union remained under the leadership of 
Trotzky and Zinoviev, instead of preferring 
that of Stalin ? The opposition, while 
demanding the rejection of the policy, did not 
offer an alternative. 

Another implication of its argument was 
that more attention should be devoted to the 
task of promoting revolution in other countries 
than to the task of the economic reconstruc- 
tion of the Soviet Union. That was simply 
vulgarisation of internationalism, done with 
demagogic purposes. 



62 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 

For one thing, the Communist Inter- 
national was there to look after that task. 
The Communist Party of the Soviet Union 
all along supported the activities of the C. I. 
Therefore, the charge that, under the leader- 
ship of Stalin, the Communist Party of 
Russia paid only lip service to the cause of 
world revolution, is utterly unfounded. 
Revolution cannot be brought about only by 
propaganda and agitation. If revolution in 
other countries depended only on the wish of 
the Communist Party of Russia, it could be 
easily brought about. Because there was no 
reason for the C. P. S. U. not to have that 
wish. On the contrary, revolution in other 
countries would be so very welcome even for 
the “nationalist” purposes of the Soviet 
Union, that it should be only too willing to 
promote it by all means at its disposal. The 
cautious and compromising character of 
Soviet diplomacy has been criticised and even 
condemned as dictated rather by “nationalist” 
interest than by considerations of the inter- 
national proletarian solidarity. It will be 
shown hereafter that this charge is equally 
baseless, being made by those who do not 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 63 


understand that one cannot always do what 
should be done, but only do what can be done 
under the given situation. 

Secondly, there may lx: more than one 
way of promoting the world revolution. Here 
again we cannot proceed strictly according to 
a predetermined plan or theoretical scheme. 
Already in 3921, the chances of a successful 
revolution in the near future in the countries 
of Western Europe disappeared. The 
internal development of the Soviet Union was 
bound to be determined by that. It is idle to 
quarrel with history. And it is worst to 
quarrel with those who lxdieve that Marxists 
can perform the miracle of making history 
to order. With the perspective of an 
immediate revolution in other countries dis- 
appearing, the only sensible and practical 
policy for the Workers’ and Peasants’ Govern- 
ment of the Soviet Union was firstly to create 
the pre-conditions for the eventual establish- 
ment of Socialism and, secondl}', to defend 
its existence, for which purpose it was 
necessary to avoid international complications 
which might involve it prematurely into a 
war with the capitalist world. 



64 


THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 


Now, the pre-conditions for the establish- 
ment of Socialism are created by the capitalist 
mode of production. But the capitalist mode 
of production is not inseparably connected 
with capitalist economy, the main purpose of 
which is to make largest possible profit which 
necessarily means the greatest exploitation of 
the working class. The fundamental feature 
of the capitalist mode of production is that 
capital (which in Marxist language means, 
factories, machines, industrial plants etc.) 
replaces land as the main means of produc- 
tion. It is evident that the introduction of 
such a mode of production does not necessarily 
require the exploitation of the working class. 
bjT- another class. Private ownership of the 
means of production is not a necessary con- 
dition for the introduction of the capitalist 
mode of production. The mode of production 
called ‘capitalist’ (because it was originally 
invented for the purpose of making profit) 
serves the purpose of the exploitation of 
labour only when the means of production 
are privately owned. With the elimination of 
private ownership of the means of production, 
the ‘capitalist’ mode of production can become 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 65 

the foundation of a type of economy which 
creates the pre-conditions for Socialism, in- 
deed, becomes an integral part of Socialist 
construction, while formally retaining certain 
features of Capitalism. 

In the Soviet Union, the private owner- 
ship of the means of production has been 
abolished. Thus, the fundamental condition 
for the establishment of Socialism is there. 
But on the other hand, production itself is 
not yet for use, but mainly for exchange. 
So, in that sense, elements of Capitalism are 
also there. Not only is the process of pro- 
duction conducted accordingly to the so-called 
capitalist mode, (which, in the last analysis, 
is only the application of technology to in- 
dustry), the capitalist method is still in force. 
Surplus value is still produced; and produc- 
tion of surplus value is not possible, unless 
the direct producer is deprived of, or volun- 
tarily foregoes, a part of the value produced 
by him. Rapid accumulation of capital, in 
consequence of larger and larger surplus value 
produced, thanks to the application of the 
most up-to-date technological skill, has 
hitherto been the motive force of Soviet 
5 



66 


THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 


economy. • It derives its formally non-socialist 
character not from tlie adoption of the capi- 
talist mode of production, but from the con- 
tinuance of the capitalist method of produc- 
tion. This, however, is no danger. It does 
not deprive Soviet economy of the other 
character of being an integral part of Socialist 
construction. The distinction between 
"building Socialism” and "building for 
Socialism” is sophistic. It should neither 
be exaggerated nor minimised. By building 
for Socialism, Soviet economy is building 
Socialism. On the other hand, it is not yet 
socialistic altogether. 

The abolition of private property in the 
means of production is a decisive guarantee 
against the formation of new classes. 
Socialism does not propose to reduce mankind 
to one level. Even in Socialist society, 
there will be strata, determined by physical, 
educational and intellectual inequalities. 
Socialism is eqnalitarian only in as much as 
it will create equality of opportunities for all. 
There will be strata. But they will not be 
differentiated bj' rigid lines. There will be 
a constant flux. Having these considerations 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 67 

in mind, we need not be alarmed by “in- 
equalities” in tbe Soviet Union. That is no 
sign for any reaction. Those belonging to 
the highly paid group cannot crystallise into 
a class of neo-capitalists even if they wanted 
to. They have the fullest liberty to enjoy 
personal comforts and achieve cultural 
advance thanks to their handsome income. 
But they are precluded, not by any mechani- 
cal law, but by the very nature of the esta- 
blished system of economy, from any 
economic aggrandisement. There is no in- 
centive for accumulating their income into 
such large wealth as can acquire illegal politi- 
cal power, or become the means of exploiting 
labour. Wealth alone cannot be the instru- 
ment of exploitation. For that purpose, it 
must be converted into capital, and, as a 
means of production, capital cannot be pri- 
vately owned in the Soviet Union. Under 
this situation, the incentive to accumulate 
wealth is bound to disappear. A classless 
society is in the process of formation. In the 
Soviet Union, human nature is changing. A 
country cannot advance that far without 
coming very near to Socialism. The Soviet 



68 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 

Union is advancing towards Socialism. Only 
it is following a path not previously foreseen. 
Hence the controversy and confusion about 
the nature of Soviet economy. 

On the other hand, there is a deplorable 
lack of frankness on the part of some defenders 
and apologists of Soviet economy. Why this 
reluctance to call the spade a spade? Why 
insist on maintaining that you are travelling 
the conventional, theoretically pre-determined 
path while experience has enabled you to 
find a new road? In order to defend the 
wholehogging attitude regarding the socialist 
character of the present Soviet economy, a 
Neo-Marxist doctrine has been invented. It 
distinguishes Communism from Socialism. 
According to these Neo-Marxist theoreticians, 
the present stage of Soviet economy is 
Socialism, which is a period of transition to 
Communism. Marxism knows no distinction 
between Socialism and Communism. If there 
is Socialism in the Soviet Union, then there is 
Communism also. And if there is no Com- 
munism, then Socialism is not yet established, 
d hat is the fact. There is no shame in ad- 
mitting it. Conscious, purposeful, building 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 69 


for Socialism is to build Socialism. That 
process has gone far enough. The transition 
is from an intermediary type of econonty to 
fullfledged Socialism. Anjr other propa- 
Gandist interpretation of the situation will 
onty create confusion. That should be 
avoided. 


VII. 

The foreign policy of the Soviet Union 
was also determined by the disappearance of 
the probability of a successful revolution 
abroad in the immediate future. The pro- 
bability disappeared already in 1920 when the 
final effort to utilise the post-war revolutionary 
crisis failed. But the possibility still re- 
mained, particularly in Germany. 

On the other hand, the nationalist move- 
ments in the non-European subject countries 
were pregnant with great revolutionary 
possibilities. An}’’ serious development in 
those parts of the world might have a con- 
siderable repercussion on the march of events 
in Europe. But before long, from that direc- 
tion also no decisive development could be 



70 


THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 


expected. The nationalist movement in 
Turkey, Persia and Afghanistan, having 
attained certain measure of success with the 
help of the Workers’ and Peasants’ Govern- 
ment of Russia, stopped short of the final 
struggle against Imperialism and even pre- 
ferred some agreement with it to the revolu- 
tionary alliance with the Soviet Union. In 
India, the movement revealed signs of im- 
maturity which precluded such serious revo- 
lutionary developments as might menace 
Imperialism. Only in China, the perspective 
was brighter. Therefore, everything possible 
was done there to help the Chinese people 
make the long overdue democratic revolution 
which, if successful, would have had an inter- 
national repercussion. But there also the 
revolution suffered an unexpected defeat just 
when it appeared to be very near to success. 

The early diplomacy of the Soviet State 
did not leave out of account the revolutionary 
possibilities in Germany. The acute crisis of 
the post-war years had passed. But conditions 
in Germany were still far from being nor- 
malised. The Versailles Treaty was there to 
ruin Germany economically and thus drive 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 71 

her towards the revolution as the only way out 
of the intolerable situation. In those days, 
the main object of Soviet diplomacy was to 
encourage Germany and other defeated 
countries to form an alliance with the 
Workers’ and Peasants’ Republic against the 
victorious Entente Powers planning to stabilise 
the system of imperialist domination of the 
world through the instrumentality of the' 
League of Nations. The first step towards 
the attainment of that object was the Treaty 
of Rapallo. In consequence of that treaty, 
the economic blockade of the Workers’ and 
Peasants’ Republic was broken. Economic 
reconstruction of the Soviet Union could be 
undertaken with machinery purchased in 
Germany. Moreover, German expert advice 
was also secured for the creation of a modern 
army which was necessary for the defence 
of the Soviet Union. The prospect of making 
profit out of the Russian trade kept the 
German bourgeoisie away from the temptation 
of seeking financial aid from the ex-enemy 
countries for rehabilitating industries. In 
short, Soviet diplomacy, while sincerely 
supporting the German people against 



72 


• THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 


Entente-Imperialism, prevented sncli a foreign 
policy on tlie part of the German Government 
as would have led to the liquidation of the 
revolutionary crisis in Germany. In other 
words, the object of the Soviet diplomacy was 
to exploit the revolutionary possibilities of the 
disturbed conditions of Germany in the years 
after the war. 

In 1923, the situation in Germany 
became acute once again, opening up the per- 
spective of a possible revolutionary develop- 
ment. But unfortunately, the working class 
was again defeated. Moreover, the German 
ruling classes realised that a rapprochement 
with the ex-enemies was the only guarantee 
against the danger of revolution at home. 
The allied powers met them more than half- 
way, political^ as well as financially. 
American capital streamed in to help the 
German bourgeoisie to overcome the financial 
chaos created b}^ the efforts to enforce the 
Treaty of Versailles by military intervention. 
British diplomacy, led bjr Austen Chamber- 
lain, welcomed German}^ into the League of 
Nations and persuaded her to abandon the 
“Russian orientation.” In order to combat 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 73 

\ 

the danger of revolution which, breaking out 
in the unsettled conditions of Germany, might 
■easily spread to other countries, the Treaty 
•of Versailles was revised. The Locarno Pact 
heralded the formation of a formidable anti- 
Soviet alliance. Considerable concessions 
were made to Germany for winning her over 
for the holy alliance of the twentieth century. 

A new task was set to Soviet diplomacy. 
It was to prevent the formation of that 
alliance, which would eventually mean mili- 
tary attack upon the Workers’ and Peasants’ 
Republic. The method adopted by the Soviet 
diplomacy was to promote rivalry between the 
parties concerned in the would-be alliance. 
The world economic crisis made the task com- 
paratively easy. The Soviet Government 
made a trade-agreement with England. 
Germany was threatened with the loss of the 
profitable Russian market. Imperialist rival- 
ries, the scramble for foreign markets, thus 
provoked, militated against the projected anti- 
Soviet alliance. The offer of huge conces- 
sions for exploiting the rich natural resources 
of the Soviet Union induced powerful financial 
groups in the imperialist countries to oppose 



74 


THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 


the plan of the anti-Soviet alliance. But 
nothing more abiding than a mere breathing 
space was gained. 

Finally, it was realised that the policy 
of the Soviet Government, internal as well as 
foreign, could no longer be framed on the 
basis of the expectation of revolution abroad. 
The expectation, still remained. The revolu- 
tion was bound to take place sooner or later 
in other countries. But it could no longer 
be expected to take place in the near future.. 
Meanwhile, the Soviet Union must carry on. 

It had to face two problems. One, that 
of internal reconstruction, the other of defence 
against foreign enemies. The solution of the 
former problem was necessarily complicated 
by the latter. Defence of the first Workers* 
and Peasant’s Government undoubtedly was 
the primary task. The solution of the pro- 
blem of internal reconstruction depended on 
the very existence of the Soviet Republic. 
And the struggle for existence necessitated 
the creation of a strong army, so strong as 
could defeat the forces of international re- 
action single-handed. Meanwhile, every 
effort should be made to avoid any premature 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 75 

military conflict of first magnitude. The 
Workers’ and Peasants’ Republic should not 
allow itself to be provoked into a war before 
it was fully’' prepared for it. 

That exigency of the situation deter- 
mined Soviet diplomac}'. The “nationalism” 
of the Soviet Government was nothing more 
damaging and discreditable than the concern 
to steer clear of the dangerous waters of pre- 
mature military conflicts. Neither Marxism 
nor loyalty to the cause of proletarian revolu- 
tion can have patience for the doctrinaire 
internationalism which finds fault with the 
“nationalist” preoccupations of Soviet diplo- 
macy. Following any other course, the Soviet 
Government could not promote the cause of' 
world revolution simply because the forces 
making for it were defeated in other countries. 
What it could possibly do was to get involved 
in a premature conflict which might mean the 
end of the first Workers’ and Peasants’ Re- 
public. The Soviet Government did not give 
up internationalism. It simply refused to be 
romantic. The existence of the Workers’ and 
Peasants’ Republic has not onfy laid down 
the foundation of a Socialist Society ; by itself 



76 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 

it is the greatest incentive for the world revo- 
lution, eventually it might be the decisive 
force to bring that about. 

The necessity of creating a powerful 
modern mechanised army very largely deter- 
mined the process of industrial development 
in the Soviet Union. Much of the undeniable 
■economic hardships, so much advertised by 
the enemies of Socialism as evidence for the 
failure of the Russian experiment, resulted 
from that necessity. Bmphasis had to be laid 
on the production of the means of production 
even for the purpose of laying down the 
foundation of Socialist economy. For the 
exigencies of defence, that had to be done all 
the more. The development of heavy in- 
dustries is an indispensable condition for the 
■creation and efficient operation of a modern 
mechanised army. Consequently, in the first 
Five Years Plan, so much place was given 
to the production of the means of production 
that only a small portion of the recurringly 
accumulated capital could be devoted for the 
production of the articles of consumption. 
Consequent^, hardships were caused not only 
by scarcity of necessary commodities; the 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 77 


urban population, including tbe industrial 
workers, bad to live on rationed food because 
tbe peasants would not sell tbeir produce 
unless supplied with manufactured articles. 
That was a period of heroism unparalleled 
in history. Only planned economy could per- 
form tbe miracle of laying a solid foundation 
for greater industrial development and inci- 
dentally of creating tbe most powerful and 
best equipped army in tbe world within tbe 
space of five years. Was tbe process of tbe 
erection of that magnificent monument of re- 
volutionary energy and human creativeness to 
be disturbed bjr petty considerations of satis- 
fying superficial observers and prejudiced 
critics, who were more concerned with tbeir 
pet pre-occupations than with tbe fundamental 
task of tbe revolution? 

The successful tackling of tbe problems 
of defence and internal reconstruction enabled 
tbe Soviet Union to cope with tbe extremely 
difficult international situation in which it 
found itself upon tbe victory of Fascism in 
Germany. Until then, tbe German Govern- 
ment bad been more or less friendly. Tbe 
alliance visualised in tbe Rapallo Treaty bad 



78 


THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 


indeed not materialised. But, on the other 
hand, the Chamberlain plan of anti-Soviet 
block had also miscarried. Germany simply 
could not do without the Russian market. 
America could give her huge loans ; France 
and England could make her concessions as 
regards the Versailles Treaty. But none of 
them would willingly allow Germany to re- 
gain her place in the world market. The 
rationalisation of industries carried on with 
borrowed American capital increased the 
German need for foreign markets. The only 
available outlet was the Soviet Union, which, 
on its part, was always prepared to buy and 
make the payments regularly. Thus, while 
giving up the “Russian orientation” politi- 
cally, the German Government found it pro- 
fitable to maintain friendly economic relations 
with the Soviet Union. There was a bond 
even between the armies of the two countries. 
Although the German bourgeoisie was eager 
for a closer rapprochement with the French 
because of the interlocking interests in the 
mining and metal industries on the border- 
land of the two countries, the spirit of revenge 
persisted in the military circles ; and the 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 79 

military retained considerable power in the 
•German Republic. So, the plan of a Russo- 
German alliance against France was not 
altogether given up. That constituted the 
bond between the armies of the two countries. 
Even that policy of retaining secret relations 
with the German army was adopted in pur- 
suance of the revolutionary purpose of pre- 
venting complete political stabilisation of 
Europe on the basis of an understanding 
between the two groups of former enemies. 
'The purpose was revolutionary from two 
points of view. On the one hand, remaining 
in an unstable political condition Europe 
•could be thrown into an acute revolutionary 
crisis by any accidental event; on the other 
kand, mutual disagreement would prevent the 
imperialist powers from carrying out the plan 
of a joint attack upon the Soviet Union. 

/ On Hitler’s advent to power, Germany 
became openly hostile to the Soviet Union. 
The previous diplomatic relations could no 
longer be maintained. The new German 
Government was not only too eager to enter 
into an anti-Soviet alliance, but aspired to 
assume its leadership. It approached England 



80 


THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 


with the proposal for an aggressive war 
against the ‘‘danger of Bolshevism.” Eng- 
land had always been mortally afraid of that 
danger. But in her traditional way, she had 
been looking for somebody who would draw 
for her the chestnuts out of the fire. Hitler 
offered her the services of Germany. The 
problem of defence became very acute for the 
Soviet Union. It had acquired considerable 
strength, but was not yet in the position to 
meet the world single-handed at both the 
extremities of its vast territories. Japan 
would readily join Germany and England. 
Once again, the skill of revolutionary diplo- 
macy was put to a severe test. Provoked from 
all sides, the Soviet Government had to act 
with patience, foresight, self-confidence and 
discretion. Soviet diplomacy had to accom- 
plish two extremely difficult tasks : To avoid 
military conflicts without appearing to be 
weak or afraid, and to secure the alliance of 
some first-rate capitalist power. 

It was obvious where the new ally was 
to be sought. Although the war-mongering 
of Fascist Germany was primarily directed 
against the Soviet Union, France, naturally. 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 81 

was very much perturbed by the developments 
across the Rhine. She had reason not to rely 
upon the ceremonious entente cordiale with 
England. On the other hand, the relations 
with Italy were very strained. The Franco- 
Soviet alliance was the obvious counter-move 
against the victory of Fascism in Germany. 
The skill of Soviet diplomacy in bringing 
about that alliance, cutting across the old 
generally favoured plan of an anti-Soviet 
block, was not fully appreciated even by all 
the leaders of the international revolutionary 
working class movement. As a matter of fact, 
not a few of them found fault with that astute 
move, criticising it as rank opportunism 
dictated by the growing “nationalist” 
tendency on the part of the present leaders of 
the Russian Revolution. If. concern for the 
existence of the Soviet Union is nationalism 
that is certainly not a matter of shame. 

In the new alliance, the Workers’ and 
Peasants’ Republic found a temporary 
guarantee against the danger of an attack 
from Germany. On the other hand, the cause 
of international revolution was furthered by 
creating a powerful check against the spread 

6 



82 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 

of the Fascist counter-revolution. But for 
the new alliance, one or other of the follow- 
ing developments would have most probably 
taken place. Either the Soviet Union would 
have been involved in a war on two fronts, 
with practically all the imperialist powers 
arrayed against it ; or France would have been 
overrun by Fascism. Either eventuality 
would be disastrous for the cause of the inter- 
national proletariat. A military defeat of the 
Soviet Government would put off the Socialist 
World Revolution for a time dreadful to con- 
template; on the other hand, if France went 
Fascist, the triumph of counter-revolution in 
Europe would be complete. Both these dis- 
astrous eventualities were headed off by the 
skill of Soviet diplomacy, which has come in 
for so much bitter criticism even from 
Socialists and Communists. 

After the victory of Fascism in' Germany, 
only romanticists could still have any illusion 
about serious revolutionary developments in 
Europe of international consequence. Counter- 
revolution was triumphant. Any revolu- 
tionary offensive was altogether out of the 
question. The task of the moment was to 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 83 

resist the triumphant march of counter- 
revolution; and since the working class even 
in German}' - could not do that alone, it was 
necessary to make alliances on the national 
scale as it had been done so profitably on the 
international scale. But the necessary alliance 
could not be made on terms of the working 
class. That sort of alliance could not last 
long, even if other classes could be duped into 
it. In order to be abiding, the alliance must 
be made as a historical necessity serving the 
common purpose. 

The defence of democracy menaced by 
Fascism could be the only platform for such a 
defensive alliance. The historical mission of 
the proletariat is to establish a form of 
democracy broader and more genuine than 
that obtaining in the parliamentary State. 
But when that earlier achievement of human 
progress is in the danger of being destroyed 
by counter-revolution, then the defence of 
parliamentary democracy becomes the para- 
mount task of the proletariat. Socialism and 
workers’ democracy are to be built on the 
foundation of industrial progress and relative 
political freedom laid in consequence of the 



84 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 

victory of tlie bourgeois revolution. If counter- 
revolution is allowed to destroy tliat founda- 
tion, the perspective before the world will be 
rather of a relapse into mediaeval barbarism 
than of Socialism and greater human freedom. 
Therefore, the defensive fight against 
triumphant counter-revolution is the task of 
the moment. Everything done for that pur- 
pose is a revolutionary act, and therefore fully 
justified. 


VIII. 

The revolution begun in 1917 has not 
developed rapidly enough to satisfy the ex- 
pectations of the easily discouraged enthu- 
siast. Even, to-day, the perspective of deve- 
lopment may appear less bright than ever. 
But that, by no means, proves that the period 
of revolution is closed. The forces of the 
revolution, begun twenty years ago, have 
suffered defeats in many a country, but in 
Russia have consolidated themselves not only 
in the form of unprecedented human achieve- 
ments, but also as a formidable power 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 85 


guaranteeing tlie success of the revolution 
throughout the world. 

More than fifty years lapsed between the 
French Revolution and the establishment of 
Democracy in the other countries of Europe. 
The intervening period was marked by ex- 
change of victories between revolution and 
counter-revolution. We are having the same 
experience in the present period of proletarian 
revolution. The delay in the development of 
revolution in other European countries had 
its repercussion on the situation in France. 
At its home, the revolution could not retain 
its original drastic character. Jacobinism was 
liquidated, to be followed by Napoleonism, 
which, representing a reaction in France, 
operated as a powerful revolutionary factor 
for the rest of Europe. 

History never repeats itself exactly. In 
our time, the proletarian revolution has not 
suffered any setback comparable to that 
suffered by the bourgeois revolution in France. 
The proletarian revolution may still have its 
period of Napoleonism. But that will be of 
entirely a different nature. Napoleon did not 
carry the banner of bourgeois revolution con- 



86 


THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 


sciously. He was simply an instrument, and 
an unwilling instrument at that. Proletarian 
Napoleonism, should it ever become a histori- 
cal necessity, would be a consciously revolu- 
tionary force. 

Now, let us see if the necessity will ever 
be there. The correct perspective must be 
found in a rigorously realistic analysis of the 
situation. History will not conform itself to 
our desire. Our perspective, therefore, should 
not be coloured by our desire. The very re- 
grettable, but most outstanding fact is that in 
every important European country, the work- 
ing class has suffered such a severe defeat as 
precludes the possibility of any effective offen- 
sive action in the near future. 

In England, the disparity between the 
objective and subjective conditions for revo- 
lution still remains very great. Indeed, the 
still lingering reformist illusions of the 
British working class reflects the immaturity 
of the objective conditions for revolution. 
Super profit made in the colonies and income 
from foreign investments still enable the 
British bourgeoisie to tide over the economic 
crisis at home. Therefore, the perspective in 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 87 

England is rather of demoralisation than of 
revolution. In the past, great Empires met 
that fate. In the case of England, history- 
may repeat itself in that sense. Of course, 
there alwaj^s remains the chance of revolu- 
tion in other countries having decisive reper- 
cussion in England. 

'In France, the proletariat is not yet 
beaten, nor does it lack revolutionary spirit. 
There, both the objective and subjective con- 
ditions for revolution are very mature. But 
any attempt on the part of the French work- 
ing class, under the given conditions of the 
world, is most likely to be defeated by the 
joint forces of international reaction. The re- 
volution has become a really international 
affair. It is no longer international only 
symbolically. Any action on the part of the 
working class of any single country must be 
determined by the revolution of forces on the 
international scale. 

If France were left alone, then there 
would be no obstacle to the revolution becom- 
ing victorious even to-day. But will she be 
left alone? That is the decisive question. 
And nobody with any sense of responsibility, 



88 


THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 


and understanding of tlie existing relation of 
international forces, can answer tlie question 
in tlie affirmative. The Spanish experience 
compels us to give the answer decisively in 
the negative. And it goes without saying 
that the intervention of the foreign forces of 
reaction will be much more prompt and on a 
larger scale in France than it has been in 
Spain. Therefore, before deciding in favour 
of a revolutionary offensive in the only single 
country where that is at all possible to-day, 
we shall have to look for possibly international 
support to counter-balance the international 
aid to counter-revolution. From where can 
that possibly come ? From the Rhine, Hitler 
has almost appeared on the Pyraenees. 
While France is surrounded by the iron ring 
of international Fascism, ready to pounce 
upon her in the case of revolution, the work- 
ing class in Germany as well as in Italy lies 
prostrate after severe defeat and years of 
brutal repression. Intervention by those 
countries could be prevented or even checked 
only by effective revolutionary action on the 
part of the working class there. And to be 
effective, that action must not fall short of 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 89 


threatening the overthrow of the Fascist re- 
gime and the capture of political power. The 
regard for the realities in those countries does 
not permit an}' optimism regarding such 
action. 

There is a tendency to welcome war as 
the opportunity for revolutionary action. 
That is a fatalist tendency which should not 
be allowed to influence the tactics and strategy 
of the revolutionary movement. Since a war 
on a large scale is likely to open the flood 
gates of revolution, it is but natural for the 
capitalist States to try their best for putting 
off that fateful day. Consequently, to pin our 
hopes on the “inevitability” of war is to 
believe that revolution will take place with 
the aid and connivance of its enemies. Then, 
what is the guarantee for the revolution 
succeeding in case of war? As a matter of 
fact, the nature of future wars is indicated 
by the Spanish experience. There will be 
more cases of invasions for supporting native 
reaction against revolution than of one State 
declaring war upon another. In other words, 
to-day the war has become the expression of 
counter-revolution. It is waged exclusively 



90 


THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 


with the purpose of suppressing revolution. 
Consequently, it is a dangerous illusion to pin 
our hopes on war. The days are gone when 
a national war could be converted into a civil 
war. Because, to-day, there are no national 
wars. On the other hand, civil war is being 
waged on an international scale. Any war 
will mean civil war on a gigantic scale — offen- 
sive of the counter-revolution against the 
forces of international revolution. 

Under the given conditions of the world, 
revolutionary offensive in any country must 
depend on the indispensable external help 
only from one source. And that is the Soviet 
Union. The situation is not likely to change 
in the near future. The victory of Fascism 
in Spain will definitely close a period of 
possible revolutionary offensive of any decisive 
importance. That victory, indeed is not yet 
complete. But, on the contrary, there is no 
use hoping against hope. The revolution can 
still win only on one condition : abandonment 
of the treacherous policy of non-intervention, 
so that the Republican Government can re- 
ceive substantial aid from sjonpatliisers 
abroad. Even in that case, it will have to 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 91 


depend mostly on France. England may not 
like tlie Italian conquest of Spain. But slie 
will certainly not give any active kelp to tke 
potential^ revolutionary Government. Tke 
Soviet Union is kandicapped by geograpkical 
distance and tke long route can be easily con- 
trolled by Germany and Italy. 

So, tke success of revolution in Spain is 
ultimately conditional upon a revolution in 
France. Tkere is a powerful Fascist move- 
ment in tkat country, aided and abeted by 
tke ruling classes. Wkile not only tke work- 
ing class but also tke petty-bourgeois demo- 
cratic masses are sympathetic towards tke 
Spanish Republicans, and even tke present 
Government is similarly disposed to some 
extent, tke army cannot be depended upon 
when support to tke Spanish Republicans will 
certainty involve France in a war with tke 
Fascist powers. So, tke attitude of tke army 
becomes tke decisive factor. But to-day, tke 
armies are no longer tke instruments of tke 
respective national States ; they are so many 
units of international counter-revolution. Of 
course, armies still are recruited from tke 
lower strata of tke population. The common 



92 


THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 


soldier still remains a potential ally of tlie 
revolution. But he is no longer the whole 
of the army. The modem mechanised army 
has very largely become immune to the re- 
volutionary susceptibility of the common 
soldier. 

In this situation, proletarian Napo- 
leonism ceases to be a matter of mere specula- 
tion, and appears as a decidedly possible, 
even necessary feature of the perspective of 
revolutionary development. The success of 
revolution is not guaranteed even in the 
country where the native forces are not yet 
beaten and are sufficiently powerful, unless 
external aid is provided for. And that can 
come only from the Soviet Union. 

Now, it will be no easier for the Soviet 
Union to help a revolutionary Government in 
France than it has been in Spain. In either 
case, the decisive aid could be given only at 
the risk of a war in which all the inter- 
national forces of reaction will be allied on 
the side of Germany and Italy. Those who 
accuse the Soviet Union for the failure to 
come to the aid of the revolution in Spain 
more effectively, do not stop to think whether 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 98 

the risk can be taken without seriously pre- 
judicing the cause of revolution, instead of 
promoting it. The risk could be taken either 
on the assumption that the war would coin- 
cide with serious revolutionary upheavals in 
the Fascist countries, or on the certainty on 
the part of the Soviet Union of the power to 
face and vanquish the united forces of inter- 
national counter-revolution. The assumption 
can be made rather by way of speculation 
than on the basis of an unbiased analysis of 
the relation of forces. Until recently, the 
Soviet Union was not prepared to run the 
risk. Even to-day, it cannot be done light- 
heartedly. 

The defeat in a large-scale war might 
not only endanger the very existence of the 
Soviet Union ; it is sure to crush the forces of 
revolution in the victorious Fascist countries. 
This consideration has influenced Soviet 
foreign policy during the last years, and has 
determined the tactics of the Communist 
International. The time has not come to 
change the course hitherto followed. Defeat 
has compelled the working class to be on the 
defensive. It would be irresponsible for the 



94 


THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 


Communist International to lead tlie prole- 
tariat in Spain or France, for example, in any 
all-round offensive action, when the guarantee 
for the success of that venture is not fully 
available. Under the situation, the People’s 
Front policy was adopted as the strategy of 
retreat, and defence against Fascism. It does 
mean betrayal of the proletarian revolution. 
Nor does it imply abandonment of the ideal 
of Socialism. To protect the proletariat from 
the danger of destruction in premature con- 
flicts, is a revolutionary duty. 

While preserving the forces of revolution 
in other countries, the base of revolution must 
be made invincible. That is the primary con- 
sideration. That necessity can be fully 
realised only in the light of the perspective of 
proletarian Napoleonism. 

On repeated occasions, the Soviet Union 
has proved its loyalty to the cause of peace. 
Its Socialist economy is free from the con- 
tradictions which breed expansionist greed 
and lead to aggressive wars. No serious 
bourgeois statesman believes in the “red 
menace”. It is fully believed even by its 
enemies, that the Soviet Union will never go 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 95 

to war, except in self-defence. But the 
exigency of self-preservation requires a fore- 
sighted policy. It is an equally well known 
fact that a number of powerful States are pre- 
paring an offensive war against the Soviet 
Union. The projected war is a part of inter- 
national civil war. Having beaten down the 
forces of revolution in their own countries, 
the Fascist Governments wish to destroy the 
base of proletarian world revolution. So 
threatened, it would be stupid for the Soviet 
Union to wait indefinitely with patience until 
the enemy breaks in. It is a typical case 
where to attack is the best defence. But if 
the Soviet Union ever takes the initiative in 
precipitating a war, it will not be a war for 
the aggrandisement of national interests. It 
will be an episode in international civil war 
which is already raging fiercely. Red Nepo- 
leonism may appear as the signal for offensive 
on the forces of international revolution, when 
they have sufficiently recovered from their 
past defeats. 

Triumphant counter-revolution in a 
number of Kuropean countries must be 
defeated, before the forces of revolution in 



96 


THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 


those countries could reassert themselves effec- 
tively. How that will be done, is the ques- 
tion. It is possible that counter-revolutionary 
States will weaken themselves in a mutual 
military conflict. But that possibility is not 
to be counted upon as the perspective of revo- 
lutionary development. As against that 
possibility, it is to-day almost certain that 
the next war will begin with an attack against 
the Soviet Union either by the joint forces of 
Fascism or by any one of the Fascist States. 
International civil war, so aggravated, will 
end in the overthrow of the counter-revolu- 
tionary States and the consequent success of 
revolution in other European countries, only 
if the Soviet Union will be powerful enough 
to carry the war into the home of the attack- 
ing States. Under the given world conditions, 
and the relation of forces in the national as 
well as international scale, no other perspec- 
tive of a triumphant revolution can appear to 
be more plausible. Therefore, to avoid the 
possible military defeat of the Soviet Union 
in prematurely precipitated military conflict, 
is the fundamental consideration of the 
strategy of the international revolutionary 



A REVIEW AND THE PERSPECTIVE 97 

movement. At the same time, the military- 
power of the Soviet Union must be increased 
at all costs. The army of the Soviet Union 
may still have to appear as the military van- 
guard of the world revolution. 

The unity of purpose on the part of the 
leadership of the Soviet Union as well as of 
the Communist International is of supreme 
importance. Any disturbance of that unity 
is likely to be the cause of weakness. There 
are those who fail to realise the supreme need 
of the moment. Their activities, if un- 
restricted, may become harmful. We are still 
in the midst of the civil war, the severest 
battles of which are yet to be fought. Revo- 
lutionary ruthlessness still remains a 
necessary weapon. It is a disagreeable 
weapon, but cannot yet be discarded without 
endangering the revolution itself. It is from 
this point of view that the recent arrests and 
trials in the Soviet Union are to be visualised. 
The task immediately before the Soviet Union 
is not only to defend itself, but in order to 
defend itself, to come to the aid of the revolu- 
tionary forces in other countries and that will 
mean military operation on a gigantic scale 
7 


98 


THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 


not dreamt, even by the boldest militarist. 
The last and decisive battles of international 
civil war shall have to be fonght on the ground 
of the enemies of the revolution and with their 
own instruments. 



APPENDIX 


THE MOSCOW TRIALS * 

Revolution eats her own children. That is a 
popular saying which acquired great plausibility from 
the tragic experiences of the French Revolution. Is 
the tragic drama being re-enacted in our time? Is 
the Russian Revolution devouring her own children ? 
Progressive forces throughout the world are bound 
to be disturbed by the fact that even when the Revo- 
lution appeared to have accomplished its destructive 
tasks and well advanced on the road of reconstruc- 
tion, such acts should be committed as are necessary 
only when it is still in danger. The French Revolu- 
tion gave birth to Napoleonism because Terror did 
not stop as soon as it had accomplished its unpleasant 
task of exterminating the defenders of the old regime. 
The moment it laid its hand on Danton, it began to 
weaken the forces of democracy and thus help the 
creation of an atmosphere favourable to the rise of 
Napoleon who was to restore monarchy. All the 
leaders of the revolution, great and small, followed 
Danton to the guillotine, accused of being enemies 
of the revolution. A similar process of extermina- 
tion has been going on in Russia ever since the fall 


* This was written in May, 1937. 



100 


THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 


of Trotzky in 1925. In the beginning, the extermi- 
nation was not physical, but political. One after 
another old leaders were removed from positions of 
authority and even expelled from the party. It is 
conceivable that it was a necessary process. Those 
who had played prominent, even decisive parts in 
the periods of preparation and destruction, might 
not all prove equally competent when confronted 
with the problems of re-construction. If they did 
not, they must make room for a new set of leaders. 
The Revolution is greater than individual revolu- 
tionaries however great these may be. It is but 
natural that in different stages of its own develop- 
ment the revolution should throw up new leaders 
to reinforce or even to replace the old cadre. But, 
in the course of time, the character of the process 
changed. Conceivably, necessary political elimina- 
tion went to the extent of physical extermination. 
Was it necessary? The recent trials and conviction 
of a large number of old leaders appear to give an 
affirmative answer to this question. They were 
accused of having conspired against the revolution. 
They pleaded guilty to the charge. The whole 
affair had the appearance of a melodrama. It delight- 
ed the capitalist world which hopefully exclaimed : 
Look, the Revolution is devouring her own children 
once again. Others, who pretend to be neutral be- 
tween the forces of revolution and counter-revolu- 
tion, expressed disgust at what they believed to be 
an unnecessary act of cruelty. Revolutionaries 



APPENDIX 

5 


101 


"inrougtwutlli'e^u^flfl’a're ’puzzled, and are earnestly 
looking for some convincing explanation. 

Dogmatic assertion about the guilt of the accused 
does not carry conviction. Sweeping justification 
begs the question. Uncritical apology is but a token 
of blind faith and intellectual slavery. It is neces- 
sary to probe deep in the conditions which compel 
the commission of acts alleged to have been com- 
mitted by the accused. 

The necessity for these trials is found in the 
fact that opposition elements inside the Communist 
Party were becoming instrumental for the overthrow 
of the established order. This fact is established 
not only by the confessions of the accused themselves. 
These could be discredited as made under pressure, 
though the spontaneity, comprehensiveness and 
vigour of those statements leave little room for such 
doubt. However, the fact is established by other 
evidence which is entirely voluntary. In his latest 
book " The Betrayed Revolution ” — Trotzky openly 
advocates violent overthrow of the present Russian 
State which he considers to be an instrument of 
counter-revolution. It is but natural for those who 
share this view to do whatever is possible under the 
given conditions for the defence of their cherished 
ideal. They did. Thus the confession of Radek 
and others is corroborated by the fact of their opinion 
about the nature of the present Soviet Government. 
If they believed that it did not incorporate the ideal 
for which they had worked throughout theirplifS^ 



102 


THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 


they should be morally justified in their efforts for 
destroying it. Why did they then take up the peni- 
tent attitude during the trial? The answer to this 
most intriguing question is found in a critical ana- 
lysis of the background on which the trial took 
place. 

When former leaders of the party believed that 
the party was going in the wrong way, their anxiety 
naturally was to regain their influence which, in 
their opinion, could alone save the revolution. But 
open opposition to the new leadership led imme- 
diately to expulsion from the party. It was not 
possible to influence the party from outside. The 
way back to the party was found in hypocrisy. 
Having gained re-admission into the party by false 

declaration, the old leaders were compelled to adopt 
clandestine methods for the propagation of the 

views they had openly abandoned. So, the root of 
the evil is to be found in the internal condition of 
the party. Former leaders of the party were denied 
the possibility of expressing their views, and were 
forced to adopt underhand methods of activity which 
brought them in contact with real enemies of the 
revolution. It is absurd to hold that men who had 
devoted their whole life to the cause of revolution 
should sell themselves willingly to the Fascists. 
But conscious motive is not the point at issue. 
Presumably, they acted according to their revolu- 
tionary conviction. In doing so, however, they 
became inspirers of counter-revolutionary activities, 



APPENDIX 


103 


and as such deserved their tragic end. When the 
dangerous implications of their activities became 
clear to them in the light of facts placed before them 
after arrest, they were not slow to admit their guilt 
though they had not committed it consciously. Their 
attitude during the trial was a tragic token of their 
sincerity, of their undying devotion to the cause of 
revolution. It was an interesting psychological 
phenomenon also. But, for the moment we are not 
concerned with that aspect of the matter. 

The deplorable conditions, under which tried 
and devoted revolutionaries were forced to become 
instruments of counter-revolution, are created by the 
suppression of all criticism of the leadership, of the 
expression even of any doubt about the correctness 
of the official policy. They are created in the stall- 
ing atmosphere characterised by utter absence of 
free discussion of problems that are constantly rising 
out of the experience of reconstruction. Clandestine 
activity on the part of dissenting elements is bound 
to take place in the absence of democracy in the 
administration of the party. The trial and stem 
administration of revolutionary justice have deprived 
the enemies of social liberation of some very conve- 
nient means for achieving their nefarious purpose. 
But the source of danger still remains, and it is a 
very fruitful source. In the given unhealthy atmos- 
phere of party life, opposition elements are bound 
to degenerate and be demoralized. No party can 
ever be entirely free from opposition. Absolute 



104 


THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 


unanimity is a sign of intellectual stagnation or 
hypocritical conformity. Freedom of criticism is the 
only guarantee against the dissenters and non- 
conformists lending themselves willingly or unwill- 
ingly to the service of the common enemy. 



ERRATA 


Chapter VIII — paragraph 15 — last sentence, after the 
words "offensive on the”, read : 
“part of the” 

Chapter VI — paragraph 8 — sentence 6, after the 
words "those who”, read : "do not” 



