(TACI 

t  No.  26a. 


i'fferf  fo  rfce  /*T«J*  Bureau,  9-4-18 


43 


The 


. 

Russian  Revolution: 

The  First  Year, 

by 
JOSEPH  KING,  M.P. 


PRICE   THREEPENCE. 
Published  by 

THE  UNION  OF  DEMOCRATIC  CONTROL, 

4-7,  Red  Lion  Court,  Fleet  Street, 

London,  E.C.4. 

April,  1918. 


NOTE. 

The  following  pamphlet  is  published  by  the  Union  of  Democratic 
Control,  because  it  is  a  valuable  contribution  to  the  discussion  of  the 
causes  of  war  and  means  of  its  avoidance  in  future.  The  object  of  the 
Union  in  its  pamphlets  is  to  place  at  the  disposal  of  the  public  ideas  and 
information  which  may  create  a  healthy  and  informed  opinion.  But  it 
does  not  necessarily  adopt  as  its  own  every  statement  or  opinion  therein 
contained.  The  five  cardinal  points  are  the  only  principles  to  which  the 
members  of  the  Union  are  collectively  pledged. 


The  five  cardinal  points  in  the  policy  of  the  Union 
of  Democratic  Control  are  as  follows : — 

To  formulate,  and  organise  support  for,  such  a  policy  as  shall  lead  to  the 
establishment  and  maintenance  of  an  enduring  peace.  For  this  purpose,  to 
advocate  the  following  points,  and  to  take  any  other  action  which  the  Couucil 
of  the  Union  of  Democratic  Control  may,  .from  time  to  time,  declare  to  be  in 
furtherance  of  such  policy. 

1.  No  Province  shall  be  transferred  from  one  Government 
to  another  without  the  consent,  by  plebiscite  or  otherwise,  of  the 
population  of  such  province. 

2.  No  Treaty,  Arrangement,  or  Undertaking  shall  be  entered 
upon    in    the    name    of   Great    Britain    without    the    sanction    of 
Parliament.     Adequate  machinery  for  ensuring  democratic  control 
of  foreign  policy  shall  be  created. 

3.  The   Foreign   Policy  of  Great   Britain  shall  not  be  aimed 
at  creating  Alliances  for  the  purpose  of  maintaining  the  Balance 
of  Power,  but   shall   be   directed  to  concerted  action  between  the 
Powers,   and  the  setting  up  of  an  International  Council,  -whose 
deliberations  and  decisions  shall  be  public,  with  such   machinery 
for  securing  international  agreement  as  shall  be  the  guarantee  of 
an  abiding  peace. 

4.  Great  Britain  shall   propose  as  part  of  the  Peace  settle- 
ment   a    plan    for    the    drastic    reduction,    by    consent,    of    the 
armaments  of  all  the  belligerent  Powers,   and   to    facilitate    that 
policy  shall  attempt  to  secure  the  general  nationalisation  of  the 
manufacture   of  armaments,   and    the    control    of    the    export    of 
armaments  by  one  country  to  another, 

5. — The  European  conflict  shall  not  be  continued  by  economic 
war  after  the  military  operations  have  ceased.  British  policy 
shall  be  directed  towards  promoting  free  commercial  intercourse 
between  all  nations  and  the  preservation  and  extension  of  the 
principle  of  the  open  door. 

"The  Union  of  Democratic  Control,  convinced  that  democracy  must  be  based  on  the 
equal  citizenship  of  men  and  women,  invites  the  co-operation  of  women." 

(Resolution  of  the  General  Council  of  the  Union,  February  gth,  1915.) 


The 

Russian  Revolution: 


The  First  Year. 


By 

JOSEPH  KING,   M.P. 


LONDON 

ST.  CLEMENTS  PRES«,  LTD., 
Portugal  Street,  Kingsway,  W.C.2. 


FOREWORD. 


This  brochure  describes  The  First  Year  of  the  Russian 
Revolution,  and  falls  into  six  sections  :— 

I.  Russia  before  the  Revolution        ...         ...  p.       3 

II.  The  Storm  which  broke  on  12th  March, 

1917      p.     10 

III.  The  Early  Days  of  the  Revolution          ...  p.  12 

IV.  The  Bolschevick  Government      .'..         ...p.  19 

V.  The  Collapse  of  Russia  as  a  Great  Power  p.  27 

VI.  The  Future  of  the  Revolution     p.  31 

In  attempting  to  recount  this  story  I  do  not  profess  to 
make  any  revelations  nor  to  give  personal  experiences.  I  have 
followed  Russian  affairs  closely  for  years,  and  have  Russian 
friends  in  various  social  circles  and  of  widely  different  views. 
Believing  that  a  true  and  connected  story  in  outline  shoul'd  be 
set  before  the  public,  I  have  tried  to  state  the  facts  rather  than 
to  criticise  or  prophesy.  The  facts  as  given  here  have  been 
sifted  out  from  many  sources,  and  books  and  journals  of 
various  points  of  view  have  been  drawn  upon. 


J.  KING. 


HOUSE  OF  COMMONS, 
March,  1918. 


The  Russian  Revolution 

The  First  Year. 


i. 

RUSSIA    BEFORE    THE    REVOLUTION 

was  ruled  by  the  House  of  Romanoff  for  300  years.  Coming  to 
power  when  Russia  (Muscovy)  seemed  likely  to  sink  back  into 
barbarism  and  insignificance,  the  Romanoffs  by  a  succession  of 
great  sovereigns  extended  their  frontiers  till  they  possessed  one- 
sixth  of  the  land  surface  of  the  globe,  ruled  with  absolute  power 
170,000,000  souls,  possessed  a  domain  of  continuous  territorial 
extent  with  every  variety  of  climate  and  people,  and  with  vast 
undeveloped  mineral  and  other  wealth.  Thus  in  1914  Russia 
appeared  the  great  empire  of  the  future. 

To  understand  Russia  to-day  one  must  know  a  little  of  Russian 
history  and  character.  The  Romanoff  line  numbers  sovereigns 
of  real  genius — Peter  the  Great,  who  brought  ideas  of  western 
civilisation  and  an  imperial  future  to  his  ipeople ;  Catherine,  who 
in  cynical  ambition  and  ruthlessness  rivalled  Frederick  the  Great 
of  Prussia ;  Alexander  the  First, "  who  alone  of  the  monarchs 
opposing  Napoleon  showed  real  genius,  imagination,  and  idealism. 
Russian  Czars  have  by  a  stroke  of  their  autocratic  pen  liberated 
the  serfs,  summoned  the  nations  to  Hague  Conventions,  and 
abolished  vodka  drinking.  The  genius  shown  by  Russian  monarchs 
is  reflected  in  varied  forms  in  the  Russian  people,  which  has 
embraced  such  contemporary  giants  as  Kropotkin,  Metchnikoff,  and 
Tolstoy. 

The    Riddle,  of    Russia 

seemed  to  men  of  western  civilisation  the  more  baffling  because 
Russia  was  in  some  ways  so  far  behind  the  age.  Its  religious  system 
was  like  Catholicism  before  the  Reformation,  and  its  Government 
that  of  the  Roman  Emperors  in  their  decadent  age.  Yet  for  years 
past  there  has  been  a  ferment.  The  intellectuals,  students  and 
savants,  have  discussed  and  preached  advanced  ideas  of  life  and 
society.  Amongst  the  working  class,  though  to  belong  to  a  socialist 
society  was  an  offence  for  which  many  have  suffered  lifelong 
deportation  or  death,  the  most  radical  opinions  continued  to  gain 
ground.  Meanwhile,  a  spiritual  movement,  seen  in  Tolstoy's 
writings  and  life,  was  dissolving  the  traditions  of  society  more 

2097898 


widely  and  powerfully  than  Rousseau  and  Voltaire  dissolved  those 
of  their  time.  Shall  we  see  a  more  potent  revolution  than  the 
French  Revolution  as  the  result  ?  While  the  temper  of  the  Russian 
people  is  as  remote  from  Prussianism  as  is  that  of  the  Irish,  the 
strange  fact  remains  that  Prussianism  had,  before  the  war, 
dominated  Russian  govarnment  and  enslaved  the  Russian  people 
as  it  had  never  done  in  Prussia.  Peter  the  Great  and  his  successors 
had  called  in  Prussians  as  bankers,  organisers,  teachers,  and  officials, 
till  German  intellect  largely  ran  the  Goveniment  and  business  of 
Russia.  The  Russian  bureaucracy  was  Prussian  in  origin  and 
spirit,  less  efficient  and  more  corrupt  than  across  the  frontier. 
Statesmanship  and  progressive  ideas,  which  had  been  seen  in  his 
predecessors  were  absent  from  Nicholas  II.  That  his  regime 
was  a 

Reign   of   Terror 

was  widely  acknowledged,  but  never  seriously  faced  by  the  nations 
in  which  liberty  was  established.  Facts  were  made  known  about 
Siberia,  Russian  prisons,  the  Jewish  pogroms  and  Stolypin's 
' '  necktie  ' ' ;  that  a  Government  living  by  such  methods  was  no  fit 
ally  for,  and  might  prove  false  to,  Western  democracies,  was  only 
stated  by  a  few.  It  was  never  in  the  minds  of  the  foreign  diplo- 
matists and  cosmopolitan  financiers  who  wished  to  exploit  Russian 
possibilities.  The  United  States  had  indeed  denounced  the  Treaty 
with  Russia  as  a  protest  against  Russian  methods.  A  periodical, 
"Darkest  Russia,"  appeared  in  London,  recounting  incredible 
tyranny;  publication  ceased  when  war  began.  But  a  few  facts  may 
be  here  stated.  In  the  aibortive  revolution  of  1905  over  26,000  paid 
their  lives  for  their  effort  to  be  free — most  executed  without  fair 
trial.  Over  30,000  Jews  were  victims  in  one  year's  pogroms,  some 
killed,  more  driven  as  beggars  from  their  homes.  Dr.  Dillon  says 
that  assassination  was  practised  with  the  connivance  of  members  of 
the  Government.  The  secret  police  (Okrhana)  were  licensed 
terrorists.  In  five  years  the  Czarist  courts  sentenced  37,600 
persons  for  political  offences,  of  whom  31,000  went  to  penal 
servitude.  By  administrative  order  hundreds  of  thousands  were 
sent  to  Siberia.  Thousands  of  Jews,  Intellectuals  and  Socialists 
fled  the  country  to  establish  Russian  colonies  in  Berlin,  Vienna, 
Switzerland  and  London.  These  refugees  carried  on  an  under- 
ground propaganda,  and  were  hotbeds  of  revolutionary  leaders  who 
returned  later  to  a  freer  Russia. 

The    Responsibility   for   Russian    Tyranny 

must  be  shared  by  society  in  other  civilised  lands.  The  German 
Kaiser  was  understood  to  have  been  ready  in  1905  to  send  German 
soldiers  into  Russia  had  the  revolt  gone  near  to  overthrowing 
Czardom.  A  different,  yet  grave,  burden  lies  on  the  financiers, 
who  lent  money  to,  or  got  concessions  from,  the  Government. 
Allied  statesmen  supported  these  financiers  and  made  treaties  and 


agreements  without  any  attempt  to  influence  the  autocracy  towards 
granting  liberty  or  ending  corruption.  In  1906  the  French  Govern- 
ment made  a  loan  to  Russia,  avowedly  to  support  the  Czar  against 
revolution.  In  1907  the  British  Government  had  its  deal  with 
Russia,  dividing  the  carcase  of  Persia.  The  democratic  Allies  of 
Russia  propped  up,  and  never  cared  to  purify  their  barbarous 
neighbour. 

Japan    and    Russia 

were  drawing  closer  in  1914,  though  ten  years  before  they  had  been 
at  war.  The  relations  of  these  two  great  Empires  afford  ground 
for  the  doctrine  that  wars  are  not  due  to  hatred  between  people, 
but  to  capitalist  and  imperialist  ambitions.  Impelled  by 
imperialistic  ambition  on  both  sides  they  had  gone  to  wax  in 
^February,  1904.  The  disgust,  privations,  humiliations  and  losses 
which  Russia  then  suffered  led  to  a  revolutionary  outbreak ;  it  was 
suppressed  with  cruel  bloodshed,  but  had  to  be  followed  by  the 
grant  of 

The   Duma   (October,  1905). 

The  first  Duma,  or  Parliament,  was  based  on  a  wide  franchise,  and 
was  an  assembly  of  advanced  opinions;  it  was  dissolved  on  July  2'2, 

1906,  the  Czar  refusing  to  accept  its  demand  for  a  Ministry  respon- 
sible to  it.     The  majority  issued  the  Viborg  manifesto,  urging  Ihc 
refusal  of  recruits  and  taxes.     The  second  Duma  met  in  March 

1907,  and,  more  advanced  than  the  first,  suffered  on  June  14  the 
arrest  of  fifty-five  of  its  members  by  the  Prime  Minister,  Stolypin . 
The  Duma  refused  to  sanction  these  arrests  and  was  promptly  dii 
solved.    The  third  Duma,  which  outlived  its  term  and  the  Czardom, 
was  a  strong-ly  conservative  body,  secured  by  Stoly  pin's  Edict,  which 
completely  transformed  the  electorate.     When  the  war  broke  out 
in  August,  1914,  Russia  was  still  an  absolute  autocracy,  with  nothing 
but  the  merest  semblance  of  popular  consultation.     After  two  years 
of  war,   even  the  mild   and  conservative  Duma  was  in  danger  of 
being  suspended  by  a  still  more  reactionary  Czar.     Without  dis- 
cussing the  origin  of  the  great  European  war,  it  is  safe. to  say  that 
the  readiness  of  the  bureaucratic  and  military  chiefs  in  Russia  (as 
in  Germany  also)  to  urge  war  on  the  Autocracy,  and  to  greet  its 
outbreak  with  enthusiasm,  was  not  unconnected  with  internal  con- 
ditions.     There  had   been  strikes,  political  in   their   origin,    and 
demonstrations  of  workmen  ruthlessly  shot  down.     These  shortly 
preceded  the  war  ;  mobilisation  was  ordered  by  the  Czar  when  Sir 
Edward  Grey  was  pleading  for  delay  and  conciliation.    Baron  Rosen, 
formerly  Russian  Ambassador  at  Washington,  has  since  stated  his 
view  of  the  outbreak  of  the  war  and  subsequent  events  in  Russia. 
His  words  are  striking,  as  coming  from  one  of  the  most  experienced 
servants  of  the  ex-Czar.     Baron  Rosen  is  an  "  aristocratic  inter- 
nationalist," a  man  of  affairs,  who  lived  in  Petrograd  through  war 
and  revolution,  always  a  spectator,  never  an  actor  of  the  events. 
He  says  "  I  knew  the  war  was  coming  as  far  back  as  1912.      Behind 


the  curtain  of  Russian  secret  diplomacy,  war  was  being  made 
inevitable  by  the  rising  tide  of  revolution  from  below.  The  Czar's 
Court  knew  that  their  only  hope  was  to  stave  off  revolution  by 
setting  their  armies  marching.  .  .  .  The  Revolution  was  a 
national  revolt  of  the  Russian  People  against  the  war.  The  war 
was  made  by  those  who  wanted  to  put  down  revolution,  and  there- 
fore the  revolution  was  made  to  put  down  the  war."  In  these 
conditions,  realised  by  more  than  the  few  who  ventured  to  warn 
against  them,  in  August,  1914,  Russia  went  to  war  against  Germany 
and  Austria. 

The  popular  theory  in  England,  which  it  was  almost  as 
dangerous  as  high  treason  not  to  accept,  was  that  Russia  had  been 
purified  from  incompetence  and  corruption  since  the  Japanese  War, 
that  by  reason  of  her  alliance  with  republican  France  and  demo- 
cratic Britain,  Russia  had  definitely  joined  the  liberal  and 
enlightened  states  of  the  world,  and  that  Russia's  geographical 
position,  her  gallant  army  and  large  military  preparations, 
her  immense  resources  of  gold  reserves,  her  superabundant  food 
production,  and  her  teeming  population,  men  of  the  hardiest  of 
peasant-type,  made  her  invincible.  By  reason  of  her  overwhelming 
weight,  though  slow  in  action,  Russia  was  to  be  the  steam-roller 
of  the  road  to  liberty — and  Berlin !  Warnings  to  a  contrary  effect 
by  the  wisest  of  statesmen  were  disregarded.  Sir  Charles  Dilke 
had  warned  against  reliance  on  Russia's  support  in  any  war,  and 
had  declared  it  to  be  one  of  the  objects  of  his  return  to  Parliament, 
in  1906,  that  he  wished  to  prevent  an  Anglo-Russian  alliance.  But 
Press  patriotism  silenced  wise  statesmanship. 

Early  in  1915  there  were  significant -signs  of  Russian  national 
awakening  against  the 

Corruption  and   Incapacity  of    Russian    Government. 

The  Zemstvos,  Provincial  Councils,  Municipalities,  and  even  Sects, 
united  in  Congress,  voiced  the  discontent  and  organised  sections 
of  the  national  effort.  These  bodies,  with  committees  of  business 
men  and  Labour  leaders,  took  over  such  services  as  production  of 
munitions,  care  of  the  sick  and  wounded,  relief  of  refugees,  and 
the  providing  for  prisoners.  They  began  with  the  support  and 
co-operation  of  the  Government.  Later  their  success  and  patriotism 
raised  suspicions  that  these -bodies  offered  an  alternative  govern 
ment  to  the  bankrupt  bureaucracy;  they  were  suppressed.  Even 
the  Duma,  elected  as  reactionary  and  subservient  to  the  Czardom, 
now  evolved  a 

Duma    Progressive    Block, 

and  demanded  a  stable  Government  of  reliable  Ministers  acting 
with  the  legislative  body,  and  a  home  policy-  which  would  preserve 
national  unity  and  peace.  The  block  demanded  definite  political 
reforms,  including  the  return  of  those  deported  for  offences,  the 
autonomy  of  Poland,  a  change  of  policy  towards  Finland,  abolition 


of  the  restrictions  on  the  Jews,  freedom  of  the  Press,  and  the  right 
of  association,  especially  for  workmen's  unions,  etc.  This  move- 
ment led  to  a  change  of  Prime  Minister;  Goremeykin,  the  new 
Premier,  had  reformers  as  his  colleagues  (Sazonoff,  Bark,  and 
General  Polivanof);  but  the  "  dark  forces''  prevailed;  the  Duma 
was  prorogued  in  November,  1915;  ministerial  changes  from  this 
point  onwards  were  successive  victories  for  reaction.  Protests, 
whether  from  the  Russian  nation  or  enlightened  opinion  among  the 
Allies,  were  disregarded.  The  British  Ambassador,  forsaking  the 
rule  which  precludes  an  accredited  Envoy  from  interfering  in 
internal  politics,  ventured  to  protest  to  the  Czar.  It  was  a  struggle 
of  all  that  was  hopeful  and  enlightened  in  Russia  against  the 

"  Dark    Forces  " 

which  included  the  bureaucracy,  the  pro-Germans  (secret  and 
avowed),  the  Court  Camarilla  with  the  notorious  Rasputin,  a 
religious  libertine,  who  mesmerised  the  Czarina,  and  through  her 
the  Autocrat  of  all  the  Russias.  The  condition  of  that  Russia  on 
which  the  Allies  hopes  had  been  in  1914  so  centred,  was 
described  'by  the  Russian  Ambassador  in  London,  who  said  to  a 
journalist:  "An  epidemic  of  madness  is  raging  in  Government 
circles  at  Petrograd."  The  Czar  and  his  friends  seem  never  to  have 
had  any  idea  of  concession  or  conciliation.  At  the  Russian  New 
Year,  1917,  Rasputin's  long  list  of  scandals  and  corruption  had 
led  to  his  murder.  Excitement  and  indignation  over  this  affair 
were  intense.  Yet  the  Czar  then  issued  his  Rescript  to  Pitirim, 
the  Metropolitan  of  Petrograd,  an  ecclesiastic  boon  companion  of 
Rasputin,  a  man  of  notorious  evil  life  and  an  extreme  reactionary. 
The  Rescript,  full  of  loathsome  adulation  and  the  old  spirit  of 
contempt  for  the  nation's  wishes,  disgusted  even  those  moderate 
men  who  were  ready  to  suffer  still  if  the  end  of  the  war  might 
bring  a  change. 

The  Russian  Army  and   Navy 

were  to  play  the  decisive  part  in  the  coming  Revolution.  For 
years  the  Czarist  methods  were  preparing  them  for  this  duty.  The 
Russian  Navy  was  recruited  from  the  towns.  Some  degree  of 
education  and  technical  aptitude  are  needed  for  men  on  modern 
men-of-war.  These  town  workers  brought  in,  imbibed,  and  spread 
Socialist  ideas.  In  the  attempted  revolt  of  1905  the  sailors  had 
shown  their  spirit.  In  1912  there  had  been  revolutionary  outbreaks 
in  certain  ships,  leading  to  shooting  and  punishment  of  naval  men. 
The  large  extent  of  these  mutinous  occurrences  and  the  number  of 
executions  never  appeared.  When  the  Revolution  came  the  sailors 
joined  in  from  the  first.  When  a  second  Revolution  brought  in 
Bolschevik  Government,  the  navy  again  went  over.  Nine  months 
of  Revolution  saw  the  ships  of  war  really  controlled  by  the  Com- 
mittees of  Sailors  on  each  ship.  They  sent  their  mem'bers  to  the 


C.W.S.D.  (Council  of  Workmen  and  Soldiers'  Delegates).  They 
elected  their  own  officers,  and  revised  or  confirmed  his  orders.  In 
most  things  the  captain  only  now  acted  with  his  men's  leave ! 


The   Russian  Army 

saw  a  similar  process  in  its  ranks.  Before  the  war,  and  up  to 
March,  1917,  Socialists  and  revolutionaries  found  the  ranks  of  the 
army  their  best  field  for  propaganda.  After  the  Russian  losses 
and  retreats  of  1915,  the  old  army  was  largely  wiped  out.  But  the 
stories  of  cruelty,  incapacity,  .and  ill-treatment  were  there.  The 
ranks  were  now  filled  with  reservists,  men  with  families  and  maturer 
minds,  conscious  of  the  corruption  above  them,  and  with  domestic 
and  social  aims;  they  knew  that  their  comrades  had  been  sent  to 
the  trenches  sometimes  without  rifles  or  ammunition.  They  did 
not  need  much  persuasion  to  join  the  Revolution. 

It   has   been   said   that   in   the   ten   years    since   the    Russo- 
Japanese  War  a  better  tone  and  new  efficiency  had  appeared  in  the 

Officers  of  Army  and  Navy. 

This  was  true  of  regimental  and  divisional  commands.  But  no 
reform  had  touched  the  central  bureaucracy  nor  the  Petrograd  Wai- 
Ministry.  The  confessions  of  the  War  Minister,  Sukhomlinov,  at 
his  trial  in  1917  amply  show  this.  The  Russian  Army  administra- 
tion remained  unsound.  Again,  the  Russian  officers  were,  like  the 
Prussia  ns  and  unlike  the  French,  taken  from  a  higher  social  class 
than  their  men.  They  treated  their  men  too  often  in  the  same 
brutal  manner.  This  explains  not  only  part  of  the  readiness  to 
join  the  Revolution,  but  also  the  murder  of  officers  both  in  Army 
and  Navy  by  their  men  when  the  Revolution  came.  Old  scores 
were  paid  oft,  and  officers  who  were  suspected  to  be  ready  to  join 
in  reaction  or  counter-revolution  were  made  to  disappear.  The 
number  of  such  cases  has  been  exaggerated.  Both  Kereusky  and 
the  Bolscheviks  did  their  best  to  prevent  these  outrages  and  to 
punish  their  perpetrators.  Soldiers  and  sailors  were  imprisoned 
and  charged  for  these  offences.  No  lynch  law  was  tolerated. 

News,  which  from  early  in  the  war  came  from  Russia,  raised 
growing  doubts  as  to  the  value  of  Russian  military  efficiency  and 
of  her  political  wisdom.  The  military  tides  need  not  be  here 
recalled.  Though  the  campaigns  in  the  Caucasus  and  Armenia  saw 
great  Russian  advances  against  the  Turks,  though  General  Brussiloff 
entered  Oalicia,  though  Lemberg  was  taken,  and  in  the  summer  of 
1916  the  Russian  advances  into  Austrian  territory  induced 
Roumania  to  come  into  the  war  against  her  former  allies,  still  the 
retreats  and  defeats  of  the  Russian  armies  were  on  the  whole  so 
much  greater  than  its  advances  or  victories  that,  at  the  end  of 
1916,  it  was  the  common  view  in  London  and  Paris  that  Russia  must 
be  written  off  as  a  serious  fighting  force.  Russia's  militarv  failures 


were  sowing  the  seeds  of  distrust  and  disgust  in  place  of  that 
adulation  of  everything  Russian  which  had  seized  the  Allied  peoples 
in  August,  1914.  The  change  of  feeling  was  accelerated  by 

Russia's  Political  Follies. 

Repeated  stories  were  told  in  political  circles  'both  in  London  aiid 
Paris  of  the  diplomacy  of  Russia,  which  caused  grave  apprehension, 
though  not  published  in  the  Press  or  Parliament.  At  one  time  it 
was  threats  of  making  a  separate  peace;  then  came  the  demand 
that  the  Allies  should  guarantee  to  Russia  the  possession  of  Con- 
stantinople and  the  Straits  after  the  war;  the  Gallipoli  campaign, 
with  its  bitter  losses,  was  the  result  of  an  urgent  Russian  demand ; 
the  Allies'  troubles  with  Greece  were  explained  by  the  Russian 
refusal  to  the  Greeks  of  any  gains,  even  if  Greek  armies  fought  for 
the  Allies.  Almost  daily  news  from  Russia  alienated  Allied 
sympathy.  Persecution  of  the  Jews  and  continued  pogroms,  an 
undiminished  stream  of  deportations  to  Siberia,  suppression  of  news- 
papers and  political  unions,  continued  contempt  o:  a  protesting 
Duma,  soaring  prices  largely  due  to  inflated  currency,  the  unlimited 
issue  of  paper  money,  soldiers  being  paid  in  unnumbered  notes  like 
postage  stamps,  stories  of  profiteering  and  waste,  disorganisation  in 
public  services,  especially  in  railway  transport,  terrible  lack  of  arms 
and  equipment,  whole  regiments  going  into  'battle  without  rifles 
or  with  one  rifle  to  every  five  men,  the  rapid  changes  of  Ministers, 
each  change  marking  growing  reactionary  influences  and  not  uncon- 
nected with  amazing  stories  of  the  unspeakable  Rasputin,  the  cir- 
culation, in  America  especially,  of  detailed  stories  of  atrocities  against 
the  Jews  and  in  invaded  districts,  such  follies  as  the  immediate 
arrest  and  deportation  to  Siberia  of  patriotic  socialist  exiles  return- 
ing to  their  native  country,  like  the  famous  Bourtzeff ;  these 
stories,  in  spite  of  censorship  and  patriotic  editing,  became  known 
in  other  countries.  Messages  from  the  correspondents  of  one  or 
.  two  well-informed  newspapers  in  England  {"  Sunday  Times," 
"Manchester  Guardian,"  "Daily  News,"  "Labour  Leader," 
"  Nation  ")  prepared  intelligent  persons  for  violent  repression  or 
successful  revolution.  Amid  this  confusion,  it  seems  certain  that 
a  separate  peace  with  Germany  was  being  arranged  by  the  Czar  or 
bis  Court  party  in  secret  negotiations  at  Stockholm.  Thus  opened 
the  year  1917,  when  the  British  War  Cabinet  of  Mr.  Lloyd  George, 
as  one  of  its  earliest  acts,  sent  to  Russia  one  of  its  members  on  a 
special  mission.  So 

Lord   Milner   went  to    Russia, 

where  he  remained  several  weeks.  He  returned  on  March  5,  1917. 
In  "  The  Times,"  on  March  6,  within  a  week  of  the  Revolution  in 
Russia,  was  an  official  statement,  in  which  Lord  Milner  paid  tribute 
to  the  .personal  influence  and  hearty  support  of  his  Majesty  the 
Czar,  and  declared  that  in  Russia  there  was  only  one  aim,  to  bring 
the  war  to  a  quick  and  successful  conclusion.  "  All  the  members 

9 


of  the  mission  were  encouraged  .  .  ."  (said  Lord  Milner). 
"  About  the  war  I  could  not  find  any  difference  of  opinion  what- 
ever .  .  .  there  was  no  question  of  any  fresh  line  of  policy,'' 
etc.  On  the  eve  of  the  Revolution,  which  was  being  confidently 
foretold  in  Scandinavian  newspapers,  Lord  Milner  told  the  world 
that  the  loyalty  of  the  Russian  Government  and  people  was  "Safe 
and  sound  for  the  cause  of  the  Allies ! 


II. 

THE  STORM  WHICH  BROKE  ON  12th  MARCH, 

1917. 

Whether  through  insufficient  information,  or  misjudging  the 
facts,  the  Allied  Cabinets  were  unprepared  and  surprised.  Four 
days  before  the  food  shortage  had  led  to  a  decision  of  the  Petrograd 
workers  to  down  tools.  Oil  March  9  the  trams  ceased  to  run;  pro- 
cessions went  through  the  streets  crying  "We  want  bread";  the 
police  organised  barricades  in  the  streets  to  stop  the  moving  people; 
in  one  square,  where  orators  began  to  declaim,  the  police  drew 
sabres  and  charged :  the  first  'blood  cdf  the  revolution  flowed ; 
meetings  and  processions,  dispersed  by  Cossacks,  re-formed  else- 
where. The  people  took  fresh  confidence;  committees  were 
formed  :  leaders  chosen.  The  Government  prepared  for  the  morrow 
by  mounting  machine-guns  on  roofs  and  at  points  of  vantage.  On 
March  10  the  strike  was  general ;  shops  all  closed  :  many  troops  were 
at  cross  roads  and  on  the  bridges  ;  the  soldiers'  barricades  were 
rushed  by  the  workmen  :  fighting  became  serious  ;  then,  by  prior 
arrangement  or  sudden  organisation,  definite  method  was  seen 
among  the  rioters.  On  March  11  the  Czar's  Ukase,  suspending 
the  Duma,  appeared  on  the  walls,  and  no  newspapers  were  being 
printed.  This  worked  up  the  whole  population  to  rise  against  the 
Government;  revolutionary  songs  and  speakers  were  heard;  what 
was  first  a  riot  was  now  a  manifest  revolution.  The  contagion  was 
irresistible,  and  spread  to  the  soldiers.  The  Duma  continued  to 
sit,  disregarding  the  Czar's  Ukase,  with  a  sort  of  Provisional  Govern- 
ment under  the  President,  Rodzianko.  The  Czar's  last  Cabinet 
kept  on  issuing  orders  for  repression  and  nothing  else.  But  the 
reinforcements  needed  by  the  police  were  not  forthcoming.  The 
soldiers  were  driven  by  sympathy  with  their  fellow  citizens  to  forsake 
discipline. 

The    Revolution    was    Established 

while  the  Law  Courts  went  down  in  flames.     The  fortress  of  Peter 
and  Paul  surrendered.    The  Arsenal  was  sacked.    Blood  flowed  as 

10 


i  he  police  agents,  and  spies  fell  into  the  hands  of  their  former 
victims,  or  the  men  serving  the  machine-guns  on  housetops  were 
taken  by  the  workers. 

The  Triumph  of  the  Revolution 

was  seen  in  the  self-surrender  of  the  Ministers,  in  the  orders  issued 
by  the  Executive  Committee  formed  at  the  Taurida  Palace,  the 
sitting  place  of  the  Duma,  and  in  the  tearing  down  of  Imperial 
Eagles  while  soldiers  paraded  with  the  red  flag. 

When  these  events  were  happening  in  Petrograd  the  Czar  was 
at  Mohilef,  the  army  headquarters.  Galitzin,  the  Prime  Minister, 
and  Protopopof,  the  strong  man  and  the  evil  genius  of  the  Czar's 
last  days  of  power,  wired  false  accounts  to  the  Czar,  who  hardened 
his  heart  and  ordered  stern  repression.  He  was  kept  in  the  dark; 
then,  too  late,  he  was  ready  to  grant  a  Constitution.  He  started 
in  his  train  early  on  March  13  for  Tsarkoye-Selo.  After  various 
delays  and  changes  of  plan  he  was  stopped  at  Pskof  on  the  evening 
of  the  14th.  Here  General  Kussky  me;t  him,  told  him  the  truth — 
that  his  authority  and  government  were  at  an  end.  Soon  tele- 
phones to  Petrograd  and  telegrams  to  the  army  leaders  Evert  and 
Brussilof  showed  that  there  was  only  one  course  open. 

The   Abdication   of    the    Czar 

was  contained  in  a  document  handed  to  him,  the  work  of  the  members 
of  the  Duma  who  at  first  served  for  a  Covernment.  It  named  the 
Grand  Duke  Michael,  the  Czar 's~ brother,  as  successor.  But  the 
men  who  drew  and  presented  this  document  were  not  the  real 
revolution.  It  was  from  the  first  clear  that  no  member  of  the 
Romanoff  family  could  possibly  succeed  to  the  throne.  The  arrest 
of  the  Czar  and  his  family  soon  followed.  Conscious  of  the  popula. 
feeling,  the  Grand  Duke  Michael  refused  the  Crown.  All  the 
Romanoffs  were  soon  regarded  as  suspects,  if  not  enemies  of  the 
State.  They  disappeared.  Not  even  the  moderate  Constitu- 
tionalists, to  whom  a  monarchy  with  parliamentary  government 
was  the  ideal,  remained  true  to  the  House  of  Romanoff.  The  true 
spirit  of  the  Revolution  and  of  the  Russian  people  was  increasingly 
Republican.  The  Russian  Revolution  was  not  created  by  the 
Liberals  or  by  any  Constitutional  reformers.  It  was  a  sudden 
effort  of  the  working  classes,  supported  by  a  discontented  and 
ill-treated  soldiery.  Years  of  repression  and  increasing  severity  of 
persecution,  the  corruption  and  disorganisation  of  the  army  and 
public  services,  the  cruel  neglect  of  the  soldiers,  the  belief  that  the 
Czar  was  negotiating  for  a  separate  peace  with  the  enemy  by  a 
secret  mission  to  Stockholm,  the  increased  cruelty  practised  towards 
the  Jews,  the  massacres  which  had  been  orolered  by  the  Czar  in 
territories  invaded  by  his  armies  and  in  distant  parts  of  his  own 
empire  (many  thousand  Khirghiz  Nomads  had  been  slaughtered  or 

11 


driven  to  die  of  famine  in  the  forests,  as  Kerensky  disclosed  in  the\ 
Duma),  and,  finally,  the  holding  up  of  food  coming  into  Petrograd, 
whether  designed  to  bring  the  revolutionary  leaders  to  light,  to  seize 
them  and  suppress  their  cause,  or  to  induce  the  populace  to  accept 
the  impending  peace — these  explain  the  outburst.     The  first 

X 

News   of   the    Revolution 

was  given  to.  the  British  public  by  a  statement  on  March  15,  1917, 
made  by  Mr.  Bonar  Law  in  the  House  of  Commons.     How  little  the 
true  facts  were  grasped  appeared  from  his  statement — (a)  that  the 
sailors  and  soldiers  had  joined  the  Duma ;  (b)  that  the  discontent 
was  not  against  the  Government  for  carrying  on  the  war,  but  for 
not  carrying  it  on  with  efficiency  and  energy.     When,  on  March  22, 
a  formal  motion  was  made  in  Parliament  of  congratulation  to  the 
Russian  people,  Mr.  Bonar  Law  not  only  spoke  as  if  the  Russian 
Duma  was  the  cause  and  symbol  of  the  revolution,  and  of  the  late 
Czar  as  having  been  for  three  years  our  loyal  ally,   and  of  his 
"  burden,  which  had  proved  too  heavy/'     On  March  19  Mr.  Lloyd 
George  stated  that  ths  revolution  was  "  due  to  discontent  at  the 
inefficiency  of  the  Government  in  its  conduct  of  the  war,"  and  that 
"  it  is  satisfactory   to   know   that  the   new   Government  has   been 
formed  for  the  express  purpose  of  carrying  on  the  war  witli  renewed 
vigour,"  promising  "  even  closer  and  more  effective  co-operation  be- 
tween the  Russian  people  and  its  Allies."     Indeed,  any  other  view 
than   that  the  Russian  Revolution   was  a  respectable  concern  of 
superior  patriots,  and  sure  to  lead  to  more  successful  warfare,  was 
considered  unpatriotic.     Really,  as  everyone  now  knows,  the  Duma 
had  discouraged  the  rising  ;    the  few  members  who   took  part  in 
the  Provisional  Government  subsequently  only  came  out  of  their 
hiding  when  the  complete  collapse  of  bureaucracy  and  autocracy 
was  secured  by  the  army's  adhesion  to  the  revolution. 

Later,  it  was  to  appear  that  even  the  "  patriotic  "  Imperialist 
Cadets  were  willing  to  do  what  the  Ukrainians  did  in  February, 
1918,  and  m^ke  a  separate  German  peace. 


III. 

THE  EARLY  DAYS  OF  THE  REVOLUTION 

saw  not  only  the  complete  collapse  of  the  Romanoffs,  but  also 
the  imprisonment  of  the  members  of  the  Czar's  Ministries,  the 
removal  of  the  hated  police,  who  were  sent  into  the  Army  at  the 
front,  the  formation  of  a  Provisional  Government  of  Ministers,  who 
were  at  first  partly  members  of  the  Duma,  and  soon  had  to  give 
\vay  to  more  Radical  and  Socialist  successors.  Thousands  of  exiles 
returned  from  Siberia  and  abroad.  The  Allied  Governments  sent 

12 


special  missions  to  encourage  and  advise  the  Russians  on  their 
newly-gained  liberty,  and  to  urge  continuance  of  the  war.  Even 
more  significant  were  the  cessation  of  active  fighting  on  the 
Russian  front,  the  absence  of  any  counter-revolution,  and  the 
universal  demand  that  the  future  form  of  Government  must  be 
Republican.  Unhonoured  and  unregretted,  the  Duma  had 
ceased  to  exist.  Its  members  were  for  the  most  part  alien  to  the 
dominant  spirit  of  the  revolution.  The  real  force  which  governed 
the  country  was  the 

Council   of    Workmen's    and    Soldiers'    Delegates, 

which  represented  the  Army,  the  Navy,  and  the  working  classes 
of  the  towns.  This  Council  (or  Soviet),  the  C.W.S.D.,  had 
Social  Democratic  opinions.  The  adheSion  of  the  peasant  popula- 
tion, at  one  time  expected  to  prove  a  steadying  or  even 
reactionary  power,  came  gradually  into  line  with  the  other  workers. 
Throughout  the  summer  and  early  autumn  of  1917  the  course  of 
revolutionary  government,  though  marked  by  frequent  change  of 
Ministries,  seemed  intelligible  to  and  in  sympathy  with  the 
Western  democracies.  It  looked  forward  to  elections  on  -a  demo- 
cratic franchise,  with  adult  male  and  female  suffrage,  and  on 
the  basis  of  Proportional  Representation  and  the  party  list  (or 
Belgian)  method ;  the  Assembly  thus  elected  was  to  decide  on  the 
form  of  the  new  Constitution. 


The    Features   of   the  Revolution 

must  be  constantly  remembered,  in  which  Russian  democracy 
differs  vitally  from  the  Western  type.  The  first  is  that  Russian 
Socialist  working-class  aims  are  essentially  international.  As  an 
acute  observer  has  written  of  their  leaders":  "  Their  International- 
ism amounts  to  colour-blindness;  they  see  and  admit  no  difference 
between  the  various  Capitalist  Governments;  they  had  always 
opposed  any  co-operation  with  middle-class  elements.  They  advo- 
cated the  dictatorship  of  the  wage-earning  proletariat.  For  this 
creed  they  had  faced  Siberia,  exile,  and  the  Czar's  '  necktie.'  ' 
The  secret  and  persecuted  Socialist  Societies,  with  propaganda  in 
workshops,  Army  and  Fleet,  going  back  for  many  years,  had  been 
preachers  of  the  Gospel  of  Karl  Marx.  While  the  average  man 
in  England  and  France  would  argue  "  make  my  country  vic- 
torious and  it  will  give  justice  and  democracy  to  workers  in  all 
lands,"  the  Russian  Marxian  would  say  "  Capitalism  causes  wars, 
let  workers  in  all  lands  join  hands  and  secure  Peace  and  Justice 
by  common  effort."  The  Marxian  conclusion  is  to  fight  for 
Internationalism,  and  to  let  Nationality  come  to  its  right  as  a 
result.  The  British  view,  as  expressed  in  the  orthodox  ordinary 
patriot,  is  to  fight  for  Nationality  and  let  Internationalism  come 
in  after. 

13 


The  other  distinctive  and  misunderstood  feature  of  Russian 
democracy  is 

The    Soviet. 

Soviets  (Councils)  are  Committees  which  are  constantly  referring 
to  the  persons  who  set  them  up  for  approval  or  correction.  Their 
members  are  liable  to  recall  or  re-election  at  any  time.  These 
Councils  correspond  to  the  ancient  forms  of  Russian  society.  The 
village  community,  the  Artels  or  gangs  for  labour,  the  co-opera- 
tive groups  are  part  of  the  life  and  social  structure  of  Russia. 
Soviets  maintain  the  closest  possible  touch  with  the  people  who 
elect  them.  A  Congress  of  Soviets  which  supported  Kerensky 
one  day  might  the  next  day  withdraw  that  support,  not  from 
being  bribed  with  German  gold,  but  from  a  real  change  in  the 
situation  which  they  reflect.  The  Soviet  system,  equally  with  the 
enthusiasm  for  internationalism,  has  been  a  mystery  to  the  British 
Press  and  politicians,  who  have  so  largely  failed  to  understand 
the  revolution. 

The   First   Eight   Months   of  the    Revolution 

showed  a  confusion  of  aims  and  methods.  But  it  is  not  hard  now 
to  see  how  things  went.  When  the  Duma  failed  to  control  and 
lead  the  nation,  the  power  passed  to  the  organisation  which  had 
sprung  up  as  in  the  night — the  Council  of  Workmen's  and  Soldiers' 
Delegates  (the  C.W.S.D.).  On  March  13,  1917,  the  Executive 
Committee  of  the  Duma  had  issued  an  appeal  to  the  nation  to  help 
in  forming  a  new  Government.  The  C.W.S.D.  issued  another 
appeal  to  the  entire  population  for  support,  urging  also  that  local 
Committees  in  the  various  districts  should  take  in  hand  the  direction 
of  local  affairs.  Though  on  March  15  the  two  bodies  coalesced  in 
a  Ministry  of  National  Defence,  yet  the  Duma  Committee  was 
bourgeois,  capitalist,  and  militarist,  and  the  C.W.S.D.  was  pro- 
letarian, socialist,  and  pacifist.  In  these  next  eight  months  there 
followed  five  Ministries.  These  changes  were  not  surprising,  since 
there  was  a  strong  desire  to  remain  true  to  the  Western  Allies,  and 
also  a  burning  wish  for  an  early  peace.  Again,  while  the  bourgeois, 
in  many  cases,  wanted  to  make  the  Revolution  lead  to  more  trade 
and  financial  opportunities,  most  of  the  active  elements  in  the 
Revolution  were  socialist  and  anti-capitalist.  Yet,  again,  there 
were  those  to  whom  nationalist  solutions  of  the  war  were  alone  satis- 
factory, while  the  internationalist  view  of  State  relations  prevailed 
in  the  workers  and  in  large  sections  of  the  fighting  forces.  These 
eight  months  of  divisions  and  doubts  were  followed  by  the  Bolschevik 
rising  in  November.  This  first  phase  of  the  Revolution  produced 
one  heroic  figure, 

Kerensky, 

a  lawyer,  who  had  been  born  in  the  Caucasus,  famous  as  an  advocate 
in  political  trials,  in  which  he  had  defended  men  against  bureau- 

H 


cratic  prosecutions.  Kerensky  had  been  leader  of  the  Labour  Party 
in  the  third  Duma.  There  he  had  been  strong  in  exposing  Czarist 
cruelty  and  bureaucratic  incapacity.  He  now  aimed  at  reconciling 
the  Revolution  to  the  Western  Allies.  Amid  changes  of  Ministry, 
threats  and  dangers,  disappointed  of  support  on  which  he  thought 
he  could  rely,  as  popular  orator,  Prime  Minister,  Commander  in 
Chief  and  Leader  of  Revolution,  Kerensky  struggled  on.  When 
just  a  month  old,  the  Revolution  proclaimed  its  altered  war  aims 
(April  11,  1917),  and  in  the  proclamation  of  Prince  Lvoff,  then 
President  of  the  Council,  renounced  imperialistic  objects,  and,  whilst 
loyally  desiring  to  fight  on  with  its  Allies,  Russia  demanded  no 
annexations  and  no  indemnities,  but  the  rights  of  nations  to  decide 
their  own  destiny.  Kerensky's  policy  was  to  continue  in  the 
Alliance  against  Germany;  whether  under  Allied  pressure  or  native 
pride,  this  policy  compelled  the  Russians  to  make  a  vigorous  offen- 
sive. The  Russian  armies  in  Galicia  advanced  two  days;  this 
was  followed  by  the  Germans  resuming  operations  and  occupying 
the  great  port  of  Riga.  The  leadership  of  Kerensky,  who  seemed  to 
Western  democrats  indispensable,  might  have  had  the  support  of 
the  Western  Allies  had  they  realised  that  Russia  was  too  disorgan- 
ised and  weakened  by  losses  and  ruin  of  the  old  social  order  to 
continue  any  real  fight. 

The    Economic   Collapse 

of  Russia  had  helped  to  bring  about  the  Revolution.  In  Petro- 
grad  in  March,  1917,  not  only  was  there  grave  shortage  of  bread, 
but  prices  had  soared  and  were  still  soaring.  The  price  of  bread 
was  five  times  what  it  had  been  when  war  began;  herrings  had 
risen  767  per  cent.;  metal  wares  1,900  per  cent.;  soap  nearly  800 
per  cent.;  wood  for  fires  1,100  per  cent.  The  cost  of  the  war,  due 
largely  to  waste,  incompetence  and  reverses,  had  been  crushing; 
in  the  three  years  of  war  to  August,  1917,  war  credits  amounted 
to  41,392,000,000  roubles  (or  £4,000,000,000  at  the  normal  rate 
of  exchange).  In  foreign  loans  there  had  been  raised  8,061  mil- 
lion roubles,  of  which  Russian  authorities  give  £700,000,000  as 
raised  in  England.  All  foreign  exchanges  had  long  been  greatly 
against  Russia.  The  Government  printing  presses  were  turning 
out  paper  money  in  literally  unnumbered  amounts.  With  indus- 
tries declining,  raw  materials  not  available,  and  famine  threaten- 
ing, it  meant  to  the  people  that  the  war  must  end.  This 
conviction  was  confirmed  by  the  patent  fact  that  while  the  limited 
railway  services  were  employed  in  feeding  a  large  army  at  the 
front,  the  want  in  Petrograd  and  the  North  could  not  be  relieved, 
because  rolling-stock  was  not  available  to  bring  corn  and  other 
goods  from  Siberia  and  Southern  Russia.  As  Kerensky  said, 
"  Russia  was  worn  out."  Those  who  condemn  Russia  for  not 
fighting  on  still  should  inquire  whether  they  are  not  demanding 
impossibilities. 

In  reply  to  Kerensky's  request  for  a  re-statement  of  Peace 

15 


and  War  Aims,  each  Ally  made  reservations  and  distinctions. 
Even  the  American  Note  was  vague,  though  President  Wilson  from 
the  first  made  a  sincere  effort  to  show  sympathy  and  guidance  to 
the  Revolution.  So  it  happened  that,  whilst  Ministries  fell,  after 
an  average  life  of  six  weeks,  Kerensky  remained  and  formed 
another.  His  eloquence,  resource,  and  programme  failed,  his 
power  declined.  With  Tereschenko,  the  Ukrainian  millionaire, 
sugar  magnate  and  Duma  deputy,  as  his  constant  colleague  at  the 
Russian  Foreign  Office,  he  remained  in  touch  with  the  Allied 
Governments.  One  sign  of  this  was  the  renewed  supply  of  muni- 
tions to  Russia  from  America,  Japan,  and  Britain.  Another 
sign  was  the  Military  Convention  with  Britain,  under  which 
Russians  here  were  conscripted  into  the  British  Army.  Kerensky 
also  encouraged  the  idea  of  autonomy  for  the  Ukrainians,  the 
Finns,  and  the  other  Russian  sub-nationalities,  and  their  future 
within  a  United  States  of  Russia. 


Kerensky' s   Army   Policy 

was  to  reorganise  the  soldiers,  and  to  inspire  a  new  discipline 
and  efficiency.  The  Revolution,  as  one  of  its  first  acts,  on 
March  20  abolished  the  death  sentence  for  soldiers.  Kerensky 
for  some  months  continued  this.  He  allowed  those  soldiers  who 
wished  to  return  home  to  leave  their  commands.  He  relied  on  a 
volunteer  army.  His  wish  for  liberty,  or  to  meet  the  soldiers' 
wish  for  liberty,  induced  his  "  Soldiers'  Charter,"  which  gave  to 
soldiers  privileges  not  enjoyed  by  any  other  army.  Its  first  words 
were:  "All  serving  in  the  Army  enjoy  the  rights  of  citizens,  but 
while  on  duty  they  must  strictly  conform  to  the  demands  of 
discipline."  Officers  have  asked  whether  this  principle  did  not 
render  old  ideas  of  discipline  impossible.  But  after  the  Revolu- 
tion could  anyone  restore  the  old  order  ? 


General    Kornilov 

had  been  Comma  nder-in-Chief  of  the  Petrograd  garrison  when  the 
Revolution  be^an.  A  Siberian  Cossack  by  birth  he  became  the 
hope  of  the  Cadet  party  and  of  all  Imperialists.  Many,  both  in 
Russia  and  among  the  Allies,  hoped  that  Kornilov  would  lead  a 
counter-revolution  and  restore  the  monarchy.  His  authority  with 
the  Cossacks,  his  attempts  to  restore  the  military  position  against 
the  Germans,  his  securing  from  Kerensky  the  restoration  of  the 
death  penalty  in  the  army,  his  proposal  to  extend  it  to  railwaymen, 
his  suppression  of  political  propaganda,  his  behaviour  and  speech 
at  the  Moscow  Conference  in  August,  his  march  on  Petrograd  in 
September,  raised  extravagant  hopes  that  a  military  dictator  had 
appeared  in  Russia,  under  whom  Russia  would  be  a  fighting  ally 
stronger  than  ever.  But  it  was  clear  to  the  Russian  soldiers  that 
to  follow  Kornilov  s  lead  must  end  the  Revolution  :  this  would  have 

16 


meant  at  once  civil  war.  His  soldiers  fraternised  with  the  revolu- 
tionary forces  sent  against  Kornilov ;  he  was  imprisoned ;  and  the 
left  wing  of  the  Revolution  was  stronger  than  ever. 

The   Stockholm   Conference 

was  proposed,  as  a  revival  of  the  old.  International.  It  was  to 
summon  working-class  representatives  from  all  countries.  So 
German  and  Russian,  French  and  Austrian  workers  would  have  sat 
together  in  an  attempt  to  find  a  basis  for  peace.  It  was  intended 
that  representatives  from  the  Allies  should  first  have  deliberated 
together  to  find  their  common  ground.  This  prospect  gave 
Kerensky  still  another  chance  when  the  Russian  offensive  of  July 
failed.  It  was  the  last  hope  of  keeping  the  Russian  Revolution 
out  of  the  control  of  the  extreme  Internationalists.  These,  the 
Maximalists  or  Bolscheviks,  opposed  Stockholm,  because  the  Socialist 
parties  (or  the  majorities  which  spoke  for  the  Socialists)  in  Germany, 
France,  and  Britain,  unlike  those  of  Italy,  had  allied  themselves 
with  their  national  Governments  in  voting  war  credits.  To  the 
Bolscheviks  this  meant  joining  with  the  Imperialistic  national 
Governments  against  International  Socialism.  The  position  was 
clearly  seen  and  urged  by  Mr.  Arthur  Henderson,  the  Labour 
Member  of  the  British  War  Cabinet.  He  had  'been  on  a  prolonged 
mission  to  Russia.  When,  through  the  action  of  the  Allied  Govern- 
ments, the  Stockholm  proposal  was  defeated,  Mr.  Henderson 
resigned  on  August  11,  1917.  The  Bolscheviks  had  been  in  a 
minority  at  first,  both  in  the  cities,  the  country,  and  the  Soviets  : 
their  papers  had  been  suppressed ;  their  leaders  had  been  forced 
into  hiding.  But  from  this  point  they  steadily  grew ;  their  ideas 
captured  the  Soviets;  the  universal  need  of  peace  and  the  failure 
of  Kerensky 's  last  hope  brought  the  Soviets  round.  It  was  through 
the  action  of  the  Soviets,  always  the  real  masters  of  the  situation, 
that  Kerensky  fell ;  on  November  6  the  second  revolution  placed 
the  Bolscheviks  in  power,  with  Lenin  and  Trotsky  as  the  leaders 
of  the  nation 

The    Lack   of   Accord  with   the  Western  Allies 

was  latent  in  the  Revolution  in  March,  and  was  manifest -in 
November,  when  the  Bolscheviks  took  control.  A  nation  with  over 
90  per  cent,  illiterates,  which  dess  than  two  generations  ago  was  a 
nation  of  serfs,  which  is  mainly  peasant  and  poor,  which  had  suffered 
invasion,  famine,  and  economic  collapse,  which  had  just  shaken 
itself  free  of  the  cruelties  and  oppressions  of  Czardom,  neither  could 
nor  would  continue  the  war.  In  wartime  the  Governments  of  most 
countries  control  their  citizens  more  powerfully  than  in  peace,  and 
are  themselves  less  controlled.  In  Russia, the  people,  through  the 
Revolution,  have  gained  a  new  freedom,  and  through  the  Soviets 
they  control  their  Government  as  in  no  other  country.  The  Russian 
Soviets  not  only  make  the  Government  as  a  General  Election  makes 

17 


the  Government  in  Britain,  but  also  keep  in  power  or  destroy  the 
Government  as  a  Parliamentary  majority  gives  or  withholds  con- 
fidence in  the  Government  of  the  day.  It  is  true  that  the  immense 
Empire  of  Russia  had  fallen  asunder,  some  provinces  taken  by  the 
enemy,  others  proclaiming  independence,  others  looking  towards 
State  autonomy  or  Home  Rule.  But  the  Russian  idea  of 
national  as  well  as  of  international  politics  supposes  local  units, 
determining  their  own  bounds  and  conditions,  yet  in  close  contact 
and  understanding  with  one  another.  Faced  with  these  facts,  why 
have  not  the  Allied  Governments  recognised  the  Republic  of  Soviets 
as  the  Government  of  Russia?  Because  their  unimaginative  diplo- 
matists and  their  Press  (perhaps  by  force  of  censorship  and  loyalty) 
have  failed  to  see  that  the  young  giants  of  Russia,  freed  from  their 
chains,  could  only  be  led  if  understood,  and  could  not  be  forced 
into  the  mind  and  manners  of  the  West. 


The   Failure   of   the   Allied   Diplomacy 

— or,  rather,  of  the  Allies  as  a  whole^in  face  of  revolutionary 
Russia  is  patent.  This  is  admitted  by  all,  especially  by  news- 
papers usually  supporting  the  Government  and  the  war.  As  soon 
as  the  Bolschevik  victory  became  complete  it  was  universally 
apparent.  The  following  quotations  might  be  multiplied: — 

'  Very  different  would  have  been  the  march  of  events  if 
the  Western  Allies  of  Russia  had  shown  more  sympathy  with 
the  Provisional  Government  and  a  better  comprehension  of 
their  difficulties.'' — Daily  Chronicle. 

"  Our  Foreign  Office  has  failed  completely  in  Russia  to 
meet  the  people/' — Evening  Standard. 

"  We  have  given  Germany  the  opportunity  of  falsely 
posing  as  a  Moderate  to  the  too  innocent  Russian  people.  .  .  . 
This  is  one  of  the  chief  failures  of  Allied  diplomacy  in  this 
war." — Westminster  Gazette. 

"  A  colossal  ignorance  and  levity  have  marked  our  policy 
with  regard  to  revolutionary  Russia  from  the  first  day  to  the 
last. " — Manchester  Guardian . 

Sternest  and  most  unanswerable  of  all  condemnations  was 

President    Wilson's    Judgment 

(December  4,  1917),  that  if  the  Western  Powers  had  so  presented 
their  war  aims  as  to  have  had  them  "  made  plain  at  the  very 
outset  the  sympathy  and  enthusiasm  of  the  Russian  people  might 
have  been  once  and  for  all  enlisted  on  the  side  of  the  Allies,  sus- 
picion and  distrust  swept  away,  and  a  real  and  lasting  union  of 
purpose  effected.  And  three  months  later  it  was  reported  from 
Washington,  apparently  on  high  authority,  that  President  Wilson 
"  still  unquestionably  holds  to  the  opinion  that  the  Revolution  is 

18 


the  one  single  great  gain  to  civilisation  thus  far  resulting  from  the 
war,  regardless  of  how  black  present  prospects  in  Russia  appear." 
The  President  of  the  U.S.A.  takes  long  views,  which  cannot  be 
brushed  aside  as  unreasonable. 


IV. 
THE  BOLSCHEVIK  GOVERNMENT 

succeeded  to  the  Revolution's  inheritance  in  November,  1917,  after 
eight  mouths  of  coalitions  and  chapges.  The  Bolschevik  advent  was 
no  sudden  success  of  a  well-timed  plot,  no  violent  effort  of  a  con- 
spiracy without  popular  oacking.  It  was  the  sequence  of  events. 
Its  early  fall  was  at  once  foretold  by  wilful  misrepresentation  or 
ignorant  misunderstanding.  But  the  fall  did  not  come.  In  spite 
of  immense  difficulties  and  defeats,  it  persists.  The  relations  be- 
tween revolutionary  Russia  and  the  Allies  appeared  hopelessly 
ruined  as  weeks  went  by  without  the  prophesied  collapse  of  the 
Bolscheviks,  while  the  Brest-Litovsk  peace  negotiations  began  and 
proceeded.  It  was  characteristic  of  the  ignorance  and  levity  of 
Allied  policy  that  so  many  chose  to  regard  the  Bolscheviks  as 
bought  with  German  gold.  To  understand  the  injustice  of  this 
accusation  we  should  know  a  little  of  the  personality  of  Lenin 
and  Trotsky. 

Lenin, 

the  Prime  Minister  of  the  Bolschevik  Government,  is  Vladimir 
Illitch  Oulianoff.  'Born  of  a  noble  family,  he  became  a  lawyer 
after  passing  through  the  University.  He  helped  to  found  the  first 
social  democratic  organisation  in  Russia ;  then'  he  was  imprisoned 
in  Siberia,  and  during  the  revolutionary  days  of  1905  edited 
the  first  Socialist  paper  in  Petrograd.  His  life  since  then  had  been 
lived  in  exile.  In  Cracow  when  the  war  broke  out,  he  was  arrested 
by  the  Austrians,  and  later  expelled  to  Switzerland,  remaining 
there  till  the  revolution  in  March,  1917,  when  occurred 

His    Return   to    Russia   through    Germany. 

This  fact  has  been  constantly  remembered  against  him  by  those 
who  have  sought  grounds  to  abuse  him  as  pro-German.  The  facts, 
however,  are  simply  these: — In  March,  1917,  a  number  of  Russian 
political  refugees  met  with  difficulties  created  by  the  French  and 
British  Governments,  who  prevented  their  return  to  Russia. 
Certain  Swiss  Socialists  then  made  arrangements  with  the  German 
Government  for  their  free  return  by  "way  of  Germany  on  certain 
conditions :  that  (a)  any  refugees  independent  of  creed  or  opinions 
might  go  in  the  party;  (b)  they  were  accompanied  by  a  Swiss 

19 


Socialist;  (c)  the  railway  carriages  were  closed  through  Germany; 
and  (d)  no  German  official  communicated  with  the  refugees.  In 
any  case,  it  is  quite  false  that  Lenin  personally  had  German 
favours  or  support  on  his  return.  Ardent  supporters  of  the  war 
and  supporters  of  the  Kerensky  policy  shared  the  journey  with 
him. 

Trotsky, 

like  Lenin,  has  risked  his  life  and  suffered  imprisonment  for  his 
faith.  He  took  part  in  the  Revolution  of  1905;  sent  to  Siberia, 
he  escaped,  to  settle  in  Vienna  in  1907.  There  he  wrote  "  Russia 
in  the  Revolution,"  and  became  famous  as  publicist  to  the 
Socialists  of  Austria  and  Germany.  On  outbreak  of  war  in 
1914  Trotsky  came  to  Paris,  and"  there  edited  a  Russian  newspaper 
strongly  anti-Czar.  On  this  paper  being  suppressed  and  himself 
banished,  Trotsky  tried  to  enter  Switzerland,  but  was  refused 
admission  at  the  request  of  the  French  Government.  He  entered 
Spain,  was  imprisoned  there,  and  released  to  go  to  U.S.A.  In 
March,  1917,  immediately  the  Revolution  had  succeeded,  he  took 
ship  for  Russia,  but  was  taken  from  the  vessel  by  a  British  war- 
ship, placed  in  a  camp  at  Halifax,  N.S.,  with  interned  German 
sailors,  and  charged  with  being  a  German  agent.  His  Socialist 
agitation  there  amongst  the  Germans  and  the  protests  from 
Russia  against  his  detention  were  followed  by  his  release.  He 
returned  to  Russia,  where  the  public  were  told  that  he  had  received 
German  money,  the  fact  being  that  German  brewery  workers  in 
Milwaukee  had  entrusted  him  with  a  collection  for  Russian  victims 
of  Czardom.  On  return  to  Petrograd  he  published  a  pamphlet 
describing  his  experiences,  with  biting  invective  against  all 
Imperialist  Governments. 

,   Lenin    and    Trotsky 

in  their  constant  attack  on  Imperialist  and  Capital  warfare 
were  in  a  minority  till  late  in  1917,  but  continued  agitating  in 
Russia  for  an  immediate  and  general  peace  without  annexations. 
They  opposed  the  idea  of  reliance  upon  the  Western  Democracies, 
which  to  them  were  Capitalist  and  therefore  Imperialist.  When 
the  Russian  offensive  failed  in  July  and  the  proposal  to  meet  the 
German  Socialists  at  Stockholm  became  the  policy  of  Kerensky 
and  the  Soviets, 

The    Maximalists 

(as  the  party  of  Lenin  was  called)  bitterly  attacked  the  policy  of 
Stockholm.  They  had  denounced  the  mass  of  German  Social 
Democrats  as  false  to  the  doctrines  of  Marx,  as  men  who,  by 
having  voted  credits  and  fighting  for  their  national  government, 
had  pledged  themselves  to  Imperialism.  Failure  of  the  Allies  to 
understand  and  support  Kerensky,  failure  of  the  Russian  July 

20 


offensive,  failure  to  secure  a  revision  of  their  War  Aims  at  a 
common  conference,  failure  to  bring  about  the  united  action  of 
Labour  at  the  Stockholm  Conference,  with  increasing  food  short- 
age and  army  disorganisation,  brought  the  C.W.S.D.  (Council  of 
Workers  and  Soldiers'  Delegates)  and  the  Peasants'  Delegates  into 
line  on  the  side  of  the  Maximalists.  From  this  time  the  Soviet 
was  the  C.W.S.P.D.  (Council  of  Workers,  Soldiers'  and  Peasants' 
Delegates).  In  October  Kerensky  met  the  Provisional  Parliament 
which  he  had  set  up  to  bridge  the  interval  before  the  electors 
could  elect  an  Assembly.  His  critics  declared  that  this  body  was 
a  selected  assembly,  picked  and  nominated  by  Kerensky,  of  men 
likely  to  support  him.  If  so,  it  is  significant  that  it  only  gave 
him  a  majority  of  twenty  out  of  400  votes,  with  more  than  twenty 
abstentions.  Kerensky 's  policy  had  miscarried.  When  Mr. 
Bonar  Law  announced  that 

The    Paris    Allied    Conference 

would  discuss  solely  the  prosecution  and  not  the  aims  of  the  war, 
Kerensky 's  power  was  gone.  The  German  Reichstag  had  in  July 
passed  its  Peace  resolution  ;  the  Kaiser  had  twice  been  forced  to 
change  his  Chancellor;  Austria  showed  signs  of  internal  weakening; 
the  Pope  had  launched  his  Peace  Note  on  August  1 ;  its  policy  of 
disarmament  and  arbitration  had  been  accepted  by  the  Central 
Powers;  Germany  had  made  a  private  approach  through  M.  Briand 
offering  to  evacuate  Belgium,  Alsace,  and  Italian  territories. 
iverensky  had  proclaimed  Russia  worn  out  and  immediate  peace 
essential.  The  Maximalists  declared,  against  Kerensky 's  policy,  that 
it  was  the  Western  Powers  as  much  as  the  Central  Powers  who 
believed  in  militarism  and  were  prolonging  the  war. 

The    Constituent    Assembly 

with  its  earlier  hopes,  had  not  been  elected.  Nominations  for  this 
body  had  been  sent  in  by  October.  It  was  to  be  elected  on  a 
democratic  franchise  of  men  and  women  by  the  party  list  method 
of  Proportional  Representation.  But  when  the  elections  were  held 
the  Bolschevik  policy  had  carried  the  people.  The  lists  put  before 
the  voters  submitted  lists  of  candidates  which  were  out  of  date.  It 
met  in  January,  1918,  but  represented  a  phase  of  the  Revolution 
now  ancient  history.  The  Bolschevik  Government  dissolved  the 
newly-elected  Assembly,  proclaimed  the  authority  and  power  of  the 
Executive  Committee  of  the  Soviets,  and  Russia's  first  revolutionary 
elected  Parliament  died  at  birth.  The  Council  of  Soviets  reigned 
in  its  stead. 

The  Bolscheviks,  their  policy,  and  achievements  were  from  the 
first  misunderstood,  and  have  been  misrepresented  by  a  persistent 

Anti-Bolschevik    Press   Campaign 

in  and  outside  Russia.     They  were  at  first  denounced  as  Pacifists, 
therefore  pro-Germans  ;  then  as  doctrinaires  ;  later  as  Jews;  madmen, 

21 


bloodthirsty  anarchists,  robbers,  criminals ;  then  as  autocrats  and 
despots,  militarists,  and  anti-Germans;  Eussian  ex-noblemen  and 
possible  allies  with  Clemenceau  and  the  Republic  of  China.  Only 
•d  few  journals  have  admitted  the  truth,  that  they  were  efficient 
administrators  and  able  negotiators.  Mr.  A.  Ransonie,  Petrograd 
correspondent  of  the  "  Daily  News,"  returning  to  Russia  after  three 
months  in  England,  wrote,  December  31,  1917,  that  "the  present 
Labour  Government  is  extremely  efficient,  energetic  and  decisive, 
though  faced  by  the  noisy  opposition  of  the  privileged  classes,  who 
are  unable  to  make  a  Government  of  their  own,  and  are  doing  all 
they  can  to  shake  the  Government  by  means  of  sabotage  and  libel. 
The  city  is  more  orderly  than  it  had  been  for  months  before  the 
Bolscheviks  took  control.  '  Col.  W.  B.  Thompson,  of  the  U.S.A. 
Army,  declared  on  January  13,  1918,  that  the  Bolscheviks  had 
"  maintained  a  most  surprising  degree  of  order  in  Russia 
in  Petrograd,  during  the  first  month  of  the  November  Revolution, 
I  can  say  from  my  personal  observation  there  was  better  order  than 
at  any  other  time  during  my  four  months'  stay"  (September  to 
December,  1917).  Col.  Thompson  also  stated  that  Kerensky  might 
have  waged  successful  war  against  Germany  if  the  Cadets,  Milhin- 
kof's  party,  had  not  lied  about  him,  done  everything  to  destroy  hi« 
influence,  and  betrayed  him.  Col.  Thompson  is  a  rich  American 
banker!  Many  other  testimonies  show  that  the  Bolschevik  policy 
was  efficient  and  restoring  the  country  to  law  and  order.  Indeed, 
this  is  implied  in  what  Sir  George  Buchanan,  the  returning  British 
Ambassador,  stated  at  Stockholm  on  January  13,  that  "the 
Bolscheviks  had  attained  such  a  position  that  nobody  can  overthrow 
them  at  present." 

The   Power   of   the   Bolscheviks 

has  relied  on  the  national  organisation  of  the  Soviets.  Their  energy, 
prompt  actions,  and  radical  ideas  began  to  produce  out  of  chaos 
and  uncertainty  a  new  order,  promising  social  rejuvenation.  Food 
was  commandeered  and  brought  to  the  towns ;  the  Peasants  parted 
now  with  stores  retained  befoie,  accepting  the 

Bolschevik    Land    Policy 

in  the  spirit  of  the  Russian  proverb,  "  God  made  the  Land  for  those 
who  will  work  it."  Lands  of  the  Church  the  Court,  and  lar^e 
landed  estates  are  now  for  the  Peasants  to  work  and  rural  Soviets 
to  administer.  The  small  'peasant  proprietor  system  of  France, 
involving  absolute  property  and  harmful  subdivision,  is  far  removed 
from  the  notions  and  practice  of  the  Russian  peasantry.  Communal 
rather  than  private  ownership  of  land  is  the  Russian  ideal. 

In  industrial  undertakings  the  control  and  management  passed 
to  the  workmen.  Co-operation  between  the  workers  with  the  masters 
of  industry  (not  dissimilar  in  spirit  and  aim  to  that  advocated  by 
the  Whitley  Report  for  Britain)  was  carried  out. 

22 


Russian    Co-Operative    Societies 

comprise  at  least  20,000  distributing  "  Co-ops."  in  Russia  and 
millions  of  members.  Thwarted  and  suppressed  by  Czardom,  they 
developed  rapidly  under  Kerensky,  who  gave  them  special  privi- 
leges. At  first  they  were  a  strong  force  against  the  Bolscheviks, 
who  in  turn  have  favoured  and  let  alone  the  Co-operators. 
Bolschevik  policy  towards  all  other  capitalists  who  did  not  submit 
to  the  control  of  their  workmen  was  "  to  leave  the  bourgeois  only 
their  slippers."  The  great  Co-operative  Banking  Concern,  the 
Moscow-Narody  Bank,  continues  while  the  other  Banks  passed 
into  a  State  monopoly.  Artels  are  being  formed  to  work  the 
national  forests:  "  the  working  of  the  forests  by  the  people  them- 
selves demands  that  all  workers  concerned  should  close  their  ranks, 
and  organise  themselves  into  Forest-Working  Artels,  further  com- 
bining these  into  Unions  and  thus  laying  the  foundation  for  a 
proper  and  co-ordinated  working  of  the  forests."  In  Februarv, 
1918,  the  organ  of  Russian  co-operators  spoke  of  the  favourable 
condition  then  prevailing  for  the  growth  of  co-operation. 

The    Bolschevik    State    Bank 

was  founded  by  taking  over  the  assets  and  businesses  of  most  of 
the  Banks  of  Russia.  The  early  days  of  Bolschevik  rule  found 
the  Banks  financing  counter-revolutionary  work,  and  declining  to 
assist  the  Government.  The  directors,  managers,  and  staffs  of  the 
expropriated  Banks  refused  the  new  conditions  of  service.  The 
Bank  doors  were  closed.  Then 'a  new  set  of  officials  and  a  unified 
State  Bank  took  their  place. 

Thus  Co-operation,  State  ownership,  and  total  elimination  of 
the  capitalist  profiteer  are  aimed  at.  Later  the  Bolscheviks 
declared  the  annulment  of  foreign  loans  and  obligations.  Their 
policy  of  repudiation  of  State  debts,  tried  often  by  small  and 
backward  States,  is  already  in  part  defeated  by  the  German  peace. 
Yet  the  financial  and  economic  position  of  Russia  may  be  repeated 
in  other  lands.  Who  will  predict  to-day  the  future  of  Labour  or 
of  Capital  anywhere  ? 

The   Class   Struggle 

of  Proletarians  against  the  propertied  classes  was  first  announced 
eighty  years  ago  by  British  Chartists,  elaborated  by  Marx  and 
Engels,  accepted  as  the  basis  of  Continental  Socialism  and  pro- 
claimed by  Trotsky  in  his  book  "  The  War  and  the  International  " 
(October,  1914).  This  doctrine  has  become  actual  in  Russian 
policy.  Similarly,  in  foreign  policy  Lenin  and  Trotsky  put  for- 
ward 

Class   Truce,    Union     Sacree,  Burgfrieden, 

peace  between  the  proletarian  workers,  who  should  take  their 
proper  place  after  the  downfall  of  Capitalism  and  the  defeat  of 

23 


Imperialism.  A  genuine  peace  and  a  true  League  of  Peoples  is 
only  possible  on  the  basis  of  the  International.  Faithful  to  this 
theory,  which  appeared  madness  to  the  Governments  of  the  world, 
they  dismissed  the  Russian  Consuls,  Ambassadors,  Attaches,  and 
others  in  foreign  lands,  appointed  mostly  by  the  Czar,  who  refused 
to  obey  their  directions,  and  they  appointed  Ambassadors  not 
accredited  to  foreign  Courts,  but  to  the  peoples  abroad.  These 
were,  of  course,  ignored  and  thwarted  in  their  missions.  When 
in  December,  1918,  the  Bolscheviks  proposed  a  Peace  Conference 
and  announced,  not  by  diplomatic  notes,  but  by  wireless  messages 
addressed  "  to  all  "  of  the  people  everywhere,  that  after  a  week's 
delay  they  would  ask  for  an  armistice  with  a  view  to  a  general 
peace  of  all  nations,  they  received  no  response  from  any  Govern- 
ment. Were  they  in  a  position  to  negotiate  ?  or  to  achieve  any 
peace  short  of  absolute  surrender  at  discretion  ?  They  would  try. 

Was  it  a  mistake  that  this  offer  "to  all  "  to  enter  into 
negotiations  for  peace  was  ignored  by  the  Allies  ?  No  doubt  the 
argument  weighed  with  them  that  labour  unrest,  extreme  war 
weariness,  internal  divisions,  and  exhausted  fighting  forces  were 
felt  as  never  before  in  Germany  and  Austria,  that  Turkey  was 
being  driven  back  in  Palestine  and  Mesopotamia,  and  that  the 
German  alliance  still  held  -unbroken  lines  on  the  West,  and  had 
recently  driven  the  Italians  far  behind  their  frontiers.  On  the 
other  hand,  America  was  making  huge  preparations,  but  not 
yet  exerting  a  tenth  of  her  prospective  power  in  the  field.  More- 
over, Russia  was  herself  not  united  :  there  were  armed  revolts 
against  the  Bolscheviks  in  Siberia,  in  Cossack  country,  the  Ukraine, 
and  southern  towns.  Accounts  sent  out  from  neutral  countries  or 
capitalistic  sources  in  Russia  magnified  the  importance  of  these 
risings  and  depreciated  the  Bolschevik  power.  A  speedy  Bolschevik 
collapse  was  still  prophesied  and  hoped  for.  Such  anticipations  were 
finally  dispelled  by  Sir  George  Buchanan,  the  British  Ambassador, 
who  on  returning  to  London  in  the  middle  of  January  declared 
that  no  change  in  Russia  was  to  be  expected  in  the  near  future,  and 
the  Soviets  will  still  be  the  holders  of  power. 

The   Attitude   of    the   Allies 

was  as  laid  down  by  the  British  Ambassador.  He  had  already, 
on  December  9,  1917,  made  a  statement  to  Petrograd  pressmen, 
dignified  in  tone,  towards  the  Russian  people,  warm  in  generous 
sentiments,  and  said  to  have  been  drawn  up  by  the  British  Foreign 
Secretary,  Mr.  Balfour.  It  admitted  the  right  of  Russia  to  make  a 
separate  peace,  but  complaine'd  of  negotiations  being  opened  with 
the  enemy  without  previous  consultation  with  the  Allies.  It  spoke 
of  the  "  principles  higher  than  treaty  rights  .  .  .  principles  fully 
recognised  by  the  Council  of  People's  Commissaries  .  .  .  those  of  a 
democratic  peace  which  accords  with  those  of  smaller  and  weaker 
nationalities,  which  repudiated  the  idea  of  extracting  plunder  out 

24 


of  conquered  enemies  under  the  name  of  war  indemnities,  or  of 
incorporating  in  great  empires  the  territories  of  reluctant  popula- 
tions." It  well  urged  that  it  is  "with  the  German  autocracy  and 
not  with  the  German  people  that  negotiations  for  an  armistice  are 
being  conducted  .  .  .  the  Allies  are  ready  as  soon  as  a  stable 
Government  is  constituted  and  recognised  by  the  Russian  people 
as  a  whole,  to  examine  with  their  Government  the  aims  of  the  war 
and  possible  conditions  of  a  just  and  durable  peace."  From  this 
date  the  Russian  Government  has  not  been  recognised  by  the  Allies. 
Russia  lias  revolved  on  an  orbit  apart. 


Bolschevik    Foreign    Policy 

marks  a  complete  break  with  the  old  diplomacy.  The  aim,  spirit 
and  methods  of  Lenin  as  head  of  the  Soviet  in  Petrograd,  and 
Trotsky  as  Foreign  Commissary  at  Brest-Litovsk  in  their  peace 
negotiations  were  novel.  How  easy,  then,  to  misunderstand  and 
misrepresent  them!  Their  aim  was  to  obtain  (1)  a  general  peace 
resting  on  the  will  of  the  peoples,  and  (2)  a  self-determination  for 
the  nationalities  whose  lands  and  liberties  had  been  outraged  by 
imperialist  militarism.  Their  spirit  was  to  appeal  frankly  to  the 
public,  over  the  heads  of  generals  and  plenipotentiaries,  to  the 
workers  and  fighters.  Their  methods  were  publicity  and  pro- 
paganda. The  armistice  on  the  Russian  front  which  they  obtained 
was  to  admit  of  the  fraternising  of  the  troops,  the  dissemination  of 
leaflets  and  journals,  and  facilities  for  trading,  and  especially  the 
discussions  of  the  negotiating  parties  were  to  be  public.  In  this 
spirit,  when  Trotsky  and  his  companions  met  the  Germans  they 
shook  hands  with  them  and  talked  in  familiar  way,  as  much  with 
the  orderlies  and  other  men  in  attendance  as  with  von  Kiihlmann 
and  Czernin.  The 

Brest-Litovsk    Negotiations 

were  prolonged,  a  long  fight  of  Russian  Socialism  against  German 
Machtpolitik.  At  the  first  meeting  (December  25,  1917)  the 
Russian  proposals  were  for  a  general  peace,  with  referenda  to 
decide  the  allegiance  of  occupied  territories,  compensation  for  the 
devastated  districts  from  a  general  fund  contributed  to  by  all 
the  belligerents,  and  no  economic  war  after  the  war.  These  terms 
are  all  included  in  the  Labour  .War  Aims  of  the  Allied  Socialists 
who  met  in  London  two  months  later,  and  agreed  on  a  common 
policy  for  peace.  Trotsky  from  the  first  demanded  that  German 
soldiers  were  not  to  be  withdrawn  from  the  Russian  front  for  service 
elsewhere.  His  object  was  to  make  clear  and  to  enforce  his  demand 
for  a  general  peace.  Whether  the  German  Military  Command 
observed  this  condition,  which  they  accepted,  is  more  than  doubtful. 
Trotsky,  moreover,  made  it  known  that  if  through  her  weakness 
an  unsatisfactory  peace  were  forced  on  Russia  it  would  be  regarded 
as  a  truce  only  till  conflict  could  be  renewed.  The  German  reply 


was  that  they  had  no  wish  to  fob  independent  States,  and  that  in 
occupied  territories  the  people  should  themselves  decide  their  fate. 
But  how  ?  Trotsky  demanded  the  withdrawal  of  every  German 
soldier,  so  that  the  populations  invaded  might  be  free  to  vote  as 
they  wanted.  Of  course,  the  Germans  declined  this.  This  first 
fundamental  difference  led  to  an  adjournment.  Trotsky  returned 
to  Petrograd,  and  in  a  public  speech  denounced  Germany's  "  hypo- 
critical peace  proposals."  In  this  first  phase  Trotsky  drew  from 
the  German  and  Austrian  Ministers  agreement  to  the  formula  "  no 
annexations  and  no  indemnities.  '  The  repercussion  of  these  events 
was  great ;  the  Junkers  were  alarmed  and  indignant  in  Prussia  ;  and 
Ludendorff  tendered  his  resignation  as  a  protest.  Later  came  the 
great  political  strike  in  Berlin.  In  London  Mr.  Lloyd  George  re- 
stated to  the  Trade  Union  Conference  the  Allied  war  aims  on 
January  5,  1918.  In  Vienna  was  also  a  strike  for  peace.  These 
events  can  all  be  traced  to  Trotsky's  daring  policy.  When  negotia- 
tions were  resumed  it  was  to  wrangle  over  the  freedom  of  self- 
determination  of  conquered  lands.  Germany  evidently  meant  to 
hold  what  she  had  seized.  German  offers  to  withdraw  some  of  the 
troops  and  to  establish  a  native  police  were  rejected.  The  negotia- 
tions were  again  adjour'ned  for  some  days.  There  had  now  arisen 
the  question  of  the  Ukraine,  which  had  proclaimed  independence  of 
Russia;  her  position  was  discussed  and  her  plenipotentiaries  took 
part  in  the  Conference ;  but  Trotsky  protested  that  the  anti- 
Bolschevik  representatives  of  the  Ukrainian  Rada  could  not  speak 
for  the  Ukraine  population.  Again  an  adjournment  took  place. 
The  novelty,  confusion,  and  "complication  of  these  negotiations 
baffle  any  attempt  at  a  clear,  concise  account.  Yet  the  Bolschevik 
policy  was  clear  and  consistently  maintained  throughout.  Trotsky 
stood  for  a  general  peace  based  on  social  revolution,  a  peace 'of 
peoples  not  of  diplomacy,  the  self-determination  of  nationalities 
and  no  annexations  or  indemnities  by  force  of  arms.  Trotsky  in 
all  these  weeks  had  shown  himself  a  foe 

Irreconcilable   to   German    Militarism. 

He  would  sign  no  peace  with  Germany,  but  would  cease  war,  dis- 
banding the  Russian  Army.  This  was  the  position  when  negotia- 
tions for  peace  failed,  and  the  Germans  announced  the  armistice 
at  an  end.  The  German  Annies  advanced  once  more.  The  Prus- 
sian mailed  fist  secured  what  parleying  could  not  obtain — a  treaty 
forced  on  Russia  after  struggles,  appeals,  delays,  and  protests.  By 
violation  of  the  armistice  terms,  and  cynical  German  disregard  of 
the  assurances  that  no  annexations  and  no  indemnities  were 
intended,  a  cruel  peace  was  imposed  on  Russia. 

The  position  in  Russia  was  that  the  old  regime  had  dis- 
appeared. The  liberal  intelligenzia  and  bourgeoisie  were  dis- 
credited, and  were  devoting  their  efforts  to  encouraging  sabotage 
and  internal  discontent  against  the  Socialists.  The  people  every- 
where were  suffering  unexampled  privations  and  hardships  from 

26 


which  peace  alone  afforded  the  only  relief.  The  Soviet  was  still  in 
command,  full  of  energy  and  alone  possessed  of  a  definite  policy. 
So  the 

Peace    with    Germany 

was  accepted.  Yet  not  without  division  of  opinion  within  the 
Soviet  ranks,  and  the  resignation  of  Trotsky  as  Foreign  Commis- 
sary. The  terms  of  the  Treaty  of  Peace  included,  among  other 
conditions,  that  (1)  Russia  shall  surrender  all  her  border  lands; 
Esthonia,  Lithuania,  Courland,  Poland,  Riga,  and  the  Moon 
Islands  are  evacuated  to  Germany;  (2)  £300,000,000  must  be 
paid,  as  equivalent  of  the  damage  done  by  Russian  troops  which 
invaded  German  and  Austrian  land  in  1914-1916;  this  is  merely  a 
"  disguised  indemnity,"  and  a  cynical  disregard  alike  of  German 
diplomatic  promises  and  the  Reichstag  resolution  of  July;  Liberal 
organs  in  Germany  have  protested  against  it;  (3)  the  recent 
Russian  annulment  of  State  loans  is  not  to  hold  against  German 
holders  of  Russian  debts;  this  may  mean  that  French  and  other 
holders  of  these  obligations  may  be  induced  to  sell  them  to 
Germans;  (4)  parts  of  the  Caucasus  comprising  Armenia  and  the 
provinces  of  Batoum  and  K-ars  are  returned  to  Turkey;  (5)  the 
commercial  Treaty  of  1904  is  revived,  giving  German  trade  special 
opportunities  for  peaceful  penetration ;  (6)  the  demobilisation  of 
the  Russian  Army  is  to  proceed  at  once;  and  (7)  free  passage 
to  be  granted  to  Persia  and  Afghanistan  for  German  commerce; 
this  would  secure  a  new  route  to  the  East  for  German  trade, 
replacing  the  Bagdad  Railway  route  which  has  been  lost  by 
British  conquests  in  Mesopotamia.  While  the  ratification  of  this 
treaty  was  pending,  the  German  Armies  continued  to  advance. 
Petrograd  was  threatened.  The  German  excuse  was  that  appeals 
for  order  and  intervention  came  from  Russia  suffering  from  the 
existing  anarchy  and  terror.  The  truth  cannot  be  obscured  that 
Militarism  and  Capitalism  were  in  league  against  Internationalism 
and  Socialism.  Germany  has  destroyed  Russia  as  a  great  Power. 
Russia  remains  a  Socialist  State. 


V. 

THE    COLLAPSE    OF    RUSSIA    AS    A    GREAT 

POWER 

is  now  apparent.  "  The  Russian  steam-roller  of  1914  has  dis- 
appeared," as  a  witty  M.P.  has- said,  "  but  the  man  with  the 
Red  Flag  is  there."  The  great  Allied  Power,  which  the  British 
Prime  Minister  said  was  "not  a  quitter,"  has  been  forced  to  a 
separate  peace.  The  future  of  this  great  nation,  with  its  still  vast 
territories  and  virile  people,  can  hardly  be  forecast.  The  duty  of 

27 


Russia's  old  Allies  is  to  understand  the  facts,  which  many  have 
wilfully  or  carelessly  disregarded,  and  to  show  such  sympathy  and 
support  as  may  hasten  her  recovery.  Foremost  among  the  facts  of 
the  situation  is  that  after,  if  not  before,  the  Revolution  there 
was  reached  the  stage  of 

Hopelessness    of   Continued   Warfare. 

Russia  was  incapable  of  further  military  effort.  Lenin's 
reasoned  statement,  on  February  24,  1918,  set  out  in  clear  terms 
that  Russia  having  accepted  a  Socialist  Government  "  must  pass 
through  a  period  of  civil  war  and  internal  disorder,"  "must  con- 
centrate all  her  forces  on  the  internal  struggle,"  accepting  then 
"  the  improbability  of  the  outbreak  of  Social  Revolution  in  the 
rest  of  Europe,"  it  was  not  "  treason  to  International  Socialism 
to  sign  a  peace  with  the  German  Imperialists."  '  When  workmen 
are  beaten  in  a  strike  they  only  accept  bad  conditions  in  order 
to  prepare  for  another  struggle  later."  "  If  the  Russian  Revo- 
lution continued  the  war  in  alliance  with  Anglo-French  Imperial- 
ism on  the  basis  of  the  old  Secret  Treaties  recently  published  and 
not  openly  repudiated  by  the  Allies,  then  it  would  be  prostituting 
itself  to  foreign  Imperialists."  This  statement  of  the  position 
from  Lenin's  point  of  view  ended  thus:  "  Russia,  if  she  has  peace, 
can  become  the  envy  of  all  lands  and  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the 
Social  World.  She  can  concentrate  on  the  internal  development  of 
the  Russian  Revolution.  If  she  attempts  to  reap  the  full  fruits 
of  the  Revolution  and  to  carry  on  the  war  against  foreign  imperial- 
ism, she  will  lose  both  her  objects.  If  she  concentrates  on  internal 
development  now,  ishe  will  secure  her  (second  victory  later." 
These  views  and  aims  have  carried  the  Soviet,  though  Trotsky, 
still  ready  to  fight  on,  has  resigned  his  post.  Russia  has  ceased 
to  be  a  great  Power  because  she  has  turned  to  an  international 
Socialism.  She  was  only  to  be  saved  from  this  course,  and  from 
all  the  horrors  and  humiliations  going  with  it,  if  the  Allies  had 
accepted  with  prompt  wholeheartedness  the  coilrse  to  which 
Kerensky  had  invited  them  in  vain. 

The   Secret   Treaties   Divulged 

by  the  Bolscheviks  were  made  public  as  part  of  their  war  against 
Imperialism  and  existing  methods  of  government.'  Milhiukof 
in  May,  1917,  and  Kerensky  later,  had  spoken  of  the  secret  docu- 
ments in  the  archives  of  the  dethroned  Russian  Government. 
From  November,  1917,  onwards  various  documents  showing  the 
secret  diplomacy  of  the  Allies  in  the  war  have  been  published, 
producing  controversies  and  new  diplomatic  developments.*  Those, 

*Those  who  wish  to  study  the  text  of  these  documents  are  recommended  to 
read  a  book  issued  by  the  Union  of  Democratic  Control,  4-7,  Red  Lion  Court, 
Fleet  Street,  E.C.4.,  entitled,  "The  Secret  Treaties  and  Understandings," 
which  contains  explanatory  notes  by  F.  Seymour  Cocks,  a  Preface  by  Charles 
Trevelyan.  M.P..  and  two  maps.  Its  price  is  2s.  6d. 

28 


who  hold  that  if  this  war  be  a  fight  for  democracy  the  people 
should  know  for  what  they  are  fighting,  are  grateful  for  these 
disclosures,  however  much  on  economic  or  other  grounds 
Bolschevik  policy  may  repel  them.  By  these  publications,  as  well 
as  in  their  whole  policy  and  in  holding  together  so  strongly  the 
working  masses  of  Russia,  and  in  spite  of  whatever  mistakes  and 
failures  can  be  charged  against  them,  the  Russian  Bolscheviks 
have  helped  to  secure  the 

End   of  Autocracy  and  the  Old  Diplomacy. 

The  downfall  has  been  proclaimed  by  no  less  an  authority  thni'. 
Dr.  E.  J.  Dillon,  the  famous  Foreign  Correspondent,  who  hi*,  had 
an  unique  experience  of  diplomatic  affairs  in  many  lands,  and  has 
talked  to  so  many  monarohs  and  Ministers  of  so  many  States.  lie 
promises  shortly  a  book  dealing  with  the  Russian  Revolution,  which 
will  "  sound  the  death  knell  of  Autocracy  and  the  Old  Diplomacy.1' 
No  sympathy  with  Bolschevism,  pacifism,  or  socialism  can  be  im- 
puted to  him.  The  revolutionaries  can  cite  him  in  their  defence. 

A  question  has  been  raised  (in  March,  1917)  whether  the  Czar 
himself  remained  loyal  to  the  Allied  cause  when  the  revolution  over- 
whelmed him.  Sir  George  Buchanan  and  Gustav  Herve  have 
asserted  his  'personal  loyalty.  Dr.  Dillon  and  others  are  as  con- 
vinced of  his  duplicity.  The  question  is  only  of  small  importance. 
The  Czar  personally  was  not  a  strong  character ;  his  wife  and  Court 
influences  moulded  him  to  their  stronger  wills.  Even  if  he  were 
personally  loyal,  he  was  not  passionately  loyal ;  his  loyalty,  if 
granted,  was  not  effective.  In  the  remote  possibility  of  imperialistic 
and  capitalistic  forces  or  a  reactionary  regime  trying  to  restore  him 
to  his  throne,  he  would  be  only  a  puppet  Czar. 


The    Lost   Territories   of   Russia 

are  a  warning  to  those  who  cherish  Imperialistic  ambitions.  Only 
three  years  ago  the  Russian  Czar  was  not  content  with  ruling  one- 
sixth  of  the  land  surface  of  the  globe  and  with  being  despot  of  170 
million  subjects.  He  planned  to  enlarge  his  dominions  by  adding 
the  divided  parts  of  Poland  vnder  his  autocracy.  In  this  aim  he 
received  the  blessing  and  good  wishes  of  Republican  France  and 
Constitutional  Britain  His  Allies  were  ready  to  win  Constantinople 
for  him,  even  while  his  own  armies  retreated  before  the  enemy,  and 
to  turn  the  Black  Sea  and  the  Sea  of  Marmora  into  Russian  Lakes. 
Even  Liberals  in  the  British  Parliament  believed  that  the  prolonged 
agony  of  Armenia  would  end  if  Russian  armies  advanced  into  Asia 
Minor,  and  if  the  rule  of  the  autocrat  brought  liberty  to  those  long 
persecuted  by  the  Sultan.  Vain  were  such  hopes!'  Russia  to-day 
has  been  bereft  of  Finland,  whose  independent  Republican  Govern- 
ment is  recognised  both  by  Germany  and  France.  The  Ukraine 
(Little  Russia),  the  south-western  portion  of  Russia  in  Europe, 
the  land  of  the  black  eaith  which  grows  abundant  grain,  has  also 

29 


declared  her  independence.  Finland  and  Ukraine  alike  have  made 
separate  peace  treaties  with  the  German  Alliance;  in  each  land 
German  soldiers  are  suppressing  the  Bolschevik  Soviets  in  the  name 
of  law  and  order.  Finiujd  is  being  fe<i  with  supplies  of  CJermar. 
grain  :  Ukraine  will  transfer  such  surplus  as  she  has  or  can  produc€ 
to  feed  lier  recent  foe.  On  the  Black  Sea,  Bessarabia,  inhabited  by 
a  Roumanian  population,  will  be  torn  from  Russia  and  given  to 
Roumania  to  balance  those  Roumanian  regions  now  handed  over  to 
Hungary  and  Bulgaria.  To  Russian  Poland  there  has  been  granted 
by  Germany  a  Polish  Council,  more  representative  and  with  greater 
liberties  than  even  the  Czar  proposed  to  give  her  :  the  hopes  of 
1  he  Poles  for  larger  national  rights  and  union  with  their  fellow 
Poles  are  now  founded  on  enlarging  the  concessions  already  made 
by  the  Germans.  The  Russian  Baltic  Provinces,  Lithuania,  Cour- 
land,  Livonia  and  Esthonia  ?re  ceded  to  Germany,  who  vaguely 
promises  them  ''social  security''  and  political  order.  The  Baltic 
has  no  longer  any  Russian  Coast ;  the  Black  Sea,  with  the  provinces 
of  Batoum  and  Kars,  added  to  Turkey,  becomes  a  Mittel-Europa 
Lake.  The  Murman  Coast,  with  its  distant  shores  and  Arctic 
climate,  and  Archangel,  ice-bound  for  five  months  in  the  year, 
remain  the  sole  direct  access  of  Russia  to  the  Western  Seas.  Was 
it  in  irony  that  the  peace  terms  imposed  on  Russia  left  her  Fleet 
still  in  her  hands  with  no  ports  or  bases  for  them  ? 

Japan   and   Siberia 

may  soon  be  the  scene  of  a  new  phase  of  the  world's  war.  As  soon 
as  the  collapse  of  Russia  before  Germany  was  clear,  voices  were 
raised,  in  France  first,  then  in  Britain,  later  from  all  quarters, 
calling  for  Japan  to  move  into  Siberia.  The  excuse  and  reasons 
for  this  proposal  to  intervene  were  not  hard  to  find.  To  -have 
Japanese  overrunning  the  East  of  Russia,  as  the  Germans  are  in- 
vading the  West  appeared  a  counter-stroke  against  the  success  of 
German  militarism  It  was  said  that  Japanese  stores  were  lying, 
unpaid  for  by  Russia,  at  Vladivostock  ;  that  German  prisoners  in 
Siberia  were  being  armed  and  drilled  to  support  Germany;  and 
that  Germany  would  soon  have  the  minerals  of  the  Ural  Mountains. 
It  was  even  said  that  Japanese  troops  could  soon  cover  the  7,500 
miles  to  the  West,  meet«the  German  foe,  and  prevent  his  conquest 
or  penetration  of  Russia.  And  so  forth  !  Whatever  be  the  out- 
come of  this  menace  to  Russia  from  her  late  Ally,  even  if  Japan 
invades  Russia,  and  her  invasion  is  not  approved  by  the  Allies, 
men  in  every  land  will  be  disgusted  at  this  cynical  invasion.  Men 
will  ask  how  those  who  took  arms  at  the  outrage  of  violated  Belgium 
can  engage  in  such  an  attack  on  Russia. 

Is   Russia   an   Outcast   among   Nations  ? 

This  is  what  M.  Pichon,  the  French  Foreign  Minister,  says  of 
Russia.     What  is  seen  to-day  is  the  Embassies  of  her  late  Allies 

30 


leaving  Petrograd;  the  refusal  of  the  British  and  French  Govern- 
ments to  receive  Russian  representatives;  the  callous  treatment  of 
Russia  by  her  conqueror  even  after  Russia  has  accepted  a  cruel 
peace:  and  Japan  encouraged  to  come  in  and  take  all  that  she  can 
of  what  is  left  of  Russia,  her  enemy  of  thirteen  years  ago,  her  ally 
of  yesterday.  At  the  moment  when  she  enters  on  her  second  year  of 
Revolutionary  life  Russia  stands  apart,  a  figure  now  lonely,  but  not 
(let  it  be  hoped)  outcast  for  long  among  the  nations. 


VI. 
THE  FUTURE  OF  THE  REVOLUTION 

is  beyond  the  power  of  any  to  forecast.  Whether  the  Bolschevik 
Government  can  last;  what  will  replace  it  if  it  fall;  whether 
some  monarchy,  constitutional  or  autocratic,  will  be  imposed  on 
or  accepted  by  the  Russian  nation;  whether  the  present  frontiers 
may  suffer  speedy  change;  whether  a  republic,  or  federation  of 
republics,  will  became  a  stable  form  of  government — these  are  all 
questions  to  ask,  and  then — wait  and  see. 

Character 

the  Russians  certainly  have — the  moral  force  of  Tolstoy,  the  strong 
type  of  peasant  character  revealed  by  the  writings  of  both  Russian 
and  English  authors,  and  the  deep  religious  vein  in  the  race  come 
up  in  the  firm  determination  and  ruthless  logic  of  such  men  as 
Kerensky,  Lenin,  and  Trotsky.  Character  is  not  denied  to  this 
race — character  will  produce  great  leaders.  Indeed,  already  in 
Russia  war  time  has  discovered  undoubted  great  leaders  of  men 
in  Army  and  in  State. 

Intellect 

of  a  peculiarly  intense  and  severe  type,  with  marked  power  of 
closest  concentration,  is  common  in  Russia.  It  is  a  quality  seen 
in  their  scientific  and  artistic  geniuses.  The  peculiar  gifts  of 
character  and  intellect  in  Russia  must  with  freer  conditions  pro- 
duce men  of  leadership  and  originality. 

Natural   Resources 

Russia   has   in   such   abundance,   especially   timber,    metals,   ooal 
grain  and  oils.      Grain  and  cattle,  wool  and  cotton,  oil  and  fruit 
she  can  produce  from  her  varied  climates.     She"  has  wealth  enough 
for  her  own  use  as  well  as  to  attract  her  neighbours  to  trade  ano! 
enterprise. 

31 


Generous    Sympathy    due   to    Russia 

must  cause  both  fears  and  hopes.  Russia  is  not  yet  played  out. 
She  is  a  young  and  vigorous  giant,  inexperienced  and  undisciplined, 
relying  more  on  the  inspiration  of  the  future  and  of  new  ideals 
than  (like  Greeks  and  Portuguese)  on  the  memory  and  pride  of 
past  greatness.  Sir  Paul  Vinagradof,  the  Oxford  professor  and 
Russian  politician,  has  issued  a  warning  not  only  against  the 
wickedness  and  folly  of  sending  Japan  in  to  complete  the  humilia- 
tion and  spoliation  of  his  country,  but  also  against  the  British 
Press  which  now  would  "  bully  and  blackguard  "  the  Revolution. 
President  Wilson  has  sent  a  generous  message  of  sympathy  to  the 
nation  forced  to  accept  a  separate  German  peace.  Mr.  Arthur 
Henderson,  leader  of  British  Labour  politics,  warns  against  the 
desertion  of  Russia.  Chivalry  and  interest  alike  demand  for  the 
fallen  Ally  patience,  sympathy,  and  generous  support. 


The   Russian    Revolution   has   only   just   Begun. 

It  will  last  and  live,  will  change  and  surprise  its  elders.  Like  a 
child,  it  needs  patience,,  sympathy,  understanding  and  direction, 
and,  like  a  child,  it  is  destined  to  grow  and  become  strong. 


S 


A    000  049  455    9 

The    following    Pamphlets   have 

been  issued  by  the  Union  of 

Democratic  Control. 

No.    2a.    Shall  this  War  End  German  Militarism? 

by  Norman  Angell       ...         ...         ...         ...         Id. 

No.  3a.  War  the  Offspring  of  Fear,  by  Hon. 

Bertrand  Russell         ...         ...          ...         ...         Id. 

No.  4a.  The  Origins  bf  the  Great  War,  by  H.  N. 

Brailsford  Id. 

No.  5a.  Parliament  and  Foreign  Policy,  by  Arthur 

Ponsonby,  M.P Id. 

No.  6a.  The  National  Policy Id. 

No.  7a.  The  International  Industry  of  War  ...  Id. 
No.  8a.  War  and  the  Workers,  by  J.  Ramsay 

MacDonald,  M.P Id. 

No.  9a.  Why  We  Should  State  Terms  of  Peace  Id. 
No.  lOa.  Towards  an  International  Understand- 
ing    Id. 

No.  lla.  Women  and  War,  by  H.  M.  Swanwick  ...  Id. 

No.  12a.  The  Polish  Problem,  bya  Pole  Id. 

No.  13a.  The  Prussian  in  our  Midst,  by  Norman 

Angell  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  Id. 

No.  14a.  The  Balance  of  Power  Id. 

No.  15a.  The  League  of  Nations,  by  J.  A.  Hobson...  Id. 
No.  16a.  Labour  and  the  Costs  of  War,  by  J.  A. 

Hobson  ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         Id. 

No.  17a.  Peace  Debate  in  the  House  of  Commons 

(May  23rd,  1916}         Id. 

No.  I8a.    Turkey  and  the  Roads  of  the  East,  by 

H.  N.  Brailsford  2d. 

No.  19a.  Economic  War  after  the  War,  by  G. 

Lowes  Dickinson         ...         ...         ...         ...         2d. 

No.  20a.  America  and  the  Cause  of  the  Allies, 

by  Norman  Angell      ...         ...         •••         ...         Id. 

No.  21a.  The  War  to  End  War :  A  Plea  to  Soldiers 

by  a  Soldier      ...         ...         ...         ...         ...         Id. 

No.  22a.  The  African  Problem  and  the  Peace 

Settlement,  by  E.  D.  Morel  2d. 

No.  23a.  The  Races  of  Austria-Hungary,  by  G.  P. 

Gooch  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...  2d. 

No.  24a.  Rex  v.  Morel 3d. 

No.  25a.  Alsace  and  Lorraine,  by  R.  C.  Lambert,  M.P.  2d. 
No.  26a.  The  Russian  Revolution,  by  Joseph  King, 

M.P 3d. 

Apply  to 

LITERATURE    DEPARTMENT 
4-7,  Red  Lion  Court,  Fleet  St.,  E.C.4. 


Books  supplied  by  the  Union  of 
Democratic  Control. 


A  League  of  Nations,  H.  N.  Brailsford         2/0 

The  European  Anarchy,  G.  Lowes  Dickinson        ...  1/8 

Towards  International  Government,  J.  A.  Hobson  2/6 

The  New  Protectionism,  J.  A.  Hobson       2/6 

National  Defence,  J.  R.  MacDonald,  M.P 1/0 

Truth  and  the  War,  E.  D.  Morel      2/6 

Africa  and  the  Peace  of  Europe,  E.  D.  Morel     ...  2/0 

Democracy  and   Diplomacy,  A.  Ponsonby.  M.P.  ...  3/6 

The  Future  of  Constantinople.    L.  S.  Woolf        ...  1/6 

The  Secret  Treaties.    F.  Seymour  Cocks      2/0 

Wars  &  Treaties,  1815  to  1914.    Arthur  Ponsonby,  M.P.  2/0 


"The  U.D.C.' 


The  most  wonderful  pennyworth  on  international  affairs  which 
the  war  has  produced. 

You  will  find  in  the  U.D.C.  sane  and  constructive  articles  by 
leading  authorities  on  the  vital  problems  of  the  hour.  You  will 
find  in  the  U.D.C.  information  that  you  cannot  obtain  elsewhere. 

You  will  find  in  the  U.D.C.  inspiration  and  faith  to  prosecute 
the  struggle  for  an  early  and  honourable  Peace  by  consent;  for 
the  destruction  of  secret  diplomacy  which  commits  the  peoples, 
bound  and  helpless,  to  war  ;  for  the  rights  of  nations  to  determine 
their  own  destiny ;  for  intellectual  freedom,  and  individual  liberty. 

You  will  find  the  U.D.C.  a  mine  of  information  to  combat  reaction 
in  all  its  forms,  to  expose  shams,  and  to  track  down  falsehoods. 

If  you  take  an  intelligent  interest  in  your  country's  welfare,  if 
you  want  to  form  your  own  opinions,  and  require  help  to  reach  inde- 
pendent and  matured  judgment,  the  U.D.C.  is  indispensable  to  you. 


The   U.D.C.,   the  official  organ  of  the  UNION  OF  DEMOCRATIC  CONTROL, 
•4-7,  Red  Lion  Court,  Fleet  Street,  E.G. 4.,  monthly,  1/6  per  annum,  post  free. 


