UC-NRLF 


'\'A' 


-:  i.-;\^  , 


THE  RUSSIAN 
REVOLUTION 
&:THE  WAR 


BY 


MICHAEL  FARBMAN 

Until  recently  the  Petrograd  Correspondent 
of  the  "Manchester  Guardian  " 


} 


PRICE  SIXPENCE  NET 


NATIONAL  COUNCIL  FOR  CIVIL 
LIBERTIES,  22  "Bride  Lane,  E.C.4 

THE  HERALD,  21  Tudor  Street 

Fleet  Street,  E.C^ 

LONDON 

1917 


THE  RUSSIAN 
REVOLUTION 
6c  THE  WAR 

BY 

MICHAEL  FARBMAN 

Until  recently  the  Petrograd  Correspondent 
of  the  "Manchester  Guardian  " 


? 


NATIONAL  COUNCIL  FOR   CIVIL 
LIBERTIES,  22  "Bride  Lane,  E.C.4 

THE   HERALD,  21   Tudor  Street 

Fleet  Street,  E.C.^ 

LONDON 

1917 


COPY  ADDED  ^-^  (  L  oo  lU-> 
ORIGINAL  TO  BE  r*  o    Q 

RETAINED  t"     S   O 

,051935 


This  book  is  the  text  of  a  lecture  for 
the  National  Council  for  Civil  Liberties 
delivered  on  Jidy  20th,  igiy,  by  Michael 
Farbman,  late  special  Correspondent 
in  Petrograd  for  the  '' Manchester 
Guardian." 


IT  must  be  left  to  the  future  historian 
to  paint  the  complete  picture  of  Rus- 
sia before  the  Revolution.  Russia  at 
this  moment  is  too  engrossed  with  actuali- 
ties, too  interested  in  the  present  to  turn 
her  eyes  back  to  the  past.  ButLlJpr  any  clear 
understanding  of  how  tEe  Revolution 
came  about,  and  what  were  the^casons 
that  created  the  Revolution  and  ^wlty 
Russia  took  this  course,  it  is  necessaTy^ 
to  point  out,  even  if  only  in  agencfaT 
way,  the  main  features  of  Russian  puBItC 
life  at  the  moment  of  the  "fall  of~tEe 
Monarchy. 

It  seems  to  be  the  popularjdeathatdie 
Rgyolution  was  caused  by  the  pro-Ger- 
manisin^  of  die  Court  and  Goyernment. 
According  to  this  notion  the  army  and  the 
people,  full  of  anger  at  the  shameless  be- 
trayal of  the  national  cause,  arose  and 
swept  the  Monarchy  away  from  the  path 
to  national  victory.  Now  there  can  be  no 
doubt  that  the  pro-Germanism  of  the 
Court  and  the  Government's  treachery 
djd  in  fact  hasten  the  catastrophe.  But  it 
is  equally  beyond  doubtthat  the  old  regime 
fell,  not  merely  because  of  its  pro-Ger- 
manism and  its  intended  treachery  to  the 

801766 


2  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

national  cause,  but  maplv  because  it  was 
{     autocratic^  The  war  revealed  not  merely 
the  pro-Germanism  of  the  Court  and  the 
(     guiltiness  of  the  Government,  but  the 
\     complete  bankruptcy  of  the  autocratic 
I    regime.   The  autocracyjiad_petered  out. 
S^AU  strength  and  vitality,  if  ever  it  pos- 
sessed any,  had  gone  out  of  it.  It  was  not 
merely  a  corpse,   but  a   decomposing 
corpse.    The  pillars  of  the  system  had 
crumbled  into  decay.  The  whole  struc- 
ture was  in  a  state  of  disintegration.  Its 
very  foundation — the  army — had  gone 
from  under  it. 
It  is  easy  to  understand  the  tragedy  of 
;      the  army.    After  two  and  a  half  years 
of  unparalleled  sacrifices,  heroism  and 
endurance,  the  army  felt  itself  morally 
weakened  and  humiliated.  It  was  con- 
scious that  all  its  sufferings  and  reverses 
were  not  its  own  fault,  but  the  result 
solely  of  the  inefficiency  and  incapacity 
and  guilty  neglect  of  the  authorities. 
The  blind  obedience,  the  unquestioning 
devotion  and  unlimited  fidelity,traditional 
to  the  Russian  soldier,  was  shaken.  In  its 


AND  THE  WAR 


place  there  grew  up  distrust,  and  some- 
thing more  than  distrust,  a  vague,  instinc- 
tive hatred  of  authority,  an  inarticulate 

and  hidden  resistance.^- 

— Airdiis  stage  the  army  began  to  disin- 


tegrate, to  rot  away.  Soldiers  began  to  de- 
sert en  masse  for  the  rear,  returning  to  their 
villages.  No  figures  are  available,  but  on 
the  authority  of  people  who  know  the  sit- 
uation, these  desertions  became  a  problem 
of  extreme  gravity.  The  military  authori- 
ties could  think  of  only  one  way  of  stop- 
ping this  rot — to  tighten  up  discipline — 
and  one  should  know  what  discipline 
meant  in  the  old  days,  to  realise  what 
severity  is  implied  in  this  statement.  Of 
course  it  only  made  things  worse. 

But  if  the  army  (the  foundation  of  auto- 
cracy) was  disintegrating>  it  may  be  said 
thatjhe  whole  civil  structure  was  in_^ 
state  of  dangerous  decay.  Favouritism  and 
corruption  flourished  as  Inever  before  in 
Russia.  I  shall  give  only  one  instance,  but 
it  is  a  sufficiently  illuminating  one.  So  flag- 
rant was  the  scandal,  and  so  great  the  gene- 
ral indignation  that  it  was  one  of  the  most 


4  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

notorious  reactionary  deputies  himself 
who  dehvered  a  scathing  indictment  of  the 
Government  in  the  matter  in  a  speech  in 
the  Duma  almost  on  the  eve  of  the  Revo- 
lution. Several  years  ago  General  Voye- 
koff,  a  famous  courtier  and  aide-de-camp 
of  the  Tsar,  discovered  on  his  estate  at 
Kuvaka  a  mineral  table-water  spring  (this, 
by  the  way,  is  the  same  general  who  urged 
the  Tsar  after  the  Revolution  to  "open 
the  Minsk  front"  and  let  the  Germans 
through  to  crush  the  Revolution).  Thanks 
to  the  influence  of  the  general  and  his  high 
protectors  this  table-water  obtained  a 
great  vogue.  It  was  named  after  the  estate 
Kuvaka,  and  its  label  was  to  be  seen  in 
every  restatirant.  Vast  quantities  of  it  were 
exported  in  long  trains  from  the  general's 
estate.  During  the  most  tragic  days  of  the 
war,whentheutter  breakdown  of  thetrans- 
port  system  had  madeit  extremely  difficult 
to  supply  the  troops  with  food  and  ammu- 
nition, the  Tsar's  friend  calmly  continued 
his  lucrative  business,  and  the  long  trains 
of  wagons,  loaded  with  Kuvaka  table- 
water,  proceeded  regularly  as  before  along 


AND  THE  WAR 


the  railway  lines  to  Petrograd.  Particular 
indignation  was  caused  by  the  fact  that 
the  raflway  trucks  were  boldly  placarded 
with  the  popular  legend  "Kuvaka."  It  is 
hardly  possible  to  imagine  such  a  thing  in 
England  without  an  immense  scandal.  In 
Russia  it  made  no  particular  stir.  Even 
the  Duma  outburst  fell  flat. 

It  was  only  one  out  of  many  such  affairs. 
Everywhere  it  was  the  same.  The  psycho- 
logy of  those  in  power  or  with  influence 
of  any  kind  had  nothing  in  it  of  what 
you  in   England  call  "public  spirit." 
Russia  was  their  patrimony,  to  be  ex- 
ploited for  their  individual  benefit,  and 
they  exploited  it  to  the  full.    As  forA 
State  ofiicials,  from  the  highest  to  the   | 
lowest,  there  was  no  limit  to  their  ra-  / 
pacity  and  insolence.  High  Government  / 
officials  bullied  and  terrorised  bankers 
and  rich  manufacturers  under  blackmail 
and  threat  of  arrest.  These  same  bankers 
and  industrials  were  making  enormous 
almost  legendary  profits  to  the  growing 
indignation  of  the  nation.  To  calm  popu- 
lar irritation  the  Government  appointed 


6  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

a  Commission  of  Investigation.  But  the 
Commission  appointed  by  Stuermer  to 
investigate  the  banks  became  itself  a  black- 
mailing agency.  The  bankers  had  only  to 
bribe  the  President  of  the  Commission  (a 
well-known  general)  and  his  fellows  in 
order  to  escape  censure.  One  oj^the  most 
/corrupt  bankers  in  Petrograd  was  actually 
'arrested  in  order  to  encourage  the  others 
to  pay  up.  The  Commission  itself  is  now 
under  trial  and  the  forthcoming  revela- 
tions may  be  expected  to  enrich  criminal 
history  with  one  of  its  choicest  episodes. 
Already  the  trial  of  the  notorious  Mann- 
sievitch  Manuilov,  one  of  the  main  black- 
mailing agents  of  this  Commission,  which 
took  place  just  before  the  Revolution,  is 
felt  as  a  national  nightmare. 

The  stories  revealed  in  the  evidence 
would  be  quite  incredible  were  they  not 
official  facts,  and  would  give  the  impres- 
sion of  a  diseased  imagination  at  work 
rather  than  of  real  happenings  of  contem- 
porary history.  But  the  bankers  and  in- 
dustrials, thus  systematically  plundered 
by  Government  officials,  compensated 


AND  THE  WAR 


themselves  in  their  turn  by  exploiting  the 
population.  The  great  industries  had  al- 
wayshad  the  patronage  of  the  authorities 
before  the  war;  during  the  war  their  pror 
titeering  was  without  check  orj^t.  For 
tEeseprofiteers  the  people  coined  a  vivid 
and  true^expression.  They  called  them 
"the  marauders  of  the  rear,"  rightly 
considering  them  as  being  as  morally 
degraded  as  the  marauders  of  the  battle- 
field, as  the  ghouls  who  plunder  the 
wounded  and  dying. 

The  whole  economy  of  Statejwasxiin- 
ducted  on  lines  of  plunder.  There  was  no 
system  of  State  finance  that  could  be  so 
described.  System  had  entirely  gone  out 
of  the  national  finances,  and  the  expres- 
sion "State  finance"  had  become  an 
anachronism.  To  borrow  money  and_to 
exploit  the  printing  press — this  was jthe 
sum  total  of  the  financial  wisdom  of 
the  Tsardom.  In^Jwo_and  a  half  years 
oTwar  the  State_debt  of  Russia,  which 
was  the  highestJlLthe  world  before  the 
war2_Jncreased.Jbi4rfoldi  Instead  of  a 
finance  policy  the  Government  flooded 


8  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

the  country  with  paper  money,  issued 
in   contravention  of  the  law,  and  this 
mad  dance  of  paper  milHons  led  to  an 
incredible  Bacchanalia  of  profits.    The 
soldierSjbeing  half  serfs^receivednothing, 
a  mere  few  pence  a  month.  Their  wives,' 
mothers  and  children  actually  died  of  hun- 
ge^_on  the  poor  separation  allowances 
made  to  soldiers'  dependents.    Workers 
got  beggarly  wages.  And  yet  the  country 
waj_swamped  with  millions.  Joint-stock 
companies^issuedjnew  stocks,  doubling 
aiid' trebling  their  capitals.  Throughout 
the  country  rumours  ran  of  legendary  in- 
comes and  monstrous  profits.  The  truth 
was  fantastic  enough,  but  rumour  made 
it  even  more  fantastic.  It  spoke  of  stupen- 
dous salaries  taken  by  bank  and  company 
directors,  of  salaries  of  millions  a  year. 
The  situation^f^ussia  was  thoroughly 
uiniSthy^Jn_a_ state  of  disease.  In  the 
rnidst  of  this  most  terrible  war  and  amid 
tfie  general  impoverishment,  anunprece- 
dented^buimess  was  done  in  jewellery, 
expensive  furs  and"articles  of  luxury.  It 
was  the  prevailing  fashion,  one  might  al- 


AND  THE  WAR 


most  call  it  the  prevailing  sport,  in  the 
vast  army  of  profiteers,  contractors,  and 
the  nouveaux  riches  to  pay  fabulous  prices 
for  champagne  and  foreign  liquors,  sim- 
ply because  their  sale  and  consumption 
^^e  prohibited  by  law. 

This  Bacchanalia  of  millions  spread 
even  to  the  newspaper  world  too.  The 
newspapers  of  Russia  hitherto  had  been 
in  the  best  sense  of  the  word  non-capital- 
istic undertakings,  but  on  the  eve  of  the 
Revolution  a  sensation  was  made  in 
Russia  by  the  news  of  the  foundation  by 
Protopopoff  of  a  new  great  daily  that 
reeked  of  millions.  It  was  recognised  as 
a  challenge  to  the  good  traditions  of  the 
Russian  Press. 

The  peasants,  who  in  the  first  year  of 
war  had  benefited  from  the  great  Gov- 
ernment orders  and  had  begun  for  the 
first  time  in  their  lives  to  have  a  surplus  * 
for  saving,  discovered  by  and  by  that  in 
spite  of  the  plentifulness  of  money  they 
were  no  better  off;  on  the  contrary, 
they  found  that  their  condition  was  be- 
coming worse,  that  it  was  becoming  more 


lo  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

and  more  difficult  to  buy  for  money  the 
necessaries  of  their  peasant  Hfe  and  work 
—vehicles,  horseshoes,  nails,  ropes,  shoes, 
clothing.  In  consequence,  the  longer  the 
war  went  on  the  more  reluctant  they  be- 
came to  sell  their  grain.  Money  had  be- 
come useless  to  them;  they  would  have 
been  glad  to  exchange  their  grain  for  the 
things  they  needed,  but  these  they  could 
not  buy  in  the  market  and  the  State  was 
unable  to  provide  them.  The  result  was 
that  the  peasants  began  to  hoard  and  even 
to  hide  their  stocks  of  grain  "for  a  rainy 
day,"  all  the  more  so  as  the  crops  were 
diminishing  every  year  of  the  war.  The 
reduction  of  the  yield  was  due  to  several 
causes.  First  there  was  the  mobilisation  of 
the  peasantry,  which  robbed  the  land  of 
labour  and  left  the  cultivation  of  the  soil 
principallyto  women;  thentherequisition- 
ing  by  the  army  of  vast  numbers  of  horses 
was  another  crippling  factor.  A  third  cause 
was  that  the  stock  of  agricultural  machin- 
ery was  diminishing  through  wear  and  tear 
and  could  not  be  replaced.  Soon  actual 
dearth  ensued.  It  was  steadily  augmented 


AND  THE  WAR  n 

by  three  factors :  actual  diminution  of  yield, 
the  depreciation  of  the  currency  and  the 
breakdown  of  transport. 

The  story  of  the  breakdown  of  trans- 
port, which  did  the  greatest  possible 
injury  to  the  conduct  of  the  war,  is  worth 
telling  because  it  is  extraordinarily  in- 
structive. In  any  case,  the  mere  fact  of 
war  and  its  demands  would  have  created 
a  serious  shortage  of  rolling-stock  and 
confusion  in  railway  transport.  But  there 
can  be  no  doubt  that  the  principal  factor 
in  creating  the  utter  collapse  of  the 
railway  system  was  the  crazy  mismanage- 
ment of  the  authorities.  There  was 
almost  wholesale  destruction  of  rolling- 
stock  through  sheer  incompetence.  I  well 
remember  a  story  which  shocked  Petro- 
grad  early  in  191 5  during  the  struggles 
for  Warsaw.  The  War  Office  had  to  de- 
spatch strong  reinforcements  to  the  front 
at  maximum  speed.  All  traffic  was  stopped 
on  the  Petrograd- Warsaw  Railway,  and 
to  double  the  carrying  capacity  the  mili- 
tary authorities  used  both  lines  for  traffic 
in  the  one  direction.  The  consequence 

B 


12  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

was  a  stupendous  block  of  empty  trains 
at  their  destination.  With  bothi  lines 
packed  with  rolling-stock  and  fresh  trains 
arriving  all  the  time  there  was  no  other 
way  of  relieving  the  block  and  making 
room  for  the  new  arrivals  than  to  hurl 
everything  over  the  embankments  and 
scrap  enormous  quantities  of  rolling- 
stock.  Vast  numbers  of  railway  coaches 
too  were  used  as  shelters  for  the  troops 
during  the  winter.  But  by  far  the  great 
mass  of  lost  rolling  and  engine  stock 
was  left  to  the  enemy  in  the  retreats, 
together  with  vast  quantities  of  food  sup- 
plies. Eventually  the  carrying  capacity  of 
the  railways  fell  so  low  that  the  Govern- 
ment introduced  quite  a  novel  scheme: 
the  so-called  "goods- traffic  weeks."  When 
Petrograd  or  the  front  was  in  danger  of 
hunger  or  a  shortage,  the  Government 
would  prohibit  all  passenger  traffic  in  cer- 
tain zones  for  a  week  or  a  fortnight  at  a 
time  and  use  the  lines  solely  for  goods 
and  supplies.  It  is  easy  to  imagine  how 
this  clever  device  influenced  the  econo- 
mic situation  in  Russia. 


AND  THE  WAR  13 

The  food  shortage  assumed  dangerous 
dimensions,  but  the  only  food  poUcy  of 
the  Government  was  to  repress  every  eflfort 
by  the  nation  to  find  a  remedy.  Any  popu- 
lar initiative  for  any  purpose  was  prompt- 
ly repressed  by  the  Government.  Only 
charity  or  Red  Cross  organisations  were 
tolerated,  and  even  barely  tolerated  at  that. 
The  Zemstvos  and  Town  Councils  were 
simply  detested  by  the  Government.Their 
efforts  were  hampered  in  every  way  .They 
would  have  been  suppressed  but  for  the 
worship  the  soldiers  had  for  them  after 
experience  of  the  good  they  had  done. 
But  the  most  grotesque  instance  was  the 
hostility  of  the  Government  towards  the 
popular  movement  embodied  in  the  War 
Industries  Committees,  which  was  started 
to  mobilise  and  organise  the  production 
of  munitions  all  over  the  country— a  most 
necessary  task  in  view  of  the  failure  of  the 
Government.  It  was  first  a  case  of  jealousy 
and  then  of  fear.  The  Government  was 
afraid  of  any  popular  organisations,  and 
particularly  of  any  popular  demonstra- 
tion of  the  national  ability  to  do  better 

B2 


14  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

than  the  Government.  The  Committees 
were  put  under  suspicion  of  having  revo- 
lutionary tendencies,  and  every  effort  was 
made  to  diminish  their  importance. 

Even  the  Fourth  Duma,  elected,  as  it 
was,  on  the  basis  of  Stolypin's  electoral 
coup  d'etat  and  representing  privileged 
classes,  which  had  been  through  all  its 
years  of  existence  thoroughly  obedient  and 
willing  to  do  all  the  Government  might 
wish,  was  so  humiliated  and  insulted  that 
it  was  driven  perforce  into  a  revolution- 
ary attitude. 

Life  had  become  intolerable.  Every- 
where there  was  suspicion  of  treason, 
and  actual  treason  everywhere.  Every- 
where there  was  mutual  hatred.  And  high 
over  it  all  and  as  a  symbol  of  it  all  was  a 
dastardly  Government  and  a  putrescent 
Court  anxious  only  for  its  own  preserva- 
tion at  any  price.  If  Russia  on  the  eve  of 
the  Revolution  was  a  living  organism  in 
its  agony,  the  Monarchy  was  a  putrifying 

corpse. 

*         *         * 

Now  it  should  be  clearly  understood 


AND  THE  WAR  15 

that  the  Russian  Revolution  was  not  in- 
tended merely  as  a  means  for  the  better 
prosecution  of  the  war.  Nevertheless,  it 
has  been  so  interpreted  by  the  Western 
Allies.  The  first  disappointment  for  New 
Russia  was  to  find  that  the  Revolution  was 
regarded  in  the  West  from  this  utilitarian 
point  of  view.  In  London  and  Paris  there' 
was  joy  over  the  Revolution,  because  peo- 
ple expected  that  freedom  would  streng- 
then Russia's  fighting  power.  It  is  not  in 
my  mind  to-day  to  lay  blame  for  this  mis- 
reading of  the  Revolution,  the  less  so  as 
this  utilitarian  conception  of  Russian  free- 
dom did  not  originate  in  the  West.  We 
know  that  the  formula  "Freedom  for  Vic- 
tory" had  long  been  the  device  of  the  Im- 
perialist wing  of  Russian  Liberalism.  For 
two  years  their  opposition  to  the  Tsardom 
had  been  expressly  based  upon  the  neces- 
sity of  "organising  victory."  If  the  Allied 
Governments  and  Press  welcomed  the 
Russian  Revolution  in  the  hope  that  it 
would  prove  the  great  stimulus  for  war 
to  a  victorious  end,  much  the  same  ideas 
prevailed  in  the  minds  of  the  Russian 


i6  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

Liberal  bourgeoisie.  For  the  cadets  and 
their  supporters  the  Revolution  is  still  but 
a  means;  their  ideal  is  still  the  fight  to  a 
finish,  the  "knock-out  blow."  Without  in- 
tending reproach  or  blame  the  Russian 
people  has  again  and  again  appealed  to 
the  West  to  abandon  this  illusion.  It  has 
done  so  through  its  Government,  which 
has  sent  its  successive  Notes  to  the  Allies, 
through  organisations  and  congresses  of 
the  army  and  the  workers  and  the  peas- 
ants. In  every  possible  form  of  manifesta- 
tion the  Russian  democracy  has  endeav- 
oured to  make  clear  the  real  meaning  of 
the  Revolution.  It  has  sought  to  make  tEe 
West  realise  that  to  Russia  the  Revolu- 
tion is  not  a  means  to  victory,  or  a  means 
at  all,  but  the  very  end  in  itself,  and  itself 
the  sole  and  highest  victory  that  Euro- 
pean democracy  has  achieved  in  the  war. 
Let  us  try  to  realise  what  the  Revolu- 
tion  means.  For  Russia  the  Revolution  is  a 
coming  into  existence.  Russia  had  no  civi- 
lisation; Russia  was  not  a  nation;  she  was 
not  even  a  State.  That  sounds  rather  like 
a  paradox,  but  it  describes  a  genuine  re- 


AND  THE  WAR  17 

ality.  You  in  England  can  hardly  imagine 
what  it  is  to  be  Fatherlandless.  Every 
Englishman  has  had  his  Fatherland  for 
centuries  before  his  birth.  In  Russia,  gene- 
ration after  generation  has  been  born  and 
has  lived  and  died  without  knowing  or 
feeling  the  full  happiness  and  joy  of  hav- 
ing a  country  of  its  very  own — a  Father- 
land. It  is  very  hard  to  describe  the  com- 
plex attitude  of  mind  of  the  Russians  who, 
while  having  a  passionate  love  for  their 
country,  have  had  that  love  starved  and 
made  sterile.  Russia  was  always  a  harsh 
foster-mother  to  the  vast  mass  of  her 
people.  As  a  consequence  all  that  apper- 
tained to  the  State  was  thought  strange 
and  alien  and  tainted.  Anyone  in  the  em- 
ploy or  service  of  the  State  was,  as  it  were, 
morally  degraded  by  the  fact  of  such  em- 
ployment. There  was  no  respect  even  for 
State  property.  On  the  contrary,  if  any- 
thing belonged  to  the  State  it  was  marked 
down;  and  there  was  actually  encourage- 
ment to  damage  or  destroy  it.  A  universal 
saying  in  Russia  expresses  this  striking 
attitude:  "It's  the  Government's,  smash 


i8  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

it!"  In  this  popular  saying  you  have  an 
illuminating  glimpse,  not  only  of  the 
wide  gulf  between  people  and  State, 
but  of  the  absence  of  any  feeling  that 
there  was  a  State.  Not  only  was  there 
no  eventual  unity  between  people  and 
State,  governed  and  governors,  there 
was  no  real  feeling  of  unity  among  the 
people  themselves,  and  only  the  most 
rudimentary  idea  of  there  being  a  State 
at  all.  The  Revolution  suddenly  gave 
Russia  a  new  aspect  of  life.  Russia  be- 
came a  State,  a  nation,  a  Fatherland. 
The  idea  of  the  State  as  something  hos- 
tile and  alien  was  transformed  into  an 
idea  of  the  State  as  something  intimate, 
or,  as  a  Russian  would  put  it,  as  "our 
own."  A  fact  of  the  Russian  temperament 
is  that  it  is  devoid  of  brag.  Russians,  as  a 
people,  do  not  habitually  over-estimate 
theirgifts  and  talents  or  importance.  They 
are  far  from  considering  themselves  the 
salt  of  the  earth.  In  Russia  the  con- 
ception of  "Russland  ueber  AUes"  would 
be  quite  impossible.  On  the  contrary,  Rus- 
sians have  a  very  modest  opinion  of  them- 


AND  THE  WAR  19 

selves.  They  know  very  well  that  they  have 
insufficient  culture,  that  they  are  in  the 
main  a  nation  of  illiterates,  that  in  general 
they  are  behind  Europe.  But  in  Russia 
there  is  a  deep  faith  in  ideals.  It  is  gen- 
uinely believed  that  life  is  not  worth  living 
save  for  an  ideal.  You  must  have  some- 
thing high  to  live  for.  So  of  Russia  her- 
self it  is  genuinely  believed  that  she  too 
must  have  something  high  in  the  world 
to  live  and  work  for.  This  element  of 
faith  gives  a  specific  and  passionate  seri- 
ousness to  every  manifestation  of  public 
spirit.  It  is  what  most  European  students 
of  Russia  have  regarded  as  its  specific 
religiosity.  Yet  it  is  not  ecclesiastical  or 
theological ;  this  spirit  of  religiosity  or 
faith  permeates  all  Russian  life.  For  cen- 
turies Russia  has  been  seeking  the  truth, 
believing  that  a  time  would  come  when 
the  conscience  would  be  delivered.  The 
Revolution  was  the_deliverance__QL  tiie 
Russian  conscience.  It  is  now  free  to  work 
for  its  ideals. 

A  vast  transformation  took  place.  The 
mutual  hostility  of  which  I  spoke  as  the 


20  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

characteristic  of  the  old  Russia  was  re- 
placed by  universal  joy  and  love,  a  uni- 
versal spiritual  uplift.  As  Mr.  Harold 
Williams  said  in  one  of  his  messages  at 
that  time:  "Life  is  flowing  in  a  healing, 
purifying  torrent.  Never  was  any  country 
in  the  world  so  interesting  as  Russia  is 
now.  Old  men  are  saying  'Nunc  dimittis'; 
young  men  singing  in  the  dawn;  and  I 
have  met  many  men  and  women  who 
seemed  walking  in  a  hushed  sense  of  bene- 
diction." 

From  the  moment  of  its  birth  the  Re- 
volution took  the  foremost  place  in  the 
minds  of  all  Russians.  Cheidze,  who,  as 
you  know,  is  president  of  the  C.W.S.D., 
once  put  it  to  me  very  characteristically. 
"The  Revolution,"  he  said,  "is  to  me  the 
centre  of  the  world,  nay,  of  the  whole 
planetary  system.  To  me  the  Revolution 
is  Alpha  and  Omega.  It  is  my  one  crite- 
rion. Anything  that  is  consonant  with  the 
Revolution  and  helps  to  consolidate  it,  I 
accept;  anything  that  stands  in  the  way  of 
the  Revolution  or  is  likely  to  hamper  it,  I 
unreservedly  reject."  In  these  words 


AND  THE  WAR  2i 

Cheidze  defined  what  is  felt  by  every 
Russian.  For  Russia,  therefore,  the  Revo- 
lution is  not  merely  a  means  for  victory. 
It  is  life  itself,  and  the  very  condition  of 
living.  Russia  freed  herself  in  order  to 
realise  her  moral  faith  in  the  high  purpose 
of  her  life.  The  war  was  not,  and  could 
not  be,  the  aim  of  the  Revolution.  But  the 
war  existed  as  a  fact;  and  as  a  fact  it  had 
to  be  faced — one  that  influenced  the 
national  and  international  significance  of 
the  Revolution. 

♦         ♦         » 

How  did  the  Revolution  at  the  outset 
face  this  fact  of  war?  In  the  first  place  it 
should  be  remembered  that  the  war  had, 
as  it  were,  played  itself  out.  The  whole 
spirit  of  militarism  had  died  away.  The 
war  was  too  closely  identified  with-thc 
Tsardom  and  the  old  regime  fr>  inspirg 
enthusiasm.  On  the  other  hand,  the  up- 
heaval had  been  too  great ;  people  were 
no  longer  able  to  concentrate'tjigir  ji^'^^g 
on  the  war.  JXhey  were  too  busy  about 
other  and,to  them,more  important  things. 
Finally,  there  was  a  widespread  and  sin- 


33  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

cere  belief  that  the  Tsardom  has  fallen, 
not  only  for  Russia,  but  for  all  Europe, 
and  that  the  Revolution  could  not  be 
without  effect  upon  the  German  people, 
which  was  regarded  as  being  under  a 
yoke  similar  to  the  Tsardom.  Neither 
was  it  forgotten  that  the  Junkers  and 
pan-Germans  had  made  fear  of  the  Tsar- 
dom and  Russian  Imperialism  the  main 
argument  in  popularising  the  war  in 
Germany. 

On  March  14th— only  about  a  fortnight 
after  the  Revolution— the  Council  ofWork- 
men's  and  Soldiers'  Delegates  launched 
that  famous  first  appeal  of  theirs  to  the 
democracies  of  the  world,  calling  upon 
them  to  unite  in  bringing  about  a  demo- 
cratic peace. 

This  appeal  was  the  first  clear  definition 
of  the  new  creed  of  the  democracy.  It  con- 
tained the  first  embodiment  of  that  creed  in 
the  famous  formula  "No  annexations;  no 
indemnities."  Now  this  formula  sounds 
very  differently  to  Russian  ears  than 
in  countries  of  a  highly-developed  Impe- 
rialism. In  such  countries  it  is  the  watch- 


AND  THE  WAR  23 

word  only  of  the  most  advanced  Socialist 
Minorities.  In  Russia  it  is  the  expres- 
sion of  the  vague  but  general  instinct 
of  the  broad  masses  of  the  Russian  na- 
tion, which  has  not  yet  grown  up  into 
a  real  and  active  Imperialism.  What- 
ever may  be  the  result  of  the  world-strug- 
gle between  the  Imperialistic  Powers,  it 
is  certain  that  imless  the  war  brings  about 
the  complete  shipwreck  of  modern  Im- 
perialism the  Russian  Revolution  is  in 
peril.  As  anon-Imperialistic  Power  Russia 
stands  to  become  the  victim  of  Imperial- 
istic Powers.  She  would  never  be  partner 
in  sharing  the  Imperialistic  booty,  she 
would  rather  be  the  victim.  It  was  because 
this  was  at  once  instinctively  perceived  by 
Russians  that  the  formula  of  "no  annexa- 
tions, no  indemnities"  was  accepted  so 
rapidly  and  completely  by  the  great  masses 
of  the  people.  To  Western  Europe  this 
formula  of  "no  annexations,  no  indemni- 
ties" was  most  extreme,  socialistic,  sec- 
tarian. To  Russia  it  was  the  commonplace 
of  national  thinking,  the  very  pivot  and 
axle  of  the  Revolution.  The  European 


24  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

democracy  of  the  Imperialistic  States  is 
out  to  destroy  German  Imperialism;  the 
Russian  democracy  is  out  to  destroy 
Imperialism  as  such,  because  Imperial- 
ism, as  such,  is  the  enemy  of  democracy 
and  of  all  the  Russian  Revolution  stands 
for.  To  a  Russian,  the  protagonists  in 
the  war  are  now  Revolution  and  Impe- 
rialism. Unless  the  Revolution  destroys 
Imperialism,  Imperialism  will  destroy  the 
Revolution. 

Such  is  the  non-Imperialist  creed  of 
the  C.W.S.D.  The  ImperiaHsts  at  once 
denounced  it  as  a  movement  for  a  sepa- 
rate peace.  There  is  no  longer  any  need  for 
argument  now  on  this  subject.  It  is  an  ex- 
ploded fable  and  was,  in  fact,  an  inven- 
tion of  the  Imperialists  for  the  purpose  of 
discrediting  the  democratic  purpose  and 
saving  their  Imperialism.  Such  an  idea  as 
that  of  a  separate  peace  was  quite  impos- 
sible from  the  very  nature  of  the  revolu- 
tionarymind.  The  onlypeacethatthe  Rus- 
sian democracy  thought  of,  or  was  capable 
of  thinking  of,  was  a  general  peace.  The 
enemy,  as  I  have  said,  was  Imperialism; 


AND  THE  WAR 25 

how  could  peace  be  made  with  Imperial- 
istic Germany! 

But  though  there  was  not  the  least 
thought  of  a  separate  peace,  the  whole 
conception  and  mentality  of  the  Revolu- 
tion was  for  a  speedy  ending  of  the  war. 
There  were  two  factors  in  this  concep- 
tion. One  was  the  sheer  difficulty  of  going 
on  with  the  war  in  face  of  the  legacy  of 
disorganisation  left  by  the  old  regime— 
disorganisation  economic,  military  and 
social.  At  one  and  the  same  time  Russia 
was  faced  by  the  greatest  political  crisis 
in  her  history;  by  the  financial  crisis 
which  has  brought  her  almost  to  the 
verge  of  ruin;  by  the  transport  crisis,  or 
rather  breakdown;  and  by  the  economic 
crisis  that  seemed  incurable.  Catastrophe 
seemed  so  imminent  that  the  only  hope 
of  salvation  for  Russia  lay  in  a  speedy  end- 
ing of  the  war.  That  was  the  first  factor; 
the  second  factor  in  this  mentality  was 
that  peace  really  seemed  attainable.  It  was 
believed  that  the  chief  obstacle  to  peace 
had  been  Tsarist  Imperialism.  With  its 
removal  thepath  seemed  open.  That  West- 


26  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

ern  Imperialism  existed  too,  and  might 
prove  an  obstacle  to  peace,  was  well  under- 
stood, but  it  was  not  regarded  as  an  in- 
superable obstacle.  There  was  faith  in  the 
democracy  of  the  West.  It  was  believed 
that  the  West  would  be  kindled  by  the 
Russian  Revolution— at  least  to  sympathy. 
The  Russian  democracy  would  never  allow 
France  or  England  to  be  crushed  by  Ger- 
many with  Russia  standing  idly  by.  Rus- 
sia was  prepared  and  willing  to  fight  for 
them.  But  it  was  hoped  that  the  Western 
democracies  in  their  turn  would  put  the 
interests  of  the  Russian  Revolution  in  the 
forefront  and  would  eventually  agree  thata 
just,  democratic  peace  was  to  be  desired,if 
only  because  it  meant  the  salvation  of  Rus- 
sia and  the  consolidation  of  her  Revolu- 
tion. Separate  peace  would  be  treason  not 
only  to  Russia's  Allies  but  to  the  Russian 
Revolution  itself.  A  general  peace  as  soon 
as  it  could  be  obtained  was  needed  for  the 
very  existence  of  Russia. 

The  difficulty  was  to  bring  this  home 
to  the  Allies;  to  reassure  them  on  the  one 
hand,  and  to  seek  their  collaboration  on 


AND  THE  WAR  27 

the  Other.  And  yet  the  initial  difficulty 
was  discovered  in  Russia  itself.  It  con- 
sisted in  the  attitude  of  M.  Milyukoff  and 
the  Russian  Imperialists.  It  became  clear 
that  the  Foreign  Minister  was  actually 
doing  his  utmost  to  prevent  Russia's  clear 
demand  from  being  understood  by  the 
Allies.  Nay  more,  he  was  making  every 
effort  to  persuade  the  Allies  that  Russia 
still  stood  to  her  Imperialistic  aims,  in- 
cluding Constantinople  and  the  dis- 
memberment of  Austria.  To  say  that  the 
Russian  mind  was  astonished  and  shocked 
by  this  perversity  would  be  putting  it 
mildly.  The  whole  thing  seemed  outside 
the  domain  of  reason.  No  wonder,  it  was 
thought,  that  the  West  was  so  slow  to  re- 
spond. Here  was  the  reason.  The  imme- 
diate thing  to  be  done  was  obviously  to 
remove  Mil5aikoflf.  A  new  Government 
must  be  found  that  would  express  Russia 
truthfully.  The  way  would  then  be  clear. 
This  new  Government  would  easily  come 
to  an  agreement  with  the  Allies  and  thus 
help  to  solve  the  situation. 


28  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

Meanwhile,  during  this  episode  two 
months  had  been  wasted,  and  those  two 
months  in  time  of  Revolution,when  every- 
thing is  unsettled,  changing,  in  a  state  of 
flux,  is  a  very  long  period.  During  that 
period  the  situation  had  grown  much 
worse.  Disorganisationhad  spread  rapidly 
in  the  army.  The  financial  crisis  had 
become  still  more  acute.  The  economic 
situation,  food  supply  and  transport,  had 
almost  reached  the  point  of  catastrophe. 
Russia  emerged  from  this  political  crisis 
with  a  new  Coalition  Government  repre- 
senting more  truly  Revolutionary  Russia, 
but  weaker,  less  organised,  less  stable.  In 
these  two  months  Russia  had  been  seri- 
ously robbed  of  her  strength  and  her  unity. 
It  was  now  realised  for  the  first  time 
that  it  was  not  so  easy  after  all  to  obtain 
peace.  Then  came  a  series  of  disappoint- 
ments from  outside. 

The  first  was  the  cynical  speech  of 
Bethmann-HoUweg,  in  which  he  made 
it  clear  that  Imperialistic  Germany  was 
not  prepared  to  make  any  concessions, 
but  that  all  she  thought  of  was  either 


AND  THE  WAR  29 

a  separate  peace  with  Russia  or  a 
general  peace  in  which  she  would  be 
the  victor.  But  this  was  a  sort  of  disap- 
pointment that  tended  to  strengthen  Rus- 
sia and  to  intensify  the  spirit  of  revolu- 
tionary defence.  It  even  strengthened  the 
hope  that  the  more  headstrong  and  brutal 
German  militarism  remained^  the  sooner 
was  internal  division  in  Germany  to  be 
expected.  Against  Imperialistic  Germany 
and  its  Junkers  and  pan-Germans  Rus- 
sia, moreover,  still  had  the  argument  of 
war,  and  she  would  be  glad  to  use  that 
argument  as  a  partner  in  a  rejuvenated 
alliance  of  democracies. 

But  of  a  very  different  character  were 
the  disappointments  that  shortly  after 
Bethmann-Hollweg's  speech  came  from 
the  Allies  themselves.  I  need  only  re- 
capitulate them — Lord  Robert  Cecil's 
speech  in  the  Commons,  M.  Ribot's 
speeches  in  the  Chamber,  the  vote  of 
the  French  Chamber,  the  French  refusal 
of  passports,  and  the  holding  up  of 
Mr.  Ramsay  MacDonald.  In  appearance 
the  speeches  by  the  Allied  statesmen 


30  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

seemed  to  go  a  long  way  in  acceptance  of 
the  Russian  formula  of  "No  annexations 
and  no  indemnities";  in  reality  they  sim- 
ply interpreted  the  formula  away.  The 
disillusionment  in  Russia  was  profound. 
Only  the  small  Imperialist  section  was 
gratified.  Their  attitude  was  that  of  "I 
told  you  so."  M.  Milyukoff 's  organ,  the 
Retch,  came  out  with  an  exultant  leader 
on  Lord  Robert  Cecil's  speech,  pointing 
out  how  futile  were  the  illusions  of  the 
Russian  democracy.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  democracy  felt  itself  defeated.  Its 
mood  was  almost  one  of  despair. 

*  *  4r 

Meantime  the  Revolution  developed. 
It  produced  a  rearrangement  of  political 
forces.  On  the  one  hand  there  was  the 
bourgeoisie,  alarmed  at  the  new  social 
prospect  that  was  growing  up.  Its 
watchword  was  "arrest  the  Revolution  at 
any  price."  This  section  is  best  repre- 
sented by  the  Cadet  Party,  which,  for 
years  the  Liberalising  force  in  Russia,  is 
now  the  Right  wing  in  the  New  Russia, 
and  may  reluctantly  find  itself  some  day 


AND  THE  WAR  31 

at  the  head  of  the  counter-revolution.  The 
Cadets  are  now  in  open  conflict  with  the 
revolutionary  democracy.  At  the  other 
political  pole  are  the  Extremists  or  Ultra- 
Revolutionaries,'  whose  watchword  is 
"Deepen  the  Revolution."  Just  as  the 
Cadets  wish  to  arrest  the  Revolution  by 
an  artificial  dam,  so  the  Maximalists  de- 
sire by  artificial  means  to  add  impetus  to 
its  flow  and  bring  about  the  full  regenera- 
tion of  Society  at  a  stroke.  These  people, 
of  whom  Lenin  is  the  most  conspicuous 
leader,  constitute  the  Extreme  Left,  and 
their  activities  are  just  as  dangerous  to 
the  safe  evolution  of  the  new  regime,  as 
are  the  counter-revolutionaries  of  the 
Right.  There  are  further  extremes  both 
of  the  Right  and  Left,  the  Black  Hun- 
dreds on  the  one  hand  and  the  Anarchists 
on  the  other,  but  neither  of  these  ultra- 
extremists  need  be  taken  into  serious  ac- 
count at  this  stage  of  affairs.  Between 
these  forces  of  counter-revolution  and 
ultra-revolution,  the  Cadets  and  Maxi- 
malists, stands  the  great  mass  of  Russian 
opinion,  represented  by  the  C.W.S.D., 


33  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

which  seeks  neither  to  arrest  nor  to  ex- 
ploit, to  dam  or  to  deepen  the  Revolu- 
tion, but  to  allow  it  to  develop  normally 
and  safely  to  the  full  extent  of  its  poten- 
tialities, political  and  social,  without  en- 
dangering the  stability  of  national  life  or 
compromising  the  gains  that  the  Revolu- 
tion has  won.  It  is  this  central  revolution- 
ary force  which  is  now  in  control  of  Rus- 
sia and  the  most  powerful  force  in  its 
Government.  The  counter-revolution  was 
a  natural  outcome  of  the  social  character 
of  the  Revolution.  It  should  always  be 
borne  in  mind  that  the  Revolution  is  not 
merely  a  political  Revolution,  nor  is  it 
the  social  Revolution  as  conceived  by  a 
minority  of  Russian  Socialists — but  it  is 
certainly  in  great  measure  a  social  Revo- 
lution. There  can  be  no  understanding 
of  Russia  to-day  without  recognition  of 
this  fact.  Naturally  it  is  a  fact  that  is 
unpalatable  to  the  capitalist  and  agrarian 
interests  who  constitute  the  counter- 
revolutionary force. 

Now,  in  fact,  the  counter-revolution  is 
very  real.  It  has  been  there  since  the  very 


AND  THE  WAR  33 

first  days  of  the  Revolution.  But  its  diffi- 
culty throughout  has  been  to  know  what 
line  to  take.  It  knew  that  the  alliance  of 
soldiers  and  workers  was  the  granite  rock 
of  the  Revolution,  and  its  first  effort  was 
to  destroy  that  alliance.  A  stream  of 
accusations  was  let  loose.  The  workers 
were  betraying  the  soldiers  by  their 
selfish  strikes.  They  were  stoppingtheout- 
put  of  munitions.  They  were  regardless 
of  the  fate  of  the  soldiers  at  the  front  and 
thought  only  of  themselves,  etc.  But  the 
manoeuvre  did  not  succeed  and  was  very 
soon  abandoned.  To  show  how  un- 
founded this  charge  was  I  need  only  men- 
tion one  fact.  On  the  appeal  of  the 
C.  W. S  .D .  the  Petrograd  workers  collected 
in  three  weeks  a  million  and  a  quarter  rou- 
bles as  a  First  of  May  Gift  to  the  soldiers. 
They  did  this  by  forfeiting  their  pay  on 
Saturdays  and  holidays,  when  they  have 
to  work.  In  face  of  such  a  voluntary  sacri- 
fice as  this  accusations  of  betrayal  could 
hardly  prosper. 

Other  methods  were  tried  and  dropped, 
and  finally  the  counter-revolution  had 


34  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

recourse  to  the  traditional  weapon  of 
reaction  in  Russia — anti-Semitism.  A 
whole  literature  of  the  gutter  has  been 
started  for  the  purpose  of  instilling  this 
virus  of  the  pogromists  into  Russian 
life.  Gutter  newspapers,  circulating  only 
among  the  lowest  classes — not  the  work- 
ers or  artisans,  but  the  indeterminate  class 
of  the  street  and  the  market-place — have 
been  set  to  work.  One  of  them  with  a 
big  circulation  is  jointly  edited  by  one  of 
the  Suvorins,  sons  of  the  notorious  editor 
of  the  Novoye  Vremya,  and  a  well-known 
music-hall  wrestler  known  in  familiar  par- 
lance as  "Uncle  Vania."  This  paper  and 
others  are  issuing  a  whole  series  of 
calumnies  against  the  leaders  of  the 
C.W.S.D.,  giving  lists  of  their  alleged 
German- Jewish  names,  and  alleging  that 
the  one  aim  of  the  Revolution  is  to  secure 
the  domination  of  the  Jews  and  to  reduce 
true  Russians  into  the  function  of  a  sub- 
ject race.  These  calumnies  and  false  char- 
ges are  occasionally  quoted  by  large  and 
more  influential  anti-Semitic  papers  and 
too  often  cabled  abroad.  Thus  from  these 


AND  THE  WAR  35 

sources  the  calumny  has  been  spread  all 
over  the  world  that  Lenin  is  not  a  Rus- 
sian but  a  Jew,  whose  real  name  is  Zeder- 
blum;  another  is  that  the  executive  of  the 
C.W.S.D.  has  only  one  Russian  in  a  mem- 
bership of  eighteen,  and  we  even  find  it 
being  stated  in  England  by  those  who 
should  know  better  that  the  majority  of 
the  Executive  Committee  are  Jews.  This 
propaganda  of  insults  and  lies  is  too  de- 
spicable and  worthless  to  deserve  much 
consideration  in  itself;  and  it  must  be  said 
in  fairness  that  the  most  respectable  ele- 
ments in  Russia  would  not  degrade  them- 
selves by  entering  into  controversy  with 
this  anti-Semitic  mentality,  which  be- 
longs rather  to  a  zoological  category  than 
to  sane  politics.  I  only  mention  the  agita- 
tion en  passant,  because  it  raises  the  very 
interesting  question  of  the  real  relation 
of  the  Jews  to  the  Revolution. 

The  vast  majority  of  Jews  in  Russia 
are,  in  fact,  to  be  found  in  association 
with  the  Liberal  bourgeoisie  and  are  sup- 
porters ofthe  Cadet  Party.  They  loyally 
supported  both  the  First  and  Second 


36  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

Provisional  Governments  like  sober  and 
respectable  citizens,  and  they  are  making 
the  greatest  efforts  to  secure  the  success 
of  the  Liberty  Loan.  Generally  they 
stand  for  maintaining  the  unity  of  the 
State  and  are  opposed  to  centrifugal  and 
separatist  ideas.  Of  the  Jews  as  a  body 
we  may  expect  that  they  will  play  a 
large  part  in  the  future  reconstruction  of 
Russia,  but  it  cannot  be  said  of  them  that 
they  played  a  great  and  active  part  in  the 
Revolution.  The  only  Jews  that  took  an 
active  part  in  the  Revolution  were  the 
small  but  energetic  Socialist  minority  of 
Jewish  idealists.  If  the  millions  of  Jews 
of  Russia  have  gained  their  freedom  to- 
day they  owe  it  to  that  minority  of  Jewish 
idealists. 

Yet  the  very  existence  of  these  Jewish 
idealists  is  a  peculiar  demonstration  of 
the  force  and  reality  of  Russian  idealism. 
Though  members  of  an  oppressed  race 
and  with  every  excuse  for  racial  bitter- 
ness, they  never  faltered  in  their  faith  in 
Russia.  In  all  the  Revolutionary  parties 
they  played  an  active  part.  They  went  to 


AND  THE  WAR  37 

gaol  and  Siberia  with  their  Russian  fellow- 
revolutionaries.  Yet  they  knew  by  experi- 
ence that  every  effort  of  theirs  would  be, 
and  was,  answered  by  the  autocracy  in 
brutal  massacre  of  the  Jewish  population 
at  large.  Had  they  been  swayed  even  to 
the  slightest  degree  by  racial  considera- 
tions they  would  have  held  their  hand  if 
only  out  of  pity  for  their  own  race.  But  to 
them  the  ideal  was  above  all,  and  to-day 
they  may  be  proud  of  Russia's  freedom, 
which  they  helped  to  achieve  in  co-opera- 
tion with  the  best  men  and  women  of  all 
Russia.  The  old  regime  fostered  mutual 
hatred  between  the  races.  It  turned  Rus- 
sians against  Ukrainians,  Poles  against 
Jews,  Tartars  against  Armenians;  all 
against  all.  But  the  Tsardom  has  fallen, 
and  this  inter- racial  hatred  is  dead  in  Rus- 
sia. Russians,  Ukrainians,  Georgians,  Jews 
and  Armenians;  they  are  all  to-day,  to  use 
Kerensky's  words,  "a  friendly  family  of 
fraternal  peoples."  They  trust  each  other 
without  cavil  or  distinction  or  arriere- 
pensee.  Not  the  most  virulent  or  insidious 
anti-Semite  poison  is  capable  of  bringing 


38  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

discord  into  the  ranks  of  the  Revolution. 
To-day  anti-Semitism  in  Russia  is  but  a 
poor,  shameful  remnant  of  the  old  regime, 
impotent  and  execrated.  But  now  that  it 
has  lost  power  in  its  native  country  it  has 
begun  to  seek  asylum  in  Western  Europe. 
It  is  not  for  me  to  speak  of  European 
anti-Semitism.  I  only  ask  your  permission 
to  tell  you  one  truth  that  we  in  Russia 
have  come  to  learn  through  heavy  sacri- 
fice. The  best  men  in  RussiajfromTolstoy 
to  Gorky,  have  combated  anti-Semitism, 
not  from  the  humanitarian  point  of  view, 
not  only  out  of  sympathy  for  its  Jewish 
victims,  but  because  the  foul  infection 
of  anti-Semitism  demoralised  the  Russian 
nation  at  large.  Anti-Semitism  is  a  poison 
that  injures  the  oppressor  rather  than  the 
oppressed. 

♦  4(  4t 

With  the  political  crisis  of  the  3rd  of  May 
— the  MiliukoflF  incident — the  romantic 
period  of  the  Revolution  came  to  an  end 
and  the  period  of  disillusions  began.  This 
was  the  most  difficult  moment  of  the 
Revolution.    It  seemed  as  if  the  nation 


AND  THE  WAR  39 

would  lapse  into  a  state  of  molecular  dis- 
solution. The  military  machine  was  fall- 
ing into  greater  and  greater  disorder. 
The  economic  and  financial  situation, 
catastrophic  enough  at  the  outbreak  of 
the  Revolution,  had  become  simply 
desperate.  The  failure  to  achieve  any 
agreement  with  the  Allies  worked  to  the 
advantage  of  the  Maximalists  and  Ex- 
tremists and  added  impetus  to  their  pro- 
paganda. Its  effect  became  more  evident 
every  day  that  passed.  At  the  same  time 
the  counter-revolutionary  elements  in 
Russia  began  to  lift  their  heads.  And  they 
lifted  their  heads  the  higher  and  the  more 
boldly  in  proportion  as  extremism  became 
noisier,  more  audacious  and  more  suc- 
cessful. There  was  neither  war  in  any 
active  sense  nor  any  prospect  of  finish- 
ing the  war.  Russia's  state,  in  short,  was 
sufficient  to  appal  the  strongest  will,  to 
shake  the  strongest  faith.  There  seemed 
no  way  out. 

Yet  even  at  this  black  hour  it  was  amaz- 
ing how  a  marvellous  instinct  continued 
to  guide  and  support   the   Revolution 


40  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

when  the  force  of  logic  alone  would  have 
failed.  I  remember  how  forcibly  I  was 
struck  at  the  time  by  the  instinctive  and 
immediate  foresight  and  resource  of  the 
revolutionary  leaders.  Instinct  had  been 
the  driving  power  of  the  Revolution  from 
the  outset;  it  did  not  fail  it  now.  The 
most  wonderful  manifestation  of  this  in- 
stinct was  the  decision  then  taken  by  the 
Executive  of  the  C.W.S.D.  to  take  part  in 
the  Provisional  Government.  That  date 
—May  the  6th— when  the  Executive  Com- 
mittee decided  to  share  the  responsibility 
of  Government  was  perhaps  the  most  fate- 
ful day  in  Russian  history.  The  risk  was 
enormous;  and  the  courage  to  face  it  was 
correspondingly  enormous.  It  meant  life 
or  death  for  New  Russia.  It  gave  Lenin's 
Extremism  the  chance  that  it  might  have 
prayed  for;  and  in  the  unhappy  event  of 
this  new  Provisional  Government  failing 
to  solve  the  situation  it  was  inevitable  that 
a  period  of  rash  social  experiment  in 
Russia  would  follow  with  its  equally 
inevitable  consequences  of  civil  war  and 
collapse,  first  into  anarchy,  and  then  into 


AND  THE  WAR  41 

despotism.  The  risk,  as  I  have  said,  was 
truly  stupendous. 

But  the  eifect  was  to  give  the  Govern- 
ment a  new  programme  and  a  new  deter- 
mined,  courageous,  clearly  defined  and 
clearly  thought-out  policy.  At  the  same 
time  the  decision  of  the  C.W.S.D.  gave 
the  Government  a  support  from  the  mass 
of  the  people  which  the  first  Provisional 
Government  did  not  possess. 

The  programme  of  the  new  Provisional 
Government  was  based  upon  two  leading 
ideas:  first,  a  foreign  policy  that  should 
rest  simultaneously  upon  a  strong,  re- 
vived, and  reorganised  army  and  a  deter- 
mined effort  for  peace;  second,  a  home 
policy  that  would  pull  the  country  to- 
gether economically,  financially  and 
politically,  and  defeat  the  disorganising 
tendencies  in  Russian  life.  I  regret  that 
space  does  not  permit  me  to  speak  of  the 
domestic  policy  of  the  new  Government, 
its  programmes  of  economic  and  financial 
reform  and  social  regeneration.  All  that 
I  need  now  say — but  I  must  say  it  with 
all  the  emphasis  at  my  command — is  that 


42  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

this  internal  salvation  of  Russia  is  in  fact 
conditional  upon  the  success  of  Russia's 
effort  for  peace.  It  is  felt  by  everybody 
in  Russia,  and  of  course  by  the  Govern- 
ment itself  in  the  first  place,  that  the 
only  chance  of  the  Government's  saving 
Russia  from  internal  chaos  is  the  success 
of  its  foreign  policy— that  is  to  say,  its 
success  in  bringing  the  war  to  a  speedy 
conclusion.  Upon  that  the  whole  future 
of  Russia  is  staked. 

The  way  was  clear  and  obvious .  A  strong 
army  was  needed  by  the  Russians  to  rein- 
force and  dignify  its  peace  programme. 
Chernov,  the  leader  of  the  Social  Revolu- 
tionaries and  Minister  for  Agriculture  in 
the  new  Government,  declared  at  a  Cabi- 
net Council :  "Russia  must  no  longer  speak 
to  her  Allies  in  the  tone  of  a  poor  relative, 
and  to  enemies  with  the  mien  and  lan- 
guage of  a  pauper."  At  the  recent  all-Rus- 
sian Congress  of  the  C.W.S.D.  he  put  it 
even  more  forcibly:  "Russia  must  have  a 
strong  army  to  enforce  the  respect  of 
friends  and  foes  alike."  We  now  see  that 
the  thing  has  been  done.  Kerensky  and 


AND  THE- WAR  43 

the  new  Government  have  done  their  work 
well.  But  let  not  the  offensive  be  misin- 
terpreted. Let  there  be  no  mistake.  The 
offensive  is  in  no  way  an  antithesis  to  the 
Russian  democracy's  struggle  for  peace. 
It  is,  on  the  contrary,  its  confirmation. 
Let  me  quote  the  Petrograd  correspon- 
dent of  the  Daily  News,  the  most  clear- 
sighted and  understanding  correspon- 
dent of  any  foreign  newspaper  in  Russia. 
He  says:  "It  is  clear  that  the  Coalition 
Government  now  recognises  that  the 
source  of  its  powers  is  the  C.W.S.D.,  and 
reciprocally  the  Council,  as  at  present  con- 
stituted, is  determined  to  support  the  Gov- 
ernment by  all  possible  means  and,  fur- 
ther, to  support  the  Government's  policy 
of  hastening  peace  by  activity  in  the  field 
as  well  as  by  diplomacy.  It  supports  the 
offensive  because  it  believes  that  it  will 
help  its  diplomacy.  Its  own  permanence 
and  that  of  the  Government  depend  on 
the  justification  of  that  belief." 

The  same  truth  is  expressed  by  Mr. 
Harold  Williams  in  one  of  his  latest  de- 
spatches. 


44  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

"It  must  be  remembered/'  he  says, 
"that  the  clearer  the  aims  of  the  war,  the 
more  distinct  and  positive  the  utterances 
of  the  AlHes,  the  more  certain  the  soldiers 
are  that  the  whole  Coalition  is  fighting 
sincerely  for  the  pure  ideal  of  liberty,  the 
more  powerful  will  be  the  offensive  im- 
pulse of  the  Russian  army." 
*        ♦        ♦ 

Russia's  danger  to-day  is  nervousness. 
The  whole  national  life  is  in  a  state  of 
nerves.  It  is  nervously  overstrained  and 
apprehensive.  The  country  feels  itself  on 
the  verge  of  ruin,  or  as  Skobelyef  (Social- 
ist Member  of  the  Government)  put  it 
the  other  day,  "Russia  is  balancing  on  a 
razor-edge."  In  fact  Russia  is  living  only 
on  her  nervous  excitement.The  new  offen- 
sive illustrates  this  most  clearly.*  It  has 
been  a  miracle.  Yet  there  is  evidently  too 
much  exaltation  and  not  enough  of  that 
calm  confidence  that  one  would  like.  The 
army  fights  with  amazing  vehemence  and 

*  Mr.  Farbman's  lecture  was  delivered  at  the 
time  of  Brussiloff 's  offensive  and  before  the  re- 
grettable breakdown  of  morale  in  Galicia. 


AND  THE  WAR  45 

with  almost  excessive  impetuosity  of  at- 
tack. This  high-pitched  impulsiveness 
of  Russian  national  life  is  fraught  with 
danger,  because  the  higher  the  nervous 
tension  and  uplift,  the  greater  may  be  the 
reaction  afterwards.  The  Russian  Revolu- 
tion and  the  Russian  Revolutionary  army 
need  all  the  sympathy  and  the  active  co- 
operation of  die  Allied  democracies.  The 
nervous  tension  of  Russian  national  life 
should  be  cured. 

The  reason  for  this  nervous  overstrain  is 
that  the  Russian  Revolution  feels  isolated, 
and  that  the  prospect  looks  dark.  Imagine 
the  position  of  the  Russian  democracy. 
The  indefinite  prolongation  of  the  war 
means  a  vista  of  internal  collapse  andcatas- 
trophe.  Yet  hope  of  a  speedy  ending  of 
the  war  diminishes  every  day. 

The  Russian  democracy  is  extending 
its  hands  with  passionate  yearning  to  its 
Allies'  democracies.  But  its  outstretched 
hands  remain  hanging  in  the  air.  Demo- 
cratic Russia  calls  upon  the  Western  de- 
mocracies :  "  Try  to  understand  the  tragic 
position  of  Revolutionary  Russia.  Try  to 


46  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION  &  THE  WAR 

understand  the  great  mission  of  the  Rus- 
sian Revolution.  Do  not  drive  Russia  to 
despair  by  your  cold  scepticism.  Do  not 
isolate  Russia.  Draw  nearer  to  Russian 
democracy  and  co-operate  with  her  in 
isolating  German  Junkerdom  and  pan- 
Germanism." 

The  Russian  Revolution  is  a  potent 
weapon.  It  is  capable  of  being  thrust  like 
a  wedge  into  German  unity  and  of  de- 
stroying that  "  burgfrieden''  upon  which 
German  mora/^  depends.  Unity  of  the 
Allies  on  such  a  single  moral  front  is  the 
best  means,  and  perhaps  the  only  means, 
of  bringing  about  a  speedy  decision  and 
an  early  and  satisfactory  peace. 


^t  the  PELICAN  PRV.SS,  Otugh  Square,  Fleet  Street,  E.C.^;  the  Vuloria  House 
Printing  Co.,  Ltd.,  Tudor  Street,  Li.ndon,  E.C.^ 


NATIONAL  COUNCIL 
FOR  CIVIL  LIBERTIES 


President  -        -        -    W.  C.  ANDERSON,  M.P. 

Vice-Presidents       -       -    JOHN  CLIFFORD,  D.D. 
J.  A.  HOBSON 
H.  Vy.  MASSINGHAM 
ROBERT  SMILLIE 

Hon.  Treasurer        -        >    Mrs.  PHILIP  SNOWDEN 

Secretary         -        -       -    B.  N.  LANGDON-DAVIES 

Hon.  Assist.  Sec.  (pro  um.)    M.  MANUS 


OBJECTS 

(^)  To  work  for  the  repeal  of  the  Military 
Service  Acts,  1916,  and  to  prevent  the 
policy  of  military  compulsion  from  becom' 
ing  a  permanent  feature  of  our  national  life; 

(l))  To  safeguard  freedom  of  speech,  the  right 
of  civil  trial  and  the  other  civil  liberties 
of  the  British  people  ; 

(O  To  watch  the  administration  of  the  Mili' 
tary  Service  Acts,  the  Defence  of  the 
Realm  Act  and  other  laws  likely  to 
endanger  civil  liberty ; 

(d)  To  oppose  any  extension  of  the  principle 
or  operation  of  the  abovc'mentioned  Acts. 

For  list  of  recent  publications  and  all  other  information 
apply  to 

THE  SECRETARY, 
NATIONAL  COUNCIL  FOR  CIVIL  LIBERTIES, 
22  BRIDE  LANE,  LONDON,  E.C.4 

Publications  by  individual  authors  are  issued  by  the  National 
Council  for  Qivil  Liberties  as  useful  contributions  to  the 
literature  of  political  thought.  The  Qouncil  does  not,  how- 
ever, necessarily  endorse  every  opinion  to  which  the  writers 
of  these  publications  give  utterance. 


14  DAY  USE 

RETURN  TO  DESK  FROM  WHICH  BORROWED 

LOAN  DEPT. 

This  book  is  due  on  the  last  date  stamped  below,  or 

on  the  date  to  which  renewed. 

Renewed  books  are  subject  to  immediate  recall. 


iAY    ^S61 


V 


in 


t 


^m^ 


tm« 


0CTir19B9 


^OV 12 1988 


LD  21A-60m-10,'65 
(F77638l0)476B 


General  Library 

University  of  California 

Berkeley 


Photomount 
Pamphlet 

Binder 
Gaylord  Bros. 

Makers 
Syractjse,  «.J£. 


u.c 


.BERKat>fUB«^« 


80 


-/-.  -■ 


,S*- 


UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA  LIBRARY 


dm- 


