PRINCE  GEORGE  E.  LVOV,  PRESIDENT  OF  THE  ALL-RUSSIAN  UNION 
OF  ZEMSTVOS  AND  PREMIER  OF  THE  PROVISIONAL  GOVERNMENT 


F 

RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 


THE 


BY 

ISAAC    DON    LEVINE 

FOKEIGN   NKWS   EDITOR,    NEW   YORK   TRIBUNE 


WITH    PORTRAITS 


HARPER   &   BROTHERS    PUBLISHERS 
NEW     YORK     AND     LONDON 


HARPER^S  CONTEMPORARY  BOOKS 


LLOYD  GEORGE:    The  Man  and  Hia  Stobt 
By  Frank  Dilnot.     Portrait.     Post  8vo 

THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

By  Isaao  Don  Levine.     12mo 

WHY  WE  ARE   AT  WAR 

By  Woodrow  Wilson.     16mo 

CONFESSIONS  OF  A  WAR  CORRESPONDENT 
By  William  G.  Shepherd.     Illustrated 


HARPER    &    BROTHERS,   NEW    YORK 
[Established    18171 


The  Russian  Rkvolution 


Copyright.  1917.  by  Harper  &  Brothers 

Printed  in  the  United  States  of  Americiv 

Published  June,  1917 


CONTENTS 

CHAP.  PAGE 

I.  A  Century  of  Struggle  for  Freedom     .  1 

II.  Russian  Autocracy  and  the  Great  War  19 

III.  Russian  Democracy  and  the  Great  War  35 

IV.  The  Birth  of  Social  Russia        ....  51 

V.  The  Duma  and  Social  Russia      ....  65 

VI.  The  Democratization  of  the  Army     .    .  79 

VII.  The  Rule  of  Goremykin 94 

VIII.  The  Dark  Forces 113 

IX.  Working  for  Prussianism 135 

X.  A  Traitor  to  Democracy 159 

XI.  The  Crisis 172 

XII.  Rasputin  and  Protopopov 193 

XIII.  The  Revolution 213 

XIV.  The  Fall  of  Czarism 240 

XV.  The  New  Russia 255 

XVI.  The  Future 268 


ILLUSTRATIONS 

Prince  George  E.  Lvov,  President  of  the 
All-Russian  Union  of  Zemstvos  and 
Premier  of  the  Provisional  Govern- 
ment        Frontispiece 

Rasputin  and  a  Group  of  Admirers    .    .  Facing  p.  122 
Paul  N.  Miliukov,  Leader  of  the  Con- 
stitutional   Democrats    and    First 
Foreign  Minister  in  the  Provisional 

Government **       178 

Alexander  Feodorovitch  Kerensky,  First 
Minister  of  Justice  and  Then  Minis- 
ter OF  War  in  the  Provisional  Gov- 
ernment     **       257 


FOREWORD 

THE  first  six  chapters  of  this  book  give  a 
general  survey  of  the  forces  that  underlay 
the  Revolution.  The  following  six  chapters  deal 
with  the  events  in  the  thirty  months  preceding 
it.  The  last  four  chapters  cover  the  Revolution 
proper  and  its  possibilities.  | 

As  this  book  is  being  completed,  the  clash 
between  the  Provisional  Government  and  the 
Council  of  Workmen's  and  Soldiers'  Deputies, 
forecast  in  the  concluding  chapter,  has  occurred. 
It  came  through  the  Council's  increasing  as- 
sumption of  supreme  power.  At  an  extraor- 
dinary session  of  the  Duma  several  leading 
members  made  desperate  appeals  to  the  radicals 
to  come  to  their  senses  and  save  the  new 
Russia  from  disintegration.  Still  the  Council 
continued  its  visionary  activities,  calling  for 
an  international  conference  of  Socialists  to 
discuss  peace  terms.  Discipline  in  the  army 
began  to  decline  at  an  alarming  rate,  threaten- 
ing a  dissolution  of  the  country's  fighting  forces. 
General  Kornilov  resigned  in  protest  from  the 
post  of  Petrograd  commandant  upon  finding 
that  the  Council  was  interfering  with  his 
duties.    Generals  Brusilov  and  Gurko  requested 


FOREWORD 

next  to  be  relieved  of  their  commands.  After 
tliat  followed  the  resignation  of  War  Minister 
Gutchkov.  As  a  climax  came  an  impassioned 
speech  by  Kerensky,  who  said  he  wished  he  had 
died  two  months  earlier  when  Russian  freedom 
was  still  a  beautiful  dream  instead  of  a  dis- 
tressing reality.  The  Council  of  Workmen  and 
Soldiers  then  realized  the  true  situation.  A 
week  before  it  had  rejected  a  proposal  to  join  a 
coalition  Cabinet,  but  now  it  adopted  it  by  a 
large  majority.  A  conference  between  the 
Executive  Committee  of  the  Duma  and  the 
Council  resulted  in  an  agreement  providing  a 
plentitude  of  powers  for  the  Provisional  Gov- 
ernment. Paul  Miliukov  retired  as  Foreign 
Minister  to  appease  the  extremists,  and  was 
succeeded  by  the  youthful  Minister  of  Finance 
Terestchenko.  Minister  of  Justice  Kerensky 
became  Minister  of  War  in  the  coalition  Cabinet. 
Prince  George  E.  Lvov  retained  his  Premier- 
ship. Minister  of  Agriculture  Shingarev  was 
slated  for  the  post  of  Minister  of  Finance,  while 
his  portfolio  was  scheduled  for  a  member  of  the 
Social-Revolutionary  party  standing  for  the 
division  of  all  land  among  the  peasants  on  a 
communistic  basis.  Altogether  the  new  Gov- 
ernment was  to  include  six  Socialists. 


THE    RUSSIAN 
REVOLUTION 


A  CENTURY  OF  STRUGGLE  FOR  FREEDOM 

THE  struggle  between  autocracy  and  de- 
mocracy in  Russia,  which  culminated  in 
the  successful  revolution  of  March,  1917,  was 
one  of  the  longest  and  bitterest  contests  of  its 
kind  in  history.  [For  more  than  a  century 
Russia's  progressive  forces  stubbornly  and  tire- 
lessly labored  for  the  destruction  of  the  most 
despotic  governmental  system  on  earth.  Per- 
haps no  national  movement  for  freedom  has 
undergone  a  bloodier  series  of  experiences.  Cer- 
tain it  is  that  no  revolutionary  movement  has 
had  a  harder  task  before  it  than  the  Russian; 
for  no  autocracy  in  the  modern  world  was  as 
firmly  and  powerfully  intrenched  as  Czarism. 


THE   RUSSIAJ^    REVOLUTION 

The  birth  of  democratic  ideas  in  Russia 
dates  back  to  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth 
century.  The  French  Revolution  is  the  direct 
progenitor  of  the  Russian  revolutionary  move- 
ment. The  democratic  doctrines  which  ema- 
nated from  France  after  the  Revolution,  spread- 
ing throughout  Europe  and  sowing  the  seeds  of 
democracy,  were  destined  to  penetrate  Russia 
in  a  most  peculiar  manner.  Napoleon's  inva- 
sion of  Russia  created  the  soil  on  which  the 
future  Russian  revolutionary  movement  was  to 
grow.  JThat  invasion  resulted  in  a  Russian 
army's  invasion  of  France.  The  Russian  army 
of  a  century  ago  was  officered  by  educated 
young  aristocrats.  The  customary  education  of 
the  Russian  nobility  was  then  wholly  French. 
The  current  ideas  in  France  could  not  but 
deeply  affect  the  Russians,  whose  prolonged 
stay  in  western  Europe  had  already  imbued 
most  of  them  with  the  radical  theories  of  the 
time. 

Autocratic  Russia  had  come  to  France  in 
order  to  defeat  her  imperial  ambitions.  In 
return  France  communicated  to  her  conqueror 
the  ferment  that  was  to  prove  the  doom  of 
Russia's  imperial  autocracy.  The  Slav  officers 
who  went  back  to  their  native  land  after  the 

2 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

Napoleonic  wars  carried  with  them  the  germ  of 
the  Russian  movement  for  freedom  and  democ- 
racy. Laden  with  pregnant  thoughts  borrowed 
from  western  Europe,  these  revolutionary  pio- 
neers returned  home,  where  serfdom  was  still 
flourishing  and  liberty  unknown,  determined 
to  work  for  a  change  in  the  Government. 

A  secret  society  was  formed  among  the  officers 
of  the  returned  army  for  the  purpose  of  dis- 
cussing and  disseminating  democratic  ideas. 
The  society's  ultimate  purpose  was  to  influence 
Emperor  Alexander  I.  in  favor  of  transforming 
Russia's  Government  into  a  democracy.  Alex- 
ander I.  was,  in  the  early  years  of  his  reign, 
very  progressive.  He  inaugurated  a  number  of 
reforms  and  innovations.  He  planned  to  grant 
a  constitution  and  a  large  measure  of  self- 
government  to  Russia.  But  toward  the  close 
of  the  second  decade  of  the  century  he  gradu- 
ally fell  under  the  influence  of  his  reactionary 
advisers.  He  became  one  of  the  leading  cham- 
pions of  absolutism  in  Europe,  helping  to  sup- 
press the  revolutionary  movements  in  Germany, 
Spain,  and  Italy. 

The  secret  military  society  soon  realized  the 
futility  of  attempting  to  transform  Russia  into 
democracy  by  means  of  influencing  the  Czar. 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

A  more  revolutionary  program  was  therefore 
elaborated  by  the  society.  This  program 
called  for  the  overthrow  of  the  autocracy.  Al- 
though confined  exclusively  to  the  army,  the 
revolutionary  movement  made  rapid  headway. 
The  secret  society  developed  into  a  national 
organization,  with  branches  in  the  various 
parts  of  Russia,  where  large  numbers  of  troops 
were  quartered.  When  Alexander  I.  died  and 
his  brother  Constantine,  heir  to  the  throne,  who 
was  in  Warsaw,  abdicated  in  favor  of  his  brother 
Nicholas,  an  interregnum  followed.  The  Petro- 
grad  troops  had  taken  the  oafh  to  Constantine 
upon  the  death  of  Alexander.  The  revolutionists 
decided  to  utilize  the  opportunity  for  seizing 
the  Government.  They  persuaded  the  troops 
under  their  command  that  Nicholas  was  the 
author  of  a  plot  against  his  brother.  A  mutiny 
followed.  The  chiefs  of  the  conspiracy  were  so 
sure  that  the  entire  army  was  with  them  that 
they  let  Nicholas  alone  while  they  had  it  in 
their  power  to  remove  him.  This  proved  their 
fatal  blunder.  Nicholas  succeeded  in  rallying 
a  considerable  force  and  attacked  the  revolu- 
tionaries. The  rebellion  was  quelled  without 
much  trouble. 

The  ringleaders  of  the  rising,  which  occurred 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

in  December,  1825,  were  then  arrested.  They 
were  all  high  army  officers  and  members  of 
noble  families.  The  investigation  that  followed 
was  conducted  by  Nicholas  I.  himself.  It  was 
soon  disclosed  that  revolutionary  leagues  per- 
meated the  whole  army.  Wholesale  arrests, 
accompanied  by  inhuman  inquisitions,  followed. 
Some  of  the  revolutionists,  known  in  history  as 
the  Decembrists,  were  executed  and  others 
exiled.  But  the  flame  of  revolution  lit  by  them 
did  not  go  out  with  the  suppression  of  the 
revolutionary  movement.  The  severe  punish- 
ment of  the  revolutionists  only  fanned  that 
flame.  The  Decembrists  had  not  sacrificed 
their  lives  in  vain.  The  ideals  for  which  they 
died  were  transplanted  from  the  army  to  the 
public.  And  freedom  and  democracy  became 
the  goals  of  all  that  was  thoughtful  and  educated 
in  Russia. 

The  reign  of  Nicholas  I.,  who  was  called  the 
"Iron  Czar,"  was  not  calculated  to  appease  the 
growing  dissatisfaction  of  the  popular  elements. 
The  peasantry,  still  in  bondage,  and  the  in- 
tellectuals, stimulated  by  the  second  French 
Revolution,  presented  a  fertile  field  for  revolu- 
tionary agitation.  The  Emperor  himself  felt 
the  need  of  reformation.    He,  however,  believed 

5 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

that  what  the  nation  needed  was  discipline. 
Being  a  soldier,  he  regarded  the  state  as  a 
military  institution  primarily.  He  crushed  mer- 
cilessly all  civic  movements.  Through  his  cen- 
sorship he  killed  all  thought.  He  established 
the  Third  Section  of  the  secret  police,  which 
became  the  terror  of  all  that  was  liberty-loving 
in  the  nation.  Autocratic  power  never  was 
exercised  more  absolutely  in  Russia  than  by 
Nicholas  I.  He  even  considered  it  his  mission 
to  uphold  autocracy  all  over  Europe.  He  co- 
operated with  the  European  monarchs  in  their 
struggle  against  democratic  progress.  His  thirty 
years'  rule  was  a  reign  of  terror  and  oppression, 
and  still,  on  account  of  its  very  nature,  it  was 
more  productive  in  latent  democratic  energy 
than  any  preceding  reign. 

This  democratic  energy  expressed  itself  in  a 
large  number  of  secret  societies  and  clubs  during 
the  '40's  and  '50's  of  the  last  century.  These 
"circles,"  as  they  were  known,  were  led  by 
brilliant  intellectuals,  such  as  Petrashevski, 
Gertzen,  and  Bakunin,  who  later  became  the 
leading  anarchist  of  his  time.  Socialistic  in 
their  nature,  they  were  revolutionary  in  their 
attitude  toward  the  Russian  Government.  Even 

more  serious  were  the  revolutionary  outbreaks 

6 


THE   RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

among  the  peasantry.  The  yoke  of  serfdom 
lay  heavy  on  the  muzhik.  And  yet  he  began 
to  bestir  himself  here  and  there.  Uprisings 
occurred  in  various  parts  of  the  country.  And 
the  more  severe  the  Czar's  despotism  the  wider 
grew  the  discontent.  When  Nicholas  I.  launched 
upon  the  Crimean  War  in  the  belief  that  the 
military  Government  he  built  up  was  impreg- 
nable, only  to  be  disillusioned,  he  acknowledged 
his  policy  had  failed.  The  defeat  in  the  Crimea 
exposed  the  Government's  rottenness  and  stimu- 
lated the  revolutionary  and  democratic  move- 
ment. When  Nicholas  I.  ascended  the  throne 
in  1825  there  was  no  public  opinion  in  Russia. 
When  he  passed  away  in  1855  a  powerful  cur- 
rent of  public  opinion  had  made  itself  felt  in 
the  life  of  Russia.  This  opinion  was  practically 
unanimous.  Radical  reforms  were  demanded 
by  all  classes.  The  democratic  institutions  of 
western  Europe  were  studied  and  admired  in 
the  Slavic  empire.  So  strong  and  universal  was 
the  pressure  of  public  opinion  that  the  young 
Emperor,  Alexander  II.,  could  not  remain  in- 
different to  the  national  will.  He  did  not  go  as 
far  as  his  liberal  advisers  urged  him  to,  but  he 
instituted  a  series  of  reforms,  the  chief  of  which 
was  the  emancipation  of  the  serfs  in  1861. 

7 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

The  half -measures  of  Alexander  II.  only 
stimulated  revolutionary  activities.  The  peas- 
ants were  freed,  but  the  soil  allotted  them  was 
to  be  paid  for  at  many  times  its  worth  during 
the  next  fifty  years.  The  leaders  of  thought 
considered  the  emancipation  of  the  peasantry 
an  empty  gift.  Autocracy  remained  as  ruthless 
as  ever.  The  expected  constitution  was  never 
granted.  Socialism  therefore  found  a  fruitful 
field  in  Russia.  Secret  organizations  again 
sprang  up  throughout  the  country.  Composed 
mainly  of  students,  these  organizations  devoted 
their  activities  at  first  to  revolutionary  propa- 
ganda among  the  agricultural  and  industrial 
elements,  and  later  to  terroristic  schemes.  One 
of  the  first  of  such  organizations  was  the  "Land 
and  Freedom"  group.  Its  activities  provoked 
several  agrarian  risings  and  for  a  time  threat- 
ened a  serious  rebellion.  The  Government  took 
rigorous  steps  to  suppress  the  agitators.  Nu- 
merous arrests  were  made  and  many  of  the 
prisoners  were  exiled  to  Siberia  without  the 
formality  of  a  trial.  This  only  caused  greater 
bitterness  in  the  hearts  of  those  who  escaped 
the  nets  of  the  police  and  secret  service. 

The  fight  between  the  popular  elements  and 

the  autocracy  assumed  a  more  acute  form  than 

3 


THE   RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

ever.  The  gulf  between  the  two  forces  soon 
became  wider  and  deeper.  The  mihtary  and 
pohce  officers  treated  the  democratic  elements 
cruelly  and  barbarously.  The  attitude  of  the 
authorities  toward  the  propagandists  and,  for 
that  matter,  toward  all  who  were  intellectual 
and  educated,  was  one  of  f rightfulness.  The 
movement  for  freedom  soon  assumed  a  wholly 
terroristic  form.  The  bitterest  foes  of  democ- 
racy in  the  Government  were  condemned  to 
death  by  a  revolutionary  committee.  The  sen- 
tences were  carried  out  by  members  of  the 
organization.  A  number  of  high  officials  were 
thus  removed.  But  this  did  not  stop  persecu- 
tions by  the  police.  Instead,  it  only  intensified 
the  battle  between  the  Government's  agents 
and  the  radical  forces.  A  climax  was  reached 
when,  after  several  unsuccessful  attempts, 
Alexander  II.  was  assassinated  by  a  revolu- 
tionist on  March  13,  1881. 

After  this  a  violent  reaction  set  in.  The  new 
Emperor  had  no  sympathy  whatever  with  demo- 
cratic institutions  and  liberal  thought.  He 
suppressed  the  revolutionary  movement  for  a 
time  by  wholesale  arrests  and  exile  to  Siberia. 
The  censorship  of  the  press  increased  in  rigidity, 

and  the  supervision  of  the  police  over  Russian 
I  9 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

life  was  extended  to  unprecedented  limits. 
Organized  persecution  of  Jews,  accompanied 
by  a  series  of  pogroms,  marked  the  beginning 
of  the  new  Czar's  reign.  Finns,  Poles,  and  other 
peoples  inhabiting  Russia  were  subjected  to  a 
relentless  campaign  of  Russification.  Many  of 
the  reforms  promulgated  by  Alexander  II.  were 
practically  nullified  by  the  new  emperor.^  All 
these  reactionary  measures  could  have  but  one 
result — the  further  expansion  of  revolutionary 
thought  in  Russia.  Ever  broader  and  broader 
did  the  wave  of  dissatisfaction  grow,  engulfing 
larger  and  larger  sections  of  the  heterogeneous 
population  of  the  country. 

A  number  of  revolutionary  parties,  largely 
Socialistic,  like  the  Social-Democratic,  Social- 
Revolutionary,  Bund,  and  others,  were  founded 
secretly  in  the  last  decade  of  the  nineteenth 
century.  Their  activities  grew  enormously 
during  the  reign  of  Alexander's  successor, 
Nicholas  II.,  who  ascended  the  throne  in  1894. 
There  was  not  a  community  in  Russia  at  the 
beginning  of  the  twentieth  century  without  its 
secret  revolutionary  committee.  While  some 
of  the  revolutionary  parties  still  continued  the 
policy  of  assassination  of  Government  officials, 
nearly  all  of  them  devoted  themselves  to  more 

10 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

constructive  work.  An  elaborate  system  of 
subterranean  printing-shops  produced  a  flood 
of  revolutionary  literature  of  all  descriptions. 
Industrial  and  political  strikes  multiplied 
throughout  the  country.  Thousands  of  agi- 
tators, at  secret  meetings,  prepared  the  masses 
for  a  general  uprising.  Along  with  this  illegal 
movement  there  grew  and  developed  a  legiti- 
mate public  opinion  that  cried  for  reforms  and 
liberty.  The  middle  classes,  the  nobility,  and 
the  financial  interests  made  up  the  backbone  of 
it.  It  became  too  insistent  to  be  ignored,  and 
there  was  no  feasible  method  of  combating  it. 
The  Russo-Japanese  War,  like  the  Crimean, 
discredited  the  Government  in  the  eyes  of  Russia 
and  the  entire  world.  And  still  the  Czar  would 
not  let  the  people  share  in  the  management  of 
the  nation's  aiffairs. 

The  disastrous  war  with  Japan  proved  a 
stimulus  to  the  cause  of  democracy,  just  as  the 
disastrous  Crimean  campaign  was  responsible 
for  the  emancipation  of  the  serfs.  Popular 
unrest  culminated  in  a  series  of  revolutionary 
outbreaks  after  January  21,  1905,  known  in 
history  as  "Bloody  Sunday,"  when  the  popu- 
lace of  Petrograd  marched  to  the  Winter  Palace 

to  ask  the  Czar  for  freedom.    In  reply  the  peace- 

11 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

ful  crowd  was  shot  at  and  sabered  by  the 
Cossacks.  This  event  marked  the  beginning  of 
the  revolution  of  1905.  While  the  labor  and 
agricultural  classes  were  getting  ready  to  rise 
against  the  Government,  the  more  moderate 
elements  petitioned  the  Emperor  for  a  constitu- 
tion. To  a  delegation  of  nobles  Nicholas  II. 
promised  to  convoke  a  parliament.  Wlien, 
however,  the  law  providing  for  a  national  as- 
sembly was  published  in  August  it  was  dis- 
covered that  the  proposed  parliament,  or  Duma, 
was  to  be  nothing  but  a  consultative  institu- 
tion, the  emperor  still  reserving  the  right  of 
legislation.  The  nation  became  infuriated  with 
this  "constitution,"  and  a  revolt  swept  the 
country  in  October. 

The  main  feature  of  the  rebellion  was  a 
general  strike,  which  paralyzed  completely  the 
whole  governmental,  civil,  and  economic  life  of 
the  empire.  The  strike  proved  an  effective 
weapon.  The  Emperor  issued  a  manifesto 
granting  a  parliamentary  form  of  government 
and  all  the  liberties  enjoyed  by  a  free  people. 
For  a  moment  it  seemed  that  the  struggle 
between  Czarism  and  Russian  democracy  was 
at  an  end.  And  it  would  have  been  at  an  end 
had  the  leaders  of  the  revolt  taken  over  the 

12 


THE   RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

Government  immediately.  But  this  they  failed 
to  do.  They  trusted  Nicholas's  promises,  there- 
by launching  the  nation  in  one  of  the  bloodiest 
periods  of  its  history. 

As  soon  as  the  reactionary  circles  surround- 
ing the  Emperor  realized  that  the  revolution 
had  left  them  in  their  former  positions,  they 
engineered  a  tide  of  reaction  which  bathed 
Russia  in  blood  and  woe.  Almost  immediately 
after  the  conclusion  of  the  general  strike, 
drunken  mobs,  backed  by  the  police  and 
troops,  were  incited  to  massacre  Jews  and  in- 
tellectuals. The  whole  nation  was  convulsed 
by  hundreds  of  such  massacres.  Punitive  ex- 
peditions were  despatched  to  the  section  of  the 
country  where  the  revolutionary  movement  had 
been  strongest.  These  expeditions  executed 
thousands  of  citizens  without  trial.  Hundreds 
of  thousands  were  arrested,  tortured  in  prisons, 
and  exiled  to  Siberia.  All  attempts  at  revolt, 
such  as  the  Moscow  rising  of  December,  1905, 
were  frustrated  promptly  and  savagely.  Of 
the  liberties  granted  by  the  Czar  in  October, 
1905,  very  little  remained  in  force.  Only  the 
promise  to  convoke  a  parliament — the  Duma — 
was  not  retracted. 

Organized  revolutionism  was  crushed  out  by 

13 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

the  reactionary  Government.  But  it  was  im- 
possible to  crush  the  spirit  of  the  nation.  And 
beginning  with  April,  1906,  when  the  first  Duma 
met,  the  national  spirit  found  its  expression  in 
parliament.  )The  first  Duma  was  not  Social- 
istic. It  was  composed  almost  entirely  of 
members  of  the  Constitutional  -  Democratic 
party.  This  party  stood  for  a  limited  monarchy. 
The  first  Duma  demanded,  first  of  all,  the  grant- 
ing of  the  promised  liberties  and  the  cessation 
of  arrests  and  executions.  The  reactionary 
Government  would  not  hear  of  such  measures. 
The  conflict  between  the  latter  and  the  Duma 
quickly  reached  a  stage  when  decisive  action 
one  way  or  the  other  was  required.  The  Govern- 
ment dissolved  the  Duma. 

An  abortive  attempt  was  made  by  a  number 
of  leading  deputies  to  start  a  revolution.  They 
went  to  Viborg,  Finland,  and  issued  a  mani- 
festo to  the  people,  exhorting  them  to  rise  in 
defense  of  their  national  assembly.  But  the 
iron  hand  of  Czarism  lay  too  heavy  on  the 
masses.  No  rising  of  large  dimensions  occurred. 
And  the  eyes  of  the  nation  turned  in  hope  to 
the  second  Duma,  praying  that  its  fate  might 
be  different  from  the  first.  But  this  could 
hardly  be,  in  view  of  the  fact  that  its  com- 

14 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

plexion  was  not  much  different.  The  extreme 
revolutionists  gained  a  number  of  seats,  while 
the  reactionaries  also  increased  their  contingent, 
but  the  dominant  party  was  still  the  Consti- 
tutional-Democratic. Collaboration  with  the 
Government  was,  of  course,  impossible  without 
its  ending  the  reign  of  terror  in  which  the  coun- 
try lived.  Martial  law  existed  almost  every- 
where, pogroms  still  continued,  Wholesale  ar- 
rests and  summary  executions  were  as  yet  the 
order  of  the  day.  The  second  Duma  fared  still 
worse  than  the  first.  The  Government  arrested 
a  number  of  deputies  on  a  framed-up  charge 
in  order  to  provoke  the  Duma  to  excitement, 
thus  providing  a  cause  for  its  dissolution.  After 
the  second  Duma's  end,  a  change  in  the  election 
law  was  promulgated  by  an  imperial  ukase. 
The  alteration  was  made  with  a  view  to  secur- 
ing a  large  representation  of  landowners  and 
clergy  in  the  next  Duma. 

\  The  third  Duma  was  pretty  close  to  what  the 
Government  desired.  It  was  chiefly  composed  of 
the  conservative  party — the  Octobrist — which 
believed  in  limited  reforms  by  the  grace  of  the 
autocrat.  Public  opinion  did  not  support  it. 
For  five  years  it  sat,  without  inaugurating  any 

substantial  changes  in  the  oppressive  atmos- 

15 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

phere  of  national  life.  The  knout  and  the 
bayonet  still  ruled  the  country.  Hundreds  of 
thousands  of  Russia's  best  sons  were  smarting 
in  the  jails  and  in  Siberia.  Hundreds  of  thou- 
sands more  migrated  to  other  lands.  Reforms 
were  indefinitely  postponed.  Liberty  was  for- 
gotten by  the  Octobrists,  who  drew  their  name 
from  the  October  manifesto  of  the  Czar.  The 
third  Duma,  in  a  word,  was  nothing  but  a  tool 
in  the  hands  of  the  bureaucratic  Government. 
At  the  expiration  of  its  term,  in  1912,  the  fourth 
Duma,  which  was  destined  to  play  a  historic 
r61e  of  momentous  universal  import,  was  elected 
on  the  same  basis  as  its  predecessor  and  with 
nearly  similar  results.  The  country,  as  a  whole, 
became  indifferent  toward  the  Duma.  No  one 
could,  of  course,  foresee  the  tremendous  event 
that  was  to  shake  it  to  its  very  foundations 
and  transform  it  into  the  citadel  of  democracy 
and  revolution. 

With  the  Duma  converted  by  the  Govern- 
ment into  a  reactionary  institution,  revolu- 
tionary agitation  began  to  manifest  itself  again 
in  popular  ranks  in  spite  of  the  Czar's  repressive 
measures.  There  was  unrest  in  the  labor  world. 
Strikes  would  often  result  from  political  as  well 

as  economic  reasons.    Thus  on  the  eve  of  the 

16 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

outbreak  of  the  Great  War  the  industrial  popu- 
lation of  the  capital  was  almost  entirely  on 
strike.  Still,  that  strike  was  purely  of  a  local 
character  and  would  have  been,  no  doubt, 
easily  suppressed  by  the  authorities.  It  was 
nothing  but  an  indication  of  latent  activity.  It 
was  evident  that  deep  in  the  national  organism 
the  flame  of  revolt  was  still  smoldering.  But  it 
would  have  taken  a  generation  at  least  for  it 
to  reach  extensive  proportions.  For  the  army 
was  with  the  autocracy.  The  peasantry  was 
cowed  into  submission  by  relentless  executions. 
Pessimism  and  skepticism  dominated  the  in- 
tellectuals and  the  middle  classes.  And  there 
was  not  even  a  nationally  organized  movement 
among  the  labor  elements. 

Such  was  the  state  of  the  Russian  struggle 
for  freedom  in  the  summer  of  1914.  Autocracy 
was  triumphant.  Democracy  lay  prostrate  at 
its  feet.  The  Duma,  once  the  hope  of  Russian 
democracy,  had  been  turned  into  a  pillar  of 
reactionism.  The  gloomiest  prospects  domina- 
ted public  opinion.  Czarism  grew  more  defiant 
and  more  tyrannical  than  ever.  The  scattered 
forces  of  democracy  were  not  allowed  to  take 
breath.  To  liberal  Russia  and  the  civilized 
world  it  seemed  that  Russian  bureaucracy  and 

17 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

autocracy  were  impregnable,  and  that  there  was 
hardly  a  chance  in  a  hundred  for  the  overthrow 
of  both  in  the  near  future.  No  one  thought  of 
the  approaching  war  and  its  effect  on  Russia. 
But  the  titanic  struggle  for  universal  democ- 
racy and  civilization,  brought  about  by  Prussia's 
military  aggression  and  the  Hohenzollern  aim 
at  world  domination,  was  destined  to  result  in 
the  triumph  of  Russian  democracy  over  Czarism 
within  a  very  short  time. 


n 

RUSSIAN  AUTOCRACY  AND  THE  GREAT  WAR 

THE  outbreak  of  the  European  war  found 
Russia  divided  into  two  hostile  camps. 
In  one  camp  were  grouped  the  autocracy, 
bureaucracy,  and  the  extreme  reactionaries; 
in  the  other  were  the  progressive,  radical,  and 
revolutionary  elements  of  the  democracy.  The 
latter  were  under  the  complete  control  of  the 
former  group.  But  the  line  was  so  sharply 
drawn  between  the  two  camps  that  no  observer 
failed  to  notice  it.  The  interests  of  the  two 
groups  were  so  diametrically  opposed  that, 
when  speaking  of  Russia,  one  had  to  designate 
which  of  the  two  Russias  one  referred  to — the 
Russia  of  the  Government  or  the  Russia  of  the 
people. 

The  two  Russias,  by  virtue  of  their  conflict- 
ing interests,  could  not  possibly  react  to  the 
Great  War  in  the  same  manner.  In  the  un- 
precedented struggle  between  democracy  and 

19 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

Prussian  military  autocracy,  the  interests  of 
democratic  Russia  were  really  allied  with  those 
of  western  Europe's  democracies,  while  the 
true  interests  of  Russia's  autocracy  obviously 
lay  on  the  side  of  Prussianism  and  jimkerism. 
But  Russian  autocracy  was  forced  by  Prussia 
to  align  itself  on  the  side  of  democracy.  This 
was  the  tragedy  of  Czarism.  It  was  compelled 
to  work  for  its  own  doom,  fighting  against 
its  only  natural  ally  in  Europe — Prussianism. 
Czarism  and  Prussianism  were  in  1914  the 
two  leading  autocratic  powers  in  Europe.  The 
genealogical,  political,  and  spiritual  bonds  unit- 
ing them  were  woven  of  solid  fiber.  And  yet 
this  union  was  disrupted  by  Prussia.  Had  the 
latter  put  the  preservation  of  autocracy  in 
Europe  above  all  other  aims,  the  traditional 
and  natural  alliance  between  the  Teuton  and 
Slav  monarchies  would  have  never  been  severed. 
But  Prussia's  imperial  designs  became  the  Leit- 
motiv of  her  national  existence.  And  the  Ho- 
henzollern  ambition  toward  world  domination 
overshadowed  the  necessity  of  cementing  the 
institution  of  autocracy  in  Europe.  Besides,  to 
work  for  the  latter  purpose  would  have  meant 
co-operation  with  Russia.  But  co-operation  im- 
plies partnership.     And  what  Prussia  wanted 

20 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

and  aimed  at  was  mastery,  supremacy,  domi- 
nation. 

A  study  of  the  ties  that  united  Czarism  and 
Prussianism,  both  physically  and  spiritually, 
reveals  the  community  of  their  interests,  em- 
phasizes the  tragedy  of  autocracy  in  Europe — 
the  split  in  the  ranks  of  the  autocratic  powers 
in  the  face  of  the  rising  tide  of  universal  democ- 
racy— and  illuminates  the  background  of  the 
historical  process  that  resulted  in  the  downfall 
of  Czarism.  The  genealogical  bond  between 
Prussianism  and  Czarism  dated  back  to  the 
first  half  of  the  eighteenth  century,  when  the 
Romanoff  dynasty  began  to  intermarry  with 
German  royal  houses.  Upon  the  death  of 
Peter  the  Great  in  1725  the  male  line  of  the 
Romanoffs  became  extinct.  From  1730,  when 
the  Duchess  of  Courland,  a  niece  of  Peter,  was 
proclaimed  empress  under  the  name  of  Anne, 
German  influence  began  to  dominate  Russian 
national  affairs.  The  reign  of  Anne,  for  instance, 
which  lasted  a  decade,  is  described  by  an  im- 
partial historian  as  "a  regime  of  methodical 
German  despotism."  The  highest  governmental 
posts  in  the  empire  were  held  by  three  Germans, 
Biren,  Munnich,  and  Ostermann,  while  many 
others  of  German  origin  filled  numerous  minor 

21 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

oflSces.  Anne  was  succeeded  by  a  daughter  of 
Peter  the  Great,  Elizabeth,  who  disHked  the 
Germans.  In  spite  of  this  she  proclaimed  as 
her  heir-apparent  a  German, '"^a  grandson  of 
Peter  and  the  son  of  the  Duke  of  Holstein- 
Gottorp.  He  became  known  as  Peter  III.,  but 
remained  hostile  to  Russia  even  as  Czar.  A 
German  by  character,  habits,  education,  and 
religion,  he  resisted  all  efforts  of  Russianization. 
After  a  short  rule  he  was  dethroned  and  assassi- 
nated. 

Peter  III.  was  succeeded  by  his  wife,  who 
was  Princess  Anhalt-Zerbst  and  daughter  of  a 
general  in  Prussian  service.  i.Her  marriage  to 
the  future  Czar  had  been 'arranged  largely  by 
Frederick  the  Great,  whose  object  was  the 
strengthening  of  the  amity  between  Russia  and 
Prussia.  She  was  christened  Catherine  in 
Russia,  and  became  known  in  history  as  Cath- 
erine the  Great.  While  she  adapted  herself 
completely  to  the  life  of  her  empire,  Catherine's 
foreign  and  internal  affairs  bore  the  stamp  of 
Teutonism.  After  Catherine,  from  1796  to 
1917,  six  Czars  reigned  in  Russia.  Of  these, 
five  married  German  princesses.  Paul  I.  mar- 
ried Sophia  Dorothea  of  Wurttemberg;  Alex- 
ander I.  married  Maria  Louisa  of  Baden;  Nicho- 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

las  I.  married  the  Prussian  Princess  Charlotte 
Louise;  Alexander  11.  married  the  daughter  of 
Grand  Duke  Louis  11.  of  Hesse;  and  Nicholas 
II.  married  Princess  Alix  of  Hesse.  Only 
Alexander  HI.  married  a  non-German — a  Dan- 
ish princess.  In  the  veins  of  the  last  represen- 
tative of  the  Romanoff  dynasty  there  flowed 
fully  seven-eighths  of  German  blood,  as  com- 
pared with  considerably  less  than  an  eighth  of 
Romanoff  blood. 

This  physical  bond  between  the  dynasties 
created  the  basis  for  a  political  bond  between 
the  Teuton  and  Slav  monarchies  which  devel- 
oped and  gained  strength  in  the  course  of 
nearly  two  hundred  years.  Peter  III.  was  in  an 
alliance  with  Frederick  the  Great.  Catherine 
the  Great  continued  this  alliance,  and  later 
co-operated  with  Prussia  and  Austria  in  the 
three  partitions  of  Poland.  Alexander  I.,  from 
a  sense  of  friendship,  purely,  refused  to  support 
Napoleon's  proposal  to  dismember  Prussia, 
although  he  was  offered  in  compensation  for 
his  acquiescence  the  Danubian  principalities. 
Under  the  influence  of  Metternich  Alexander  I. 
signed  the  famous  Troppau  Protocol,  which 
bound  Austria,  Prussia,  and  Russia  to  intervene 
in  any  European  state,  in  case  of  necessity,  for 

23 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

the  purpose  of  crushing  all  revolutionary  out- 
breaks. This  Protocol,  later  affirmed  by  the 
three  powers  at  the  Laibach  Congress,  laid  the 
foundations  of  the  spiritual  bond  that  soon  ap- 
peared between  the  Teuton  and  Slav  autocra- 
cies. This  bond  was  based  on  the  principle  of 
the  preservation  of  autocracy  in  Europe.  That 
was  the  time  when  democracy  first  began  to 
make  rapid  strides  in  continental,  especially 
eastern  and  northern,  Europe.  Germany  and 
Austria-Hungary  were  astir.  A  revolutionary 
movement  even  originated  in  Russia.  The  mon- 
archs  therefore  rallied  to  the  banner  of  autocracy. 
Alexander  I.  helped  to  crush  the  movements 
for  freedom  in  Germany,  Italy,  and  Spain. 
His  successor,  Nicholas  I.,  even  considered  him- 
self the  guardian  of  European  monarchism.  He 
was  always  on  the  lookout  for  some  popular 
movement  in  order  to  hasten  to  suppress  it. 
Prussia  and  Austria  made  ample  use  of  the 
Czar's  support.  When  the  Triple  AlHance  of 
Vienna,  Berlin,  and  Petrograd  was  renewed  in 
1835,  one  of  its  first  acts  was  to  suppress  the 
republic  of  Cracow,  "as  a  center  of  revolutionary 
agitation."  The  Triple  Alliance  was  to  Nicholas 
"the  last  anchor  of  safety  for  the  monarchical 
cause."    When,  in  1849,  the  Hungarian  rebeUion 


THE   RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

broke  out,  Nicholas  heeded  Francis  Joseph's 
appeal  for  help  in  spite  of  a  certain  coldness 
which  had  developed  in  the  Austro-Russian 
relations.  He  hurried  to  Hungary,  crushed  the 
rebellion,  and  presented  a  pacified  country  to 
the  Austrian  emperor.  The  Teuton,  especially 
Prussia,  paid  the  Czar  in  the  same  coin.  When 
Poland  revolted  in  1863,  and  France  and  Great 
Britain  threatened  to  intervene  in  behaK  of  the 
martyred  Polish  democracy,  Bismarck  came  to 
the  aid  of  Alexander  II.  The  institution  of 
autocracy  was  in  danger.  Hence,  Prussia's 
quick  support  of  Czarism.  Bismarck  also 
helped  Russia  to  regain  part  of  her  losses  in  the 
Crimean  War.  And  autocratic  Russia,  in  re- 
turn, contributed  strongly  to  the  realization  of 
Prussia's  imperial  designs. 

But  Russia's  kinship  with  Prussia  did  not 
express  itself  only  through  external  channels. 
Internally,  the  Russian  Government  was  largely 
in  the  hands  of  men  of  Teuton  origin.  The 
nobility  of  the  Baltic  provinces  became  a  power 
in  Russian  politics  about  a  century  ago.  The 
members  of  the  Czar's  family  were  mostly  inter- 
married with  German  and  Austrian  royalty. 
This  created  a  German  atmosphere  in  the  Rus- 
sian  court,    where   the    Czarina   was    usually 

2  25 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

German.  The  highest  offices  in  the  Government 
would  often  be  ffiled  with  men  of  Teutonic 
stock.  Their  influence  grew  tremendously  in 
the  last  few  decades.  And  this  influence  was 
never  for  liberty  or  reforms.  It  was  a  force 
for  oppression,  severe  punishment,  utter  dis- 
regard for  public  opinion,  and  rigid  formality. 
The  subordination  of  right  to  might,  con- 
tempt for  intellectualism,  and  absolute  lack 
of  civility  and  humanity  were  the  symbols 
of  that  force.  In  a  word,  Prussianism,  and 
all  that  it  stands  for  in  the  eyes  of  the 
civilized  world,  had  joined  Czarism  in  its 
own  citadel,  the  two  growing  into  a  nearly 
perfect  spiritual  union. 

Here  was  the  most  logical,  the  most  natural, 
and  the  most  powerful  political  combination 
possible — the  traditional  and  spiritual  alliance 
between  Germany,  with  her  subordinate  Austria, 
and  Russia.  Ties  of  blood  bound  them  together. 
Past  political  history  backed  such  an  alliance. 
But,  above  all,  their  common  interests  demand- 
ed their  continued  union.  The  tide  of  democ- 
racy was  rising  tempestuously  within  and  with- 
out. United,  Germany  and  Russia  might  have 
defied  democracy  for  generations,  perhaps  for 
centuries.     Divided,  they  exposed  themselves 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

to  succumbing  to  democracy  individually  and 
more  speedily. 

Fortunately  for  humanity,  Prussian  autocracy 
aimed  at  more  than  the  fortification  of  monarch- 
ism  in  Europe.  Prussia  began  to  dream  of 
world  power.  The  interests  of  every  European 
state  therefore  conflicted  with  Prussian  interests, 
which  reached  out  in  every  direction.  Austria 
had  been  defeated  by  Prussia  and  turned  into 
a  subordinate  ally.  France  had  been  admin- 
istered a  severe  blow.  Then  Russia's  turn  came. 
At  the  end  of  the  Russo-Turkish  War  of 
1877-78  Russia  had  obtained  by  the  treaty  of 
San  Stefano  considerable  advantages.  The 
Czar  expected  Prussia's  support  in  the  solution 
of  the  Eastern  problem  in  return  for  his  aid  in 
the  creation  of  the  German  Empire.  But  Bis- 
marck could  not  possibly  help  Russia  to  expand, 
in  view  of  his  own  larger  aims.  At  the  Berlin 
Congress  of  1879  he  offered  no  support  whatever 
to  the  Czar's  representatives.  Moreover,  shortly 
after  the  congress,  he  entered  into  an  alliance 
with  Austria  for  the  express  purpose  of  counter- 
acting Russian  plans  in  the  Balkans.  Prussian 
autocracy  had  betrayed  its  colleague.  And  the 
crack  caused  in  the  ranks  of  the  Teuton-Slav 
monarchical  alliance  by  Prussia's  sudden  change 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

of  attitude  toward  Russia  grew  wider  and  deeper 
with  the  development  of  Germany's  power  and 
aggression.  For  a  time  an  attempt  was  made  to 
restore  the  Three  Emperors'  League.  It  was 
reconstituted  for  a  period  of  three  years.  But 
signs  were  accumulating  that  Prussia  harbored 
secret  designs  against  Russia.  The  methodical 
weakening  of  France  and  the  subordination  of 
Austria  to  Prussia,  along  with  the  latter's  in- 
creasing appetite,  convinced  Alexander  HI.  that 
Germany  was  seeking  the  dominant  role  in 
Europe,  which  was  to  be  accomplished  by  the 
isolation  and  conquest  of  Russia.  Alexander 
m.,  therefore,  began  to  seek  an  understanding 
with  France.  Thus  a  great  feat  was  accom- 
plished. Prussian  autocracy,  because  of  its 
ambition  for  world  domination,  had  alienated 
Russian  autocracy.  The  most  marvelous  polit- 
ical phenomenon  of  the  age  was  the  result  of 
this  alienation.  Reactionary  and  despotic 
Russia  and  radical,  republican  France  were 
driven  into  each  other's  arms! 

The  rapprochement  between  France  and 
Russia  developed  into  an  alliance  in  the  last 
decade  of  the  nineteenth  century.  It  was  more 
to  the  interests  of  France  than  of  Russia  that 
the  alliance  seemed  necessary.    Hence  France's 

28 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

enormous  efforts  to  widen  the  gulf  between 
Prussia  and  Russia.  The  latter,  however, 
under  Nicholas  II.,  remained  on  good  terms 
with  Germany.  France  invested  billions  in 
Russia  in  order  to  strengthen  the  bonds  that 
held  her  close  to  the  Czar's  empire.  But  France 
did  not  dare  to  try  to  influence  Russia's  internal 
affairs.  And  these  affairs  were  almost  entirely 
dominated  by  the  Russian  Prussianism.  Re- 
actionism  was  rampant  in  the  Government  in 
spite  of  the  alliance  with  republican  France. 
The  ties  of  relationship  between  the  Russian 
court  and  the  German  royal  houses  continued 
to  exist.  And  Germany's  influence  and  power 
in  Russia  expressed  itself  also  through  a  newly 
created  economic  bond.  Germany's  commerce 
with  the  Slavic  empire  developed  to  immense 
proportions.  Germany  got  most  of  her  raw 
materials  from  Russia,  at  cheap  prices,  which 
enabled  her  to  build  up  her  wonderful  indus- 
trial and  commercial  systems.  From  the 
economic  point  of  view  Russia  was  a  vast 
colonial  empire  at  Germany's  side,  to  which 
she  had  unusual  privileges  of  access  obtained 
through  a  commercial  treaty  concluded  with 
Russia  during  the  Russo-Japanese  War.  Dom- 
inating Russia  economically,  and,  to  a  large 

29 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

extent,  politically,  Germany  had  every  reason 
to  be  satisfied.  But  Germany  wanted  Europe, 
the  world.  She  dreamed  of  imperial  schemes 
that  belonged  to  the  feudal  age.  She  chal- 
lenged the  Franco-Russian  alliance  without 
realizing  the  turn  events  were  to  take  on  account 
of  her  military  tactics. 

Just  as  Prussianism  did  not  foresee  that  the 
war  it  initiated  was  to  become  the  decisive 
struggle  in  the  world  between  democracy  and 
autocracy,  so  Czarism  did  not  realize,  upon 
taking  up  arms  in  July,  1914,  the  nature  of  the 
approaching  conflict.  When  the  war  broke 
out  Russian  autocracy  threw  itself  into  the 
battle  with  the  same  ardor  and  impetuousness 
as  the  Russian  democracy.  The  two  Russias, 
the  bureaucratic  and  democratic,  seemed  united 
for  the  first  time  in  their  existence.  But  in- 
trinsically such  a  union  was  impossible.  Their 
interests  were  antagonistic.  Where  democracy's 
interests  lay  there  was  the  doom  of  autocracy, 
and  vice  versa,  A  fatal  blunder,  therefore,  must 
have  been  committed  by  one  of  the  two  Russias. 
Either  the  democracy  or  the  autocracy  had 
joined  the  wrong  side  and  fought  for  its  own 
destruction.  And  the  fatal  blunder  was,  of 
course,  committed  by  the  autocracy.    Czarism 

30 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

was  forced  by  Prussianism  to  take  up  arms 
against  its  natural  colleague.  Czarism  allied 
itself  with  its  internal  foe — Russian  democracy 
—and  external  historical  enemies — ^British  and 
French  democracies — in  the  prosecution  of  a 
cause  that  held  out  but  gloomy  prospects  to 
autocracy  everywhere.  The  Russian  bureau- 
cracy soon  began  to  realize  that  it  was  under- 
mining its  own  interests,  and  that  it  was  speed- 
ing headlong  toward  complete  self-annihilation. 
The  reaction  that  set  in  in  the  high  court  and 
bureaucratic  circles  necessitated  a  painful  re- 
vision of  their  original  attitude  toward  the  war. 
This  revision  could  lead  to  but  one  conclusion 
— that  Czarism  had  landed  in  a  very  precari- 
ous position.  The  dilemma  was  by  no  means 
soluble.  Russia  was  forced  into  the  war;  there- 
fore patriotism  required  that  all  the  elements 
of  the  empire  fight  with  all  their  resources  and 
energies  in  defense  of  the  country.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  fullest  prosecution  of  the  war  would 
mean  the  defeat  of  Prussianism  as  well  as 
Czarism.  Which  were  to  be  preferred:  The 
interests  of  the  country,  or  the  interests  of  the 
bureaucracy?  The  choice  was  between  patriot- 
ism and  treason.  The  former  meant  the  ulti- 
mate passing  of  the  old  regime.     The  latter 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

meant  the  possible  retention  of  the  autocratic 
hold  on  the  nation. 

Confronted  by  such  a  dilemma,  the  over- 
whelming majority  of  the  elements  that  made 
up  the  reactionary  forces  and  the  bureaucracy 
of  the  country  did  not  hesitate  to  choose  patri- 
otic service  to  the  national  cause.  But  a  small, 
though  very  influential,  minority  chose  the 
other  path.  This  minority  was  composed  of  a 
few  rabid  reactionary  leaders  who  believed  that 
it  was  better  for  Russia  to  suffer  defeat  and 
remain  an  absolute  autocracy  than  win  the  war 
at  the  expense  of  the  destruction  of  Prussianism 
and  the  triumph  of  democracy;  of  a  number  of 
high  Government  oflScials  and  Teuton  func- 
tionaries in  the  Court;  and  of  the  Czarina  and 
the  other  Germans  in  high  places.  Altogether, 
this  Germanophile  group  numbered  only  sev- 
eral hundred  persons.  Believing. in  the  final 
triumph  of  German  arms,  this  group  was  con- 
tent to  remain  inactive  at  first  and  watch  the 
natural  course  of  events  that  was  to  result  in 
the  Allies'  defeat.  But  as  the  natural  course  did 
not  run  along  the  expected  lines,  the  bureau- 
cratic traitors  began  to  move.  To  action  they 
were  also  stimulated  by  the  rapidly  expanding 
current  of  democratic  energy  and  activities. 


THE   RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

The  suppressed  popular  forces  had  suddenly 
arisen  from  the  graves  in  which  they  had  been 
interred  so  recently  by  the  reactionary  authori- 
ties. There  were  signs  in  the  air  of  profound 
changes  that  were  dislodging  the  traditional 
strata  of  political  life  in  the  country.  The 
bureaucrats  already  felt,  though  it  was  as  yet 
too  early  to  perceive  with  the  eyes,  the  germina- 
tion and  evolution  of  a  new  arrangement  of 
forces  which  augured  little  good  for  the  future 
of  the  old  regime.  Pressure  from  within  for 
determined  action  was  therefore  growing  daily 
in  weight.  On  the  other  hand,  external  pressure 
coming  from  Germany  after  Russia's  disastrous 
defeats  in  North  Prussia  at  the  hands  of  Von 
Hindenburg  was  also  exerted  on  the  German- 
ophile  group  in  increased  volume.  Thus  the 
movement  for  a  separate  peace  with  Germany 
was  born  in  the  high  councils  of  the  nation. 
Centering  in  the  Court,  in  the  very  midst  of  the 
clique  that  made  and  unmade  governments, 
this  movement  became  a  continuous  source  of 
danger  to  democratic  Russia. 

Within  six  months  the  orientation  of  the  in- 
visible bureaucrats,  who  held  the  Government 
of  the  empire  in  their  hands,  with  regard  to 
autocracy's   attitude   toward   the   Great   War 

33 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

had  undergone  a  complete  transformation. 
Starting  out  fully  inspired  with  hope  and  reso- 
lution to  labor  for  the  defeat  of  Prussianism, 
Czarism  at  the  end  of  half  a  year  prayed  secretly 
for  the  defeat  of  the  Allies.  The  Czar  himself, 
swayed  as  he  was  by  various  influences,  had 
no  absolutely  fixed  attitude  toward  the  war. 
But  the  camarilla  that  was  behind  the  throne, 
the  group  that  formed  the  invisible  though 
omnipotent  Government,  and  which  symbolized 
Czarism  as  a  political  institution,  had  definitely 
fixed  the  conclusion  of  a  separate  peace  with 
the  Central  Powers  as  its  goal.  Such  became 
the  attitude  of  the  Russian  autocracy  toward 
the  Great  War. 


Ill 

RUSSIAN  DEMOCRACY  AND  THE  GREAT  WAR 

IN  June,  1914,  Russian  democracy  as  an 
active  political  force  was  practically  ex- 
tinct. The  arm  of  reaction  had  halted  all 
progress.  The  fourth  Duma,  in  which  the  con- 
servative Octobrists  predominated,  was  vir- 
tually a  governmental  appendix  retained  by 
the  bureaucracy  for  decorative  purposes.  The 
radical  Social-Democratic  and  Social-Revolu- 
tionary parties  no  longer  existed  as  national  or- 
ganizations. The  liberal  Constitutional-Dem- 
ocratic, or  Cadet,  party  was  not  permitted  to 
develop  its  activities.  The  nightmare  of  the 
preceding  eight  years'  reaction,  with  its  tor- 
rents of  blood,  had  paralyzed  all  the  muscles  of 
democracy.  The  latent  energy  was  there.  Deep 
in  its  breast  the  fuse  of  revolution  still  burned. 
But  under  the  overwhelming  pressure  of  Czar- 
ism  the  gases  of  revolt  were  not  allowed  to 
expand.    It  would  have  taken  decades  for  these 

35 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

gases  to  have  flamed  into  a  national  confla- 
gration. Autocracy's  continued  grip  on  the 
democratic  elements  of  the  country  therefore 
seemed  assured  to  its  supporters  as  well  as  to 
its  enemies. 

The  outbreak  of  the  Great  War  in  July,  1914, 
thrust  Russian  democracy  into  the  process  of  a 
swift  regeneration.  The  events  that  led  up  to 
the  war,  the  causes  of  the  war,  and  its  issues 
infused  a  new  spirit,  new  life,  into  the  prostrate 
body  of  democracy.  Hope  replaced  pessimism, 
idealism  succeeded  skepticism,  union — division 
in  lightning-like  evolution.  Popular  Russia 
sensed  immediately  the  great  meaning  of  the 
war.  It  realized  what  bureaucratic  Russia 
failed  to  realize — ^namely,  that  the  supreme 
struggle  between  democracy  and  autocracy  in 
Europe  was  at  hand,  and  that  the  interests  of 
Russian  democracy  demanded  its  utmost  ex- 
ertions in  the  great  conflict.  And  it  rose  to  the 
occasion.  Numb  and  lifeless  a  month  ago, 
popular  Russia  was  now  swept  by  a  mighty 
spiritual  upheaval.  With  the  exception  of 
France,  no  other  belligerent  nation  went  through 
such  an  uplifting  and  exalted  state  of  mind  as 
Russia  did  at  the  beginning  of  the  war.  The 
ban  on  alcohol  was  the  direct  result  of  that 

36 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

almost  religious  fervor  which  seized  the  nation. 
The  Russian  bureaucracy  would  have  never 
enacted,  let  alone  initiated,  the  prohibition  of 
vodka  without  the  tremendous  pressure  ex- 
erted on  it  by  the  transformed  people.  Rus- 
sian bureaucracy  was  incapable  of  exaltation. 
It  lacked  vision  just  as  it  lacked  a  soul.  Re- 
forms were  foreign  to  its  nature  and  habits. 
Had  it  understood  the  meaning  of  its  act  it 
would  never  have  promulgated  the  imperial 
ukase  which  wiped  the  great  scourge  of  vodka 
out  of  Russia's  national  existence.  But  Russian 
bureaucracy  did  not  understand  the  significance 
of  the  transformation  that  had  occurred  in 
Russia.  It  ascribed  the  marvelous  awakening 
of  the  democracy  to  patriotism.  The  menace  of 
an  aggressive  foe,  it  thought,  was  responsible 
for  the  Russian  people's  enthusiasm  about  the 
war. 

The  misinformed  outside  world  shared  with 
the  Russian  bureaucracy  this  fallacious  view. 
The  outside  world's  knowledge  of  Russia  was 
based  on  superficial  observations  conveyed  by 
a  few  correspondents.  But  bureaucratic  Russia 
should  have  known  better.  It  should  have 
known  that  patriotism,  per  se,  patriotism  of  the 
"my-country-right-or- wrong"  type,  was  a  rare 

37 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

article  in  the  ranlcs  of  the  Russian  democracy. 
The  lesson  of  the  Russo-Japanese  War  should 
have  been  remembered  by  the  Russian  reac- 
tionaries who  controlled  the  fortunes  of  the 
empire  on  the  eve  of  the  Great  War.  In  the 
former  war,  which  was  on  its  face  an  aggressive 
blow  on  the  part  of  Japan,  Russian  public 
opinion  did  not  enthusiastically  respond  to 
the  cause  of  national  defense.  As  a  matter 
of  fact,  Russia's  radical  and  progressive  forces 
put  the  cause  of  democracy  above  that  of  patri- 
otism during  the  struggle  with  Japan,  and 
worked  for  the  collapse  of  the  Government. 
Russia's  revolutionary  movement  gained  power- 
ful impetus  during  that  struggle,  and  the  revo- 
lution of  1905  was  largely  a  product  of  the 
Far  Eastern  campaign.  The  radical  forces 
openly  advocated  Russia's  defeat  at  that  time, 
seeing  in  such  outcome  the  guarantee  of  bureau- 
cracy's downfall.  Had  Czarism,  in  1914,  studied 
the  nature  of  the  spiritual  upheaval  trans- 
forming popular  Russia,  it  would  have  dis- 
covered that  patriotism  was  not  its  dominant 
motive,  that  it  was  largely  generated  by  the 
endangered  position  of  European  democracy 
and  freedom,  and  that  it  was  due,  abovp  all, 

tp  the  feeling  and  conviction  of  the  Russian 

33 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

democracy  that  its  own  interests  would  be 
served,  and  those  of  Czarism  fatally  injured, 
by  the  destruction  of  Prussianism  and  mili- 
tarism. 

The  reasons  that  determined  the  practically 
unanimous  attitude  of  the  Russian  democracy 
toward  the  war  were  of  two  categories.  First, 
there  were  reasons  common  to  nearly  all  the 
elements  of  democratic  Russia.  Second,  the 
specific  motives  actuating  certain  particular 
forces  in  the  Russian  democracy.  Perhaps  the 
chief  reason  of  the  first  category  was  the  op- 
portunity the  war  created  for  the  removal  of 
Russia's  internal  Prussianism.  The  entire  Rus- 
sian nation  harbored  deep  hatred  against  the 
German  influences  in  the  empire's  high  coun- 
cils. The  traditional  bonds  existing  between 
official  Russia  and  Prussia  were  always  ob- 
noxious to  the  Russian  people.  There  was  a 
deep-seated  antagonism  between  the  Slav  and 
the  Teuton  in  Russia  that  dated  back  to  the  be- 
ginning of  the  seventeenth  century.  At  that 
time  a  bitter  and  relentless  struggle  originated 
between  the  old  Slav  nobility  and  the  German 
officials,  introduced  first  in  Russia  during  the 
reign  of  Peter  the  Great  and  his  successors. 
After  the  death  of  Peter,  the  German  and  the 

39 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

Slav  parties  wrangled  for  the  control  of  the 
throne  and  the  Government.  Wlien  a  Russian- 
German  occupied  the  Russian  throne,  such  as 
Empress  Anne,  Duchess  of  Courland  (1730-40), 
the  entire  control  of  the  Government  went  over 
to  the  Germans,  while  the  Slav  nobles  we^e 
exiled  to  Siberia.  On  the  other  hand,  during  the 
reign  of  Elizabeth,  from  1741  to  1761,  the 
German  officials  of  the  previous  administration 
went  into  exile.  On  the  whole,  it  was  the 
German  party  which  was  dominant.  And  with 
the  accession  of  Catherine  the  Great  to  the 
throne  the  Teutons'  position  was  made  secure, 
and  never  afterward  shaken.  The  resultant 
resentment  in  the  Russian  heart  never  passed 
away  entirely.  The  Russian  people  remem- 
bered the  common  cause  Russian  and  Ger- 
man autocracy  had  made  in  the  past  for  the 
suppression  of  freedom  and  democracy  every- 
where in  Europe.  The  people  remembered 
that  some  of  the  most  cruel  and  inhuman  sup- 
pressors of  the  Russian  revolutionary  movement 
were  of  German  blood  and  name;  that,  while 
all  the  foreign  nationalities  inhabiting  the 
country  united  with  the  Russian  democracy 
in  its  struggle  against  autocracy,  the  German 
element  in  the  nation  stood  for  reactionism, 

40 


THE   RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

Czarism,  and  oppression.  The  last  was  cer- 
tainly a  most  remarkable  phenomenon.  But 
it  is  a  fact  that  least  stirred  by  the  cause  of 
democratic  Russia  was  the  German  population 
of  the  empire. 

All  the  people  of  Russia  felt  that  the  destruc- 
tion of  Prussianism  would  mean  the  ultimate 
destructior  of  despotism.  Great  Britain's  en- 
trance into  the  war  after  Germany's  invasion 
of  Belgium  had  a  tremendous  effect  on  the 
Russian  democracy.  The  complete  annihilation 
of  Prussianism  in  Europe  and  in  Russia,  and  a 
close  union  with  the  peoples  of  France  and 
Great  Britain,  this  was  a  message  that  appealed 
strongly  to  all  classes  of  the  Russian  public. 
Great  Britain,  the  mother  of  democracy,  France, 
the  cradle  of  liberty,  spelled  hope  and  progress 
to  all  liberal  Russians  alike.  All  that  was  for- 
ward-looking in  the  country  saw  in  a  close 
union  with  these  two  nations  a  guarantee  for 
a  future  free  Russia.  Fighting  for  civilization, 
justice,  humanity,  Russian  autocracy — accord- 
ing to  the  feeling  of  progressive  Russia — was 
bound  to  become  influenced  by  the  great  moral 
principles  it  was  fighting  for.  The  substituting 
of  British  and  French  influence  in  the  Russian 
Court  instead  of  the  German  was  considered 

3  41 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION  • 

another  force  for  the  benefit  of  democracy  and 
progress. 

The  attitude  of  the  various  Socialist  parties 
toward  the  war  was  determined,  in  addition 
to  the  above,  by  specifically  Socialistic  reasons. 
As  soon  as  the  war  began  the  leaders  of  the 
Russian  Socialists,  who  lived  mostly  abroad  as 
political  exiles,  declared  themselves  in  favor 
of  co-operating  with  the  Government  in  the 
prosecution  of  the  war.  George  Plekhanov, 
the  veteran  leader  of  the  Russian  Social  Demo- 
crats; Grigori  Alexinski,  one  of  the  dominating 
figiu'es  in  the  Socialist  group  of  the  second 
Duma;  Vladimir  Burtzev,  the  chief  historian 
of  the  Russian  revolutionary  movement;  Prince 
Peter  Kropotkin,  an  old  revolutionist  and  a 
theoretical  anarchist;  and  a  number  of  other 
political  exiles  whose  opposition  to  the  Czar's 
Government  up  to  the  outbreak  of  the  war  was 
implacable,  now  came  out  in  support  of  working 
hand  in  hand  with  their  traditional  foe  in  the 
prosecution  of  the  war.  Behind  these  men  stood 
the  great  majority  of  Russian  Socialists  and 
revolutionists.  It  was  an  extraordinary  situa- 
tion. Czarism  and  its  bitterest  enemies  had 
found  a  common  cause.  The  revolutionist  who 
but  yesterday  was  ready  to  assassinate  the 

42 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

reactionary  official  to-day  offered  his  services 
and  whole-hearted  support  to  the  same  official. 
The  reason  for  this,  besides  the  destruction  of 
Prussianism  and  the  defense  of  European  de- 
mocracy, was  of  an  economic  rather  than  of  a 
political  nature.  Russia's  path  to  political  free- 
dom lay  through  economic  development,  ac- 
cording to  the  Socialistic  view.  Russia  was  still 
a  feudal  nation,  economically  the  most  back- 
ward in  Europe.  Her  commercial  relations  with 
Germany  were  of  such  a  nature  as  to  keep  her  as 
long  as  possible  in  that  feudal  state.  Germany 
drew  from  Russia  nearly  all  the  raw  materials 
responsible  for  her  own  industrial  expansion. 
To  keep  Russia  raw,  not  to  allow  her  to  develop 
industrially  and  commercially,  were  the  aims 
of  Germany.  With  the  help  of  her  political 
influence  in  the  Russian  Government  she  was 
enabled  to  conclude  treaties  and  win  privileges 
which  were  designed  to  interfere  with  Russia's 
economic  progress.  And  so  long  as  Russia 
remained  a  great  feudal  country  there  was 
little  hope  of  her  becoming  a  democratic  state. 
It  is  the  transformation  from  feudalism  to 
capitalism  that  creates  powerful  forces  for  polit- 
ical freedom.    The  new  development  of  large 

industrial  and  middle  classes  incident  to  such 

43 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

transformation  means  the  development  of  demo- 
cratic currents  and  elements  in  the  nation. 
Russia  presented  a  vast  and  fertile  field  for 
economic  enterprise.  Her  natural  resources 
were  great  enough  to  make  her  in  a  short  time 
one  of  the  leading  capitalistic  countries  in 
Europe.  But  Germany  was  in  the  way.  Be- 
sides, Germany  had  no  surpluses  to  invest  in 
Russia.  France  and  Great  Britain  were  the 
great  capitalistic  entrepreneurs  in  the  world. 
What  Russia  needed  was  an  economic  union 
with  these  two  nations,  not  with  Germany. 
Practically  all  the  ante-bellum  foreign  invest- 
ments in  Russia  came  from  these  two  countries. 
But  Russia  needed  much  more  capital.  And  to 
bring  her  in  closer  contact  with  these  two 
economic  pioneers  it  was  necessary  to  release 
her  from  the  German  shackles.  On  these 
grounds  the  Russian  Socialists  built  their  argu- 
ments as  to  why  Russia  should  fight  Prussia  to 
the  bitter  end.  They  saw  in  the  evolution 
from  feudalism  to  capitalism  a  necessary  his- 
torical step  preceding  political  liberty,  and  in 
the  hastening  of  this  evolutionary  process  they 
saw  a  guarantee  for  the  sure  arrival  of  such 
liberty  in  Russia. 
A  number  of  the  Russian  socialists  did  not 

44 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

share  the  views  of  the  rest  of  democratic  Russia. 
They  did  not  change  their  former  attitude 
toward  the  Czar's  Government,  considering 
Russia's  defeat  in  the  war  as  the  surest  way  of 
bringing  about  the  fall  of  Czarism.  They 
became  known  as  "Porazhentsi,"  which  means 
advocates  of  defeat.  Regarding  the  war  as  a 
struggle  for  capitalistic  domination  exclusively, 
they  took  the  stand  that  the  interests  of  Social- 
ism would  not  be  served  by  the  victory  of  the 
German  or  French  and  British  arms,  as  labor 
has  no  country.  According  to  them,  it  was 
from  an  economic  slavery  which  the  workers 
should  free  themselves,  and  this  slavery  was 
international  and  common  to  all  countries 
alike.  To  co-operate  with  the  Czar's  Govern- 
ment it  was  impossible  for  them  even  to  con- 
template. And  yet  it  was  this  co-operation 
on  the  part  of  the  Russian  democracy  that 
largely  brought  about  the  Russian  revolution 
and  the  overthrow  of  the  old  regime. 

This  group  was  the  only  element  in  popular 
Russia  that  opposed  the  war.  It  made  itself 
felt  during  the  thirty  months  of  war  which 
preceded  the  revolution.  History  records  that 
it  was  radical,  revolutionary  Russia  that  was 
divided  on   the  issues  of  the  great  struggle. 

45 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

No  such  division  existed  in  the  ranks  of  the 
hberal  and  progressive  forces.  The  Constitu- 
tional-Democratic party,  which  represented 
these  forces,  was  unanimous  in  its  attitude 
toward  the  war.  If  there  were  any  special 
currents  visible  in  this  party,  they  were  those 
that  supported  the  war  on  account  of  some 
specific  reasons.  Thus,  the  question  of  the 
Dardanelles  was  responsible  for  such  a  special 
current.  A  considerable  portion  of  Russian 
progressives  stood  for  the  war,  in  addition  to 
other  reasons,  also  because  they  believed  that 
the  interests  of  Russia  demanded  a  warm  out- 
let to  the  high  seas.  Constantinople,  as  a  holy 
city  to  orthodox  Russia,  made  no  special  ap- 
peal to  the  Russian  people,  in  spite  of  the  im- 
pression abroad  that  it  was  a  big  factor  in 
Russian  war  sentiments.  But  Constantinople, 
or  at  least  the  Straits,  as  a  prime  necessity  to 
commercial  Russia  was  a  factor  of  considerable 
importance  in  defining  the  democracy's  attitude 
toward  the  Great  War,  and  especially  toward 
Turkey. 

Another  element  was  Russia's  sentimental 
Slavism.  This  element  had  been  expanded  by 
the  outside  world  into  a  veritable  universal 
menace.     A   word    was   coined   for   it — ^Pan- 

46 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

Slavism — and  it  was  held  up  to  humanity  as 
a  monster  of  the  type  of  Prussianism  or  Pan- 
Germanism.  In  reality  there  was  no  such  thing 
as  a  Pan-Slavic  danger.  There  were  in  Russia 
a  few  Pan-Slavists,  to  be  sure,  but  their  in- 
fluence in  the  Government  or  court  was  nil, 
A  few  publicists  and  professors,  who  wrote 
books  and  articles  that  appealed  neither  to 
the  Russian  bureaucracy  nor  to  the  democracy, 
constituted  the  "menace."  The  Russian  bureau- 
cracy and  autocracy  were  not  moved  by  the 
paper  Pan-Slavism,  not  because  of  any  dis- 
inclination toward  schemes  of  conquest,  but 
because  of  the  Prussian  influence  that  domi- 
nated them.  The  Russian  democracy  was  not 
stirred  by  the  Pan-Slavic  doctrine  simply  be- 
cause it  was  the  most  pacifist  democracy  in  the 
world.  The  Russian  people  were  sick  of  war  for 
the  sake  of  conquest.  They  had  fought  too 
many  such  wars  under  their  despotic  Czars. 
That  did  not  mean,  however,  that  the  Russian 
democracy  had  no  affection  for  the  Balkan 
Slavs.  It  was  a  purely  sentimental  Slavism, 
though  undoubtedly  of  a  national  character, 
which  prevailed  in  Russia  at  the  outbreak  of 
the  war.  And  though  foreign  to  Pan-Slavism, 
this  national  sentiment  was  another  factor  in 

47 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

determining  the  popular  attitude  toward  the 
immediate  cause  of  the  Great  War. 

There  remains  one  more  element  to  be  dealt 
with  in  regard  to  Russian  democracy's  view  of 
and  attitude  toward  the  European  conflict. 
This  element  was  one  of  the  bulwarks  of  Rus- 
sian democracy  at  the  time  of  the  revolution. 
But  two  and  a  half  years  before  that  event  it 
could  hardly  have  been  considered  as  a  part 
of  democratic  Russia.  This  element  was  the 
Octobrist  and  Right  parties.  The  Octobrists 
were  conservatives  and  the  Rightists  reaction- 
aries. Both  consisted  largely  of  land-proprie- 
tors, clergymen,  former  tchinovniks,  wealthy 
manufacturers  and  merchants,  and  some  igno- 
rant and  semi-illiterate  peasants.  Since  these 
elements  predominated  in  the  fourth  Duma  at 
the  beginning  of  the  war,  the  tracing  of  their 
remarkable  evolution  in  the  thirty  months  of 
the  war  preceding  the  revolution  constitutes 
the  history  of  the  marvelous  transformation  of 
the  fourth  Duma  from  a  lifeless,  bureaucratic, 
governmental  institution  into  one  of  the  chief 
forces  responsible  for  the  overthrow  of  the  Czar 
and  his  Government.  The  attitude  of  the  Octo- 
brists and  Rightists  toward  the  war  was  purely 

nationalistic.    The  great  issues  of  the  struggle, 

48 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

the  question  of  democracy  or  autocracy,  did 
not  at  first  affect  these  parties.  To  them  the 
war  was  simply  a  case  of  national  emergency. 
The  Central  Powers  attacked  Russia.  Austria's 
aggression  in  Serbia,  and  Prussia's  efforts  to 
bring  about  the  war,  made  it  sufficiently  clear 
to  the  conservative  majority  of  the  Duma  that 
it  was  the  patriotic  duty  of  every  Russian  to 
fight  in  defense  of  his  country.  It  therefore 
supported  the  Government  as  usual,  and  in  no 
sense  could  this  support  be  considered  as 
prompted  by  reasons  peculiarly  democratic  or 
humanitarian. 

But  while  the  reactionary  majority  of  the 
Duma  entered  the  war  on  purely  patriotic  and 
Russian  grounds,  it  was  to  emerge  from  only 
one  year's  war  experience  in  a  revolutionary 
attire.  In  July,  1914,  the  Duma  was  a  bureau- 
cratic institution.  A  year  later  it  was  almost 
entirely  democratic.  It  entered  the  war  for 
the  purpose  of  defeating  a  foreign  foe,  but 
experience  taught  it  that  the  foreign  foe's 
defeat  must  be  preceded  by  the  destruction  of 
the  internal  enemy.  The  incompetence,  ineffi- 
ciency, corruption,  treason  which  dominated  the 
bureaucratic  Government  soon  began  to  bear 

calamitous  fruit.    The  disasters  on  the  fields  of 

49 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

battle  and  the  disorder  in  the  rear  began  to 
convince  the  conservatives  that  the  Government 
was  at  the  bottom  as  well  as  at  the  top  deca- 
dent, that  changes  were  badly  needed,  that  the 
persistent  attacks  made  in  the  past  by  the 
democratic  elements  against  the  bureaucracy 
had  been  well  founded.  Little  by  little  the  con- 
servatives became  progressives,  the  reaction- 
aries turned  into  moderate  progressives,  and 
even  the  extreme  monarchists  underwent  a 
change  of  mind.  It  was  a  phenomenal  thing 
in  Russia's  history.  Democracy  recruited  new 
supporters  and  members  from  the  ranks  of 
its' recent  opponents.  Russian  autocracy  was 
losing  the  very  pillars  of  its  foundation.  The 
Great  War  had  exposed  the  bureaucracy's 
shortcomings  and  defects,  converting,  step  by 
step,  to  the  cause  of  democracy  all  classes  and 
parties  and  factions  in  the  multi-racial  Russian 
Empire. 


IV 

THE  BIRTH   OF  SOCIAL  RUSSIA 

THE  respective  attitudes  of  the  Russian 
autocracy  and  democracy  toward  the  Great 
War,  as  outlined  in  the  preceding  two  chap- 
ters, were  the  fountain-heads  from  which  the 
forces  responsible  for  the  Russian  revolution 
sprang.  The  attitude  of  the  Russian  autocracy 
toward  the  war  was  negative;  of  the  democracy, 
positive.  The  negative  forces  generated  by  the 
former  as  reactions  to  the  war  became  positive 
as  stimulants  of  unrest  and  democratic  thought. 
In  other  words,  autocracy  actively,  though  un- 
wittingly, co-operated  with  the  democracy  in 
the  production  of  the  powers  responsible  for 
its  own  destruction.  The  story  of  this  co- 
operation is  the  story  of  the  events  that  led  up 
to  the  revolution.  Two  sets  of  forces,  working 
from  opposite  directions,  for  more  than  two 
years  stored  up  the  energy  that  culminated  in 
the  political  eruption  of  March,  1917.    Without 

51 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

the  negative,  injurious  activities  and  qualifi- 
cations of  the  bureaucracy  or  without  the  posi- 
tive, constructive  activities  and  ideas  of  the 
democracy  the  wonderfully  successful  revolution 
would  not  have  been  possible.  Both  elements 
were  essential  to  the  great  overturn,  and  both 
contributed  to  it  nearly  equal  shares. 

As  soon  as  the  war  broke  out  the  Russian 
public  hastened  to  the  aid  of  the  Government 
and  the  army.  Social  organizations  sprang  up 
throughout  the  empire  for  the  purpose  of  helping 
Russia  fight  and  win  the  war  against  Prussian 
militarism.  These  social  bodies  were  largely 
stimulated  by  the  vital  issues  at  stake  in  the 
great  struggle.  The  cause  of  democracy  called 
the  Russian  public  to  mobilize  all  its  resources 
in  a  campaign  of  aid  to  the  soldiery.  The  first 
organization  to  launch  such  a  campaign  was 
the  Moscow  Zemstvo.  Since  the  work  of  the 
Zemstvos  became  one  of  the  chief  factors  re- 
sponsible for  the  overthrow  of  Czarism,  it  is 
important  to  indicate  here  the  exact  nature  of 
the  Zemstvo  system  and  its  role  in  the  history 
of  democratic  evolution  in  Russia. 

The  origin  of  the  word  Zemstvo  is  zem,  which 
is  the  Russian  equivalent  for  soil.  The  Zemstvos 
are  rural,  provincial  organizations,  created  in 

52 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

1864  by  Alexander  II.,  who  liberated  the  serfs. 
The  Zemstvo  of  each  province  is  governed  by  a 
council.  This  council  or  board  is  elected  by  a 
Zemstvo  assembly.  The  assembly  is  made  up 
of  the  nobility,  which  forms  the  large  land- 
proprietary  class  of  the  province,  of  representa- 
tives of  the  peasant  communities,  and  of  clergy- 
men who  own  land.  Originally  the  Zemstvos 
were  endowed  with  the  authority  of  legislative 
bodies.  Questions  of  taxation,  education,  public 
improvements,  and  similar  matters  belonged  to 
their  jurisdiction.  In  a  large  measure,  there- 
fore, the  population  of  each  province  was  to 
enjoy  self-government.  When  the  Zemstvos 
were  first  introduced  the  reform  was  hailed  as 
the  beginning  of  a  new  era.  But  self-govern- 
ment could  not  well  exist  and  develop  in  au- 
tocratic Russia.  The  opportunity  that  the 
Zemstvos  presented  for  debate  and  discussion  of 
public  questions  was  in  contradiction  to  the 
Government's  police  regulations.  The  Zemstvos 
naturally  became  the  centers  of  liberal  thought. 
They  contributed  enormously  to  the  popular 
movement  for  constitutional  government.  Dur- 
ing the  last  years  of  Alexander  II.'s  reign,  when 
revolutionary  outbursts  rapidly  multiplied,  pro- 
gressive public  opinion  found  its  organ  of  ex- 

53 


THE   RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

pression  in  the  Zemstvos.  But  the  status  of 
the  Zemstvo  was  changed  radically  after  the 
assassination  of  Alexander  II.  The  new  Emperor 
adopted  a  consistent  policy  of  repression,  and 
curbing  the  Zemstvos  consequently  became  a 
matter  of  necessity  from  the  point  of  view  of 
the  reactionaries  controlling  the  Government. 
A  law  was  enacted  which  subordinated  the 
Zemstvos  to  the  Governors  of  the  respective 
provinces.  No  decision  of  a  Zemstvo  was  valid 
unless  approved  by  the  governor  of  the  province. 
As  the  Russian  Governor  was  practically  a 
police  officer,  the  work  of  the  Zemstvos  under 
him  was  rendered  very  difficult.  The  Governor 
was  also  empowered  to  exercise  rigid  discipline 
over  the  members  of  the  coimcil.  This  amounted 
to  putting  the  Zemstvos  imder  police  super- 
vision. 

In  spite  of  all  restriction,  the  Zemstvos  be- 
came a  great  constructive  force  in  the  life  of 
the  nation.  The  revolutionary  movement  that 
stirred  the  country  during  and  after  the  Russo- 
Japanese  War  prompted  the  Zemstvos  to 
decisive  action.  Toward  the  end  of  1904  a 
convention  of  Zemstvo  leaders  was  held  in 
Petrograd  with  the  object  of  urging  the  Gov- 
ernment   to    grant    liberty    and    reforms.      A 

54 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

deputation  of  eminent  Zemstvo  workers  de- 
manding a  change  in  the  Government  system 
presented  themselves  to  the  Premier.  The 
public  opinion  of  the  entire  country  rejoiced  at 
the  time,  seeing  in  the  event  a  turning-point  in 
the  nation's  history.  The  imperial  ukase  that 
followed  failed,  however,  to  satisfy  the  people. 
The  revolutionary  movement  gained  even  more 
powerful  impetus. 

After  the  assassination  of  Grand  Duke  Sergius 
in  Moscow  early  in  1905  another  convention  of 
Zemstvo  delegates  was  held  in  Moscow.  Headed 
by  Prince  Troubetzkoy,  a  second  deputation  of 
Zemstvo  leaders  presented  themselves  to  the 
Czar  and  urged  him  to  grant  a  constitutional 
form  of  government  to  the  country  and  to  con- 
voke a  constitutional  assembly  as  soon  as  pos- 
sible. The  Emperor  issued  soon  afterward  a 
ukase  establishing  a  constitutional  assembly, 
which  was,  however,  so  far  from  what  the  depu- 
tation and  the  nation  desired  that  the  act  still 
more  exasperated  the  people,  provoking  the 
revolution  of  1905  and  the  consequent  estab- 
lishment of  the  Duma.  The  influence  of  the 
Zemstvos  in  the  history  of  Russian  democracy 
thus  constitutes  a  very  important  part  of  it  and 
the  most  influential  Zemstvo  in  Russia  has  been 

55 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

the  Moscow  organization.  During  the  war  with 
Japan  this  Zemstvo  called  upon  those  of  the 
other  provinces  to  unite  in  furnishing  medical 
aid  to  the  army.  The  nature  of  that  war  made 
it  impossible  for  the  few  united  Zemstvos  to 
develop  into  a  national  organization.  It  was 
destined  for  the  Great  War  to  turn  the  Zemstvos 
into  that  tremendous  weapon  on  behalf  of  de- 
mocracy which  was  so  instrumental  in  the  over- 
throw of  Czarism. 

At  the  outbreak  of  the  European  conflagra- 
tion in  1914  about  fifteen  Zemstvo  leaders  of 
Moscow  met  to  discuss  the  question  of  a  relief 
organization  for  the  victims  of  the  war.  At 
this  meeting  the  foundation  for  the  social  Russia 
was  laid.  The  dominating  personality  at  the 
little  gathering  was  one  of  Russia's  noblest  sons. 
Prince  George  E.  LvoflF,  a  devoted  Zemstvo 
worker.  He  was  destined  to  play  a  leading 
role  in  the  events  of  the  following  three  years. 
The  meeting  decided  to  call  a  national  con- 
ference of  delegates  of  various  Zemstvos.  On 
August  12,  1914,  representatives  of  nearly  all 
the  nation's  Zemstvos  met  in  Moscow.  The 
meeting  resolved  to  form  an  association,  which 
became  known  as  the  All-Russian  Zemstvo 
Union:     At  the  head  of  the  Union  stood  a 

56 


THE   RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

General  Committee  and  a  chief  representative, 
or  president,  elected  by  a  congress  of  Zemstvo 
delegates.  Prince  G.  E.  Lvoff  was  chosen 
president  and  he  has  retained  the  post  ever 
since. 

Thus  was  social  Russia  born.  It  grew  and 
expanded  at  an  incredible  rate.  The  Zemstvos 
only  showed  the  way.  Thousands  of  local, 
provincial,  and  social  relief  organizations  soon 
appeared  in  all  parts  of  Russia.  As  their  activi- 
ties are  typified  by  the  larger  bodies,  it  will 
suffice  merely  to  call  attention  to  them  as  the 
powerful  foundation  on  which  social  Russia 
was  built.  Shortly  after  the  formation  of  the 
Zemstvo  Union,  another  important  organization 
sprang  into  existence.  The  city  of  Moscow, 
through  its  council,  invited  all  the  other  cities 
of  Russia  to  send  representatives  to  a  conference 
for  the  purposes  of  war  relief  work.  At  the 
conference  a  Union  of  Towns  was  formed, 
which  developed  into  the  second  strongest 
social  organization  in  the  empire.  Without  the 
work  of  the  social  organizations  a  successful 
revolution  would  have  been  impossible  at  this 
time,  therefore  it  is  important  to  know  inti- 
mately social  Russia's  activities.  These  multi- 
farious activities  were  all  embraced  in  those  of 

4  57 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

the  greatest  of  all  social  bodies,  the  All-Rus- 
sian  Union  of  Zemstvos.  A  brief  report  of  the 
Union's  activities  was  made  in  January,  1916, 
by  its  General  Committee.  This  report  con- 
veys some  idea  of  the  magnitude  of  the  Union's 
operations.  The  following  summary  covers 
only  the  first  year  of  the  life  of  the  Union  of 
Zemstvos: 

The  activity  of  the  Union  of  Zemstvos,  as 
originally  planned,  was  to  be  confined  to  the 
care  of  sick  and  wounded  soldiers  in  the  interior 
of  Russia,  the  Union  being  looked  upon  as  one 
of  the  auxiliary  organizations  set  up  in  con- 
nection with  the  Red  Cross  Society  and  the 
Army  Medical  Service.  The  Union  decided, 
accordingly,  to  provide  and  maintain  a  number 
of  hospital  beds,  not  exceeding  30,000,  from  the 
fund  voted  by  the  Zemstvos,  but  during  the 
first  few  weeks  of  war  the  influx  of  wounded 
was  so  great  that  the  number  of  hospitals  at 
the  disposal  of  the  Army  Medical  Service  and 
the  Red  Cross  Society  proved  to  be  wholly 
inadequate.  A  vast  number  of  hospital  beds 
were  urgently  needed  in  the  interior  of  the 
country.  The  Army  Medical  Service  and  the 
Red  Cross  Society,  chiefly  devoting  their  atten- 
tion and  energy  to  the  work  at  the  front,  were 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

unable  to  solve  this  problem  by  their  own 
efforts,  and  this  moved  the  Government  to  call 
in  the  aid  of  public  bodies. 

The  number  of  hospital  beds  which  it  was 
decided  should  be  provided  in  the  interior  of 
the  country  was  based  on  the  estimate  made 
by  the  military  authorities.  It  was  computed 
that  altogether  280,000  beds  would  be  required. 
Of  this  number  155,400  beds  were  to  be  pro- 
vided by  the  Union  of  Zemstvos  and  the  Union 
of  Towns,  the  Uniop  of  Zemstvos  having  made 
itself  responsible  for  two-thirds  of  these.  The 
total  number  of  beds  was  afterward  increased 
in  accordance  with  the  increased  demand.  At 
present  there  are  173,000  beds  provided  by  the 
Union  of  Zemstvos,  which  thus  occupies  the 
first  place  among  the  institutions  devoting  their 
energies  to  the  care  of  sick  and  wounded  sol- 
diers. The  War  Office  provided  160,000,  the 
Municipal  Union  about  70,000,  and  the  Red 
Cross  Society  about  48,000  beds.  Altogether 
more  than  3,100  hospitals  contain  beds  kept  up 
by  the  Union  of  Zemstvos. 

Apart  from  providing  hospital  accommoda- 
tion, the  Union  of  Zemstvos  had  to  take  up  the 
whole  of  the  work  connected  with  the  establish- 
ment of  distributing  and  evacuating  centers, 

59 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

the  military  authorities  being  unable  to  cope 
with  this  problem.  The  Union  of  Zemstvos 
was  authorized  to  manage  these  centers  in- 
dependently and  to  deal  with  the  complicated 
business  of  acceptance,  registration,  and  de- 
spatch of  the  wounded  to  hospitals  in  the 
interior  of  the  country. 

This  stupendous  task  could  only  have  been 
accomplished  with  the  whole-hearted  co-opera- 
tion of  all  the  Zemstvos.  The  work  was  carried 
on  with  great  zeal;  thousands  of  new  hospital 
beds  were  furnished  daily,  thus  enabling  those 
engaged  in  the  work  to  accommodate  the 
continual  stream  of  wounded. 

Simultaneously  with  the  erection  of  the  req- 
uisite number  of  hospitals,  the  Union  arranged 
hospital-trains  for  the  conveyance  of  wounded 
soldiers.  A  special  commission,  appointed  for 
that  purpose  by  the  General  Committee,  tried 
to  design  a  type  of  train  which  would  be 
equipped  with  all  necessary  conveniences  for 
the  wounded,  at  the  lowest  possible  cost,  and 
which  would  at  the  same  time  assure  a  regular 
system  of  treatment. 

By  an  agreement  with  the  general  headquar- 
ters, the  Union  was  requested  to  undertake  the 
setting  up  of  fifty  trains,  and  to  run  them  for 

60 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

the  duration  of  the  war.  The  cars  given  over 
to  the  Union  by  the  mihtary  authorities  were 
adapted  for  the  transport  of  the  wounded; 
medical  and  household  appliances  were  pro- 
vided, and  the  requisite  medical  staff  appointed. 
Caring  for  this  staff  and  for  additions  made  to 
it,  as  occasion  required,  together  with  the  regu- 
lar working  of  the  trains,  proved  a  most  difficult 
task. 

After  organizing  hospitals,  hospital-trains, 
and  food-providing  units,  the  Union  of  Zemstvos 
extended  its  activity  at  the  front.  Its  first  at- 
tempt proved  a  success,  and  the  high  command 
laid  on  the  Union  the  most  varied  tasks.  New 
enterprises  followed  one  after  the  other,  more 
primitive  ones  were  extended  and  new  duties 
were  added.  The  units  at  the  front  increased 
in  number;  stores  of  various  kinds,  with  their 
bases  in  the  rear,  accumulated;  and,  in  con- 
junction with  the  War  Office,  stations,  medical 
organizations  supplemented  by  canteens,  bath- 
houses, and  laundries  were  established  by  the 
Union.  The  victualing  of  a  host  of  over  300,000 
men,  engaged  in  war  construction  in  the  im- 
mediate rear  of  the  army,  fell  to  the  care  of  the 
Union.  The  sanitary  work,  with  numerous 
units    for    dealing    with    infectious    diseases, 

61 


THE   RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

vaccination,  disinfection,  bacteriological  labora- 
tories, and  medicinal  stores,  developed  rapidly. 
The  Union  of  Zemstvos  was  required  likewise 
to  relieve  refugees,  and  organized  a  network  of 
canteens,  medical  institutions,  registration  and 
labor  ojffices,  refuges  for  children,  workshops, 
etc. 

The  first  necessity  in  the  soldier's  outfit  is 
his  footgear.  The  need  of  boots  in  the  army  is 
expressed  in  millions  of  pairs.  From  the  be- 
ginning of  the  war  the  General  Committee  and 
the  local  committees  of  the  Union  organized  all 
over  Russia  the  preparation  of  footgear  for 
the  army,  but  the  Russian  market  was  soon 
exhausted.  This  induced  the  Union  to  try  the 
foreign  markets.  The  Union  appointed  a  special 
c6mmittee  in  New  York  to  procure  different 
kinds  of  goods  for  the  army,  boots  included. 
Through  this  committee,  300,000  pairs  of  boots 
and  1,700,000  pairs  of  shoes  were  bought  in  the 
United  States. 

The  conditions  of  the  Russian  market  made 
it  clear  that  the  greater  part  of  raw  material 
as  well  as  tanning  extracts  imported  from 
abroad  before  the  war  were  for  the  present 
unobtainable.  At  the  same  time  enormous 
quantities  of  skins  of  animals  slaughtered  for 

62 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

the  army  were  either  being  destroyed  or  bought 
up  by  traders  and  resold  at  high  prices.  To 
counteract  these  abuses  the  military  authorities 
empowered  the  Union  to  collect  and  buy  the 
skins  at  all  the  fronts  and  forward  them  to 
the  centers  where  fur  coats  and  felt  boots  were 
made  for  the  men.  At  first  the  exclusive  right 
of  buying  skins  was  given  to  the  Union  within 
the  region  of  the  southwestern  front,  where 
oflScial  statistics  showed  the  number  of  slaugh- 
tered animals  was  the  largest.  The  whole  busi- 
ness was  successfully  managed  by  the  Union's 
committee  at  the  southwestern  front.  Skins 
to  the  number  of  550,000  were  collected  from 
March  15  to  September,  1915.  The  experiment 
at  the  southwestern  front  proved  that  the  work 
was  in  safe  hands,  consequently  the  military 
authorities  proposed  to  the  Union  to  collect 
skins  on  the  western  and  Caucasian  fronts. 
Thus  at  present  the  providing  of  skins,  foot- 
gear, etc.,  for  the  army  is  almost  exclusively  in 
the  hands  of  the  Union,  which  has  arranged 
through  private  factories  for  the  dressing  of  the 
skins,  as  well  as  the  making  of  necessary  outfits 
from  the  prepared  leather. 

These  activities  of  the  Union  of  Zemstvos 

belonged  to  the  early  development  of  the  or- 
es 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

ganization,  but  they  show  how  social  Russia 
attacked  enormous  tasks  and  carried  them  out 
with  unusual  success. 

The  Union  of  Zemstvos  was  followed  by  the 
Union  of  Towns.  Supporting  them  were  the 
innumerable  local  committees  and  the  powerful 
net  of  co-operative  societies.  Russian  democracy 
had  demonstrated  its  genius.  Young  and  ama- 
teurish, social  Russia  showed  herself  superior  in 
every  way  to  the  tried  and  experienced  bureau- 
cratic Government. 


THE  DUMA  AND   SOCIAL  RUSSIA 

SOCIAL  Russia  was  the  response  of  Rus- 
sian democracy  to  the  challenge  of  Prus- 
sianism.  As  such  it  was  entirely  a  product  of 
the  war.  This  fact  is  one  of  the  strongest 
proofs  that  the  Russian  revolution  of  March, 
1917,  was  the  fruit  of  the  great  world  conflict, 
and  that  without  the  war  Russian  autocracy 
would  have  continued,  for  decades  at  least,  to 
govern  the  vast  Slavic  nation.  For  social 
Russia  was  the  agency  through  which  the  war 
mobilized  the  forces  responsible  for  the  revolu- 
tion. From  social  Russia  came  the  power  that 
wrought  epochal  changes  in  the  structure  of 
political  and  military  Russia.  The  political 
physiognomy  of  Russia  underwent  unprece- 
dented changes  mainly  because  of  the  activities 
of  social  Russia.  Therein  lies  part  of  the  ex- 
planation of  the  wonderful  ease  with  which  pop- 
ular Russia  cast  off  the  biu*den  of  autocracy. 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

The  revolution's  astounding  features,  which 
amazed  and  puzzled  the  entire  world,  were  really 
the  natural  and  logical  sequels  to  a  rapid  his- 
torical process  inaugurated  and  concluded  dur- 
ing the  war. 

This  process  manifested  itself  in  the  gradual 
transformation  of  the  conservative  fourth  Duma 
into  a  radical  body.  Through  contact  with  the 
activities  of  social  Russia  as  contrasted  against 
those  of  the  Government  the  "Right"  elements 
in  the  Duma  began  to  move  toward  the  "Left." 
Before  the  war  these  elements  had  perverted 
notions  of  liberal  Russia's  fitness  to  do  con- 
structive work.  A  liberal,  a  progressive,  was 
to  them  a  revolutionary  agitator,  an  anarchist, 
a  nihilist.  A  social  organization,  being  demo- 
cratic in  essence,  although  patriotic,  could  not 
compare  in  the  estimate  of  the  honest  Russian 
bureaucrats  and  their  supporters  with  the 
Government's  institutions  in  efficiency.  While 
welcoming  all  national  efforts  toward  helping 
the  Government  prosecute  the  war  successfully, 
the  Dmna  majority  in  the  fall  of  1914  had  im- 
plicit faith  in  autocracy's  competence  and 
ability.  The  Russian  autocratic  and  bureau- 
cratic machine  seemed  so  solidly  established, 
^nd  the  governmental  plant  looked  so  firm  and 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

effective  in  internal  crises,  that  the  reactionary 
deputies  and  their  constituents  had  no  doubt 
of  the  fitness  of  Czar  ism  to  meet  a  grave  inter- 
national crisis.  All  criticisms  of  the  Govern- 
ment as  a  corrupt  and  incompetent  institution 
they  ignored  and  ascribed  to  the  revolution- 
ism of  the  critics.  Only  a  great  war  could 
have  exposed  the  decayed  foundations  of  the 
bureaucracy.  And  when  such  a  war  came  it 
provided  the  first  opportunity  for  those  honest 
upholders  of  the  old  regime  to  revise  their 
earlier  opinions.  The  tardy,  antiquated,  in- 
ternally discordant,  inefficient,  and  uninspired 
processes  of  the  Czar's  machine  one  by  one  re- 
vealed themselves  in  their  true  light  with  the 
progress  of  the  strenuous  struggle. 

In  contrast  to  this  state  of  affairs  on  the 
part  of  the  bureaucracy  was  democracy's 
effort — social  organizations.  Without  this  con- 
trast it  is  conceivable  that  the  political  meta- 
morphosis undergone  by  the  conservative  and 
reactionary  elements  might  not  have  occurred. 
In  other  words,  the  Duma  would  not  have 
changed  as  it  did,  and  the  revolution  would 
not  have  been  successful.  Many  members  of 
the  Duma  joined  the  army  in  various  capaci- 
ties, many  others  went  to  the  front  for  dif- 

67 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

ferent  purposes,  while  more  remained  in  the 
rear  and  watched  developments  there.  And  all 
of  them  began  to  see  the  light.  They  saw  the 
despised  Progressives,  Liberals,  and  Radicals 
working  hard  for  the  army's  welfare.  They  also 
saw  bureaucratic  Russia,  through  her  corrupt 
and  incompetent  tchinovniks,  at  work.  And 
they  began  to  draw  astounding  conclusions. 
The  tchinovnik  was  ignorant,  lazy,  and  disloyal; 
the  Zemstvo  worker  was  intelligent,  eflScient, 
patriotic,  and  honest.  Tasks  accomplished  by 
the  Unions  of  Zemstvos  or  of  Towns  in  a  month 
would  have  required  six  months  for  the  Govern- 
ment. The  lesson  was  too  striking,  too  obvious, 
to  pass  without  effect.  Criticizing  the  Govern- 
ment became  more  and  more  the  occupation 
of  those  elements  in  the  Duma  and  the  nation 
who  but  a  short  time  before  had  supported 
with  all  their  energies  the  sacredness  of  auto- 
cratic institutions.  Marvelous  things  began  to 
transpire  in  Russia,  things  that  were  not  re- 
ported in  the  foreign  press  because  they^were 
not  "news."  But  Russia's  political  history  never 
saw  a  more  momentous  event  than  the  steady 
change  toward  radicalism  in  the  complexion 
of  the  Duma.  Conservatives  grew  into  Lib- 
erals,  Reactionaries   into   Progressives.     The 

68 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

citadel  of  Czarism  was  losing  one  by  one  its 
very  pillars  and  bastions. 

To  accelerate  this  alienation  of  its  supporters 
it  was  but  necessary  for  the  Government  to 
break  down.  So  long  as  victory  crowned  Rus- 
sian arms,  bureaucracy  felt  secure  in  spite  of 
all  its  errors  and  crimes.  But  as  soon  as  the 
Russian  armies  began  to  meet  with  reverses 
all  those  elements  in  the  nation  that  had  sup- 
ported the  bureaucracy  turned  against  it.  For 
the  Russian  defeats,  as  a  rule,  were  due  to  in- 
competent and  often  treacherous  leadership. 
Thus  Russia's  disasters  in  East  Prussia  were 
due  to  the  treason  of  a  member  of  the  General 
Staff.  The  storm  of  popular  indignation  that 
broke  out  at  the  time  against  the  Government, 
which  had  harbored  a  traitor  in  the  highest 
council  of  the  army,  did  not  subside  after  his 
execution.  The  conservative  elements  in  the 
Duma  and  the  nation  began  to  regard  the  Gov- 
ernment with  suspicion.  This  suspicion  in- 
creased with  the  continued  failure  of  the  War 
Ministry.  The  colossal  Austro-German  drive 
against  Russia  in  the  spring  and  summer  of 
1915,  the  most  stupendous  military  operation 
in  history,  which  resulted  in  the  Teuton  occu- 
pation of  Poland,  Lithuania,  and  parts  of  Vol- 

69 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

hynia  and  Courland,  brought  Russia  near  col- 
lapse. No  more  pathetic  spectacle  was  ever 
staged  in  a  nation's  history  than  the  one  pre- 
sented by  the  helpless  Russian  Government 
after  the  German  invasion  of  Poland.  It  defi- 
nitely demonstrated  to  all  patriotic  Russians 
the  bureaucracy's  unfitness  to  cope  with  big 
problems.  The  very  head  of  the  War  Depart- 
ment, Minister  Sukhomlinov,  was  found  to  be 
as  corrupt  as  he  was  incompetent,  and  was 
subsequently  imprisoned.  No  more  disgraceful 
conduct  on  the  part  of  the  Government  was 
possible  in  the  circumstances.  It  symbolized 
the  utter  rottenness  and  ineptitude  of  the  au- 
tocratic system.  The  Duma  majority  finally 
came  to  realize  the  real  condition  of  govern- 
mental Russia.  At  the  same  time  they  saw 
social  Russia  make  herculean  efforts  toward 
the  rehabilitation  of  the  shattered  military  or- 
ganization. The  stupendous  scale  of  these  ef- 
forts, so  much  responsible  for  the  changes  in 
political  Russia,  could  be  seen  from  the  measure 
of  their  development  during  the  first  two  years 
of  the  Great  War. 

The  All-Russian  Zemstvo  Union  had  handled 
through  its  offices  the  enormous  sum  of  2,500,- 
000,000  rubles  in  the  two  years  of  its  existence. 

70 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

The  Central  Committee  of  the  Union  alone  had 
had  in  the  same  period  passed  through  its  treas- 
ury the  sum  of  1,300,000,000  rubles.  The  Union 
maintained  317  institutions  on  the  northern 
front,  1,043  on  the  western,  1,631  on  the  south- 
western, and  288  on  the  Caucasus  front.  These 
institutions  included  hospitals,  ambulance  sta- 
tions, sanitary  trains,  medical  and  feeding  units, 
medical  and  feeding  stations  on  the  various 
supply  routes,  tea-rooms,  field  dentists  and 
dental  and  X-ray  stations,  laboratories,  dis- 
infection stations,  baths,  laundries,  motor, 
motor-cycle  and  horse-supply  communications, 
veterinary  stations,  boats,  shops,  factories,  etc. 

On  July  16,  1916,  the  material  on  hand  in  all 
the  warehouses  of  the  Zemstvo  Union  was  in- 
sured for  22,790,000  rubles.  In  the  two  years 
of  its  activities  the  Union  supplied  the  War 
Ministry  with  78,000,000  pieces  of  linen,  while 
it  issued  to  its  own  institutions  at  the  front 
50,000,000  more  pieces  of  linen.  In  addition 
to  this  the  Union  had  an  order  to  supply  the 
army  with  4,000,000  tent  awnings  and  3,000,000 
sand-bags.  Altogether  it  had  filled  orders  for 
131,000,000  linen  articles  of  all  descriptions. 

The  Union's  order  department  supplied  the 
Government  in  1916  with  5,000,000  pairs  of 

71 


THE   RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

winter  boots,  4,000,000  winter  coats,  5,000,000 
pairs  of  gloves,  and  10,000,000  pairs  of  socks, 
all  for  the  sum  of  75,000,000  rubles.  On  January 
1,  1916,  the  Union  had  furnished  to  the  War 
Ministry  about  3,000,000  articles  for  winter  use. 
From  August  3,  1915,  to  August  10,  1916,  the 
branch  institutions  of  the  Union  had  distributed 
articles  to  the  value  of  36,000,000  rubles. 

The  Automobile  Department  of  the  General 
Committee  had  purchased  1,261  automobiles, 
261  motor-cycles,  and  60  motor-boats.  The 
special  factory  maintained  by  the  Sanitary- 
Technical  Department  had  turned  out  articles 
to  the  value  of  1,450,000  rubles.  Up  to  January 
1, 1916,  this  department  had  expended  7,000,000 
rubles  on  medicine.  During  the  whole  of  1915 
the  department  distributed  medicines  to  the 
value  of  1,200,000  rubles;  in  the  first  four 
months  of  1916,  to  the  amount  of  1,031,000 
rubles.  On  July  14,  1916,  the  department  had 
on  hand  Various  medical  supplies  valued  at 
2,800,000  rubles. 

The  Union  of  Towns  was  another  striking 
proof  of  the  miraculous  growth  of  the  activities 
of  social  Russia.  The  Union,  headed  by  Mos- 
cow, consisted  of  474  Russian  cities  and  towns. 
For  administrative  purposes  it  was  divided  into 

72 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

thirteen  central  districts.  In  the  two  years  the 
central  treasury  handled  through  its  offices  the 
sum  of  125,000,000  rubles.  The  Union  main- 
tained relief  institutions  at  the  fronts.  Sixteen 
hundred  of  these  were  on  the  European  front. 
Up  to  July  14,  1916,  the  Union  fed  15,000,000 
people.  It  maintained  208  surgical  hospitals 
in  European  Russia,  7  in  Finland,  and  10  in  the 
Caucasus.  The  budget  for  the  second  half  of 
1916  was  for  31,000,000  rubles.  Forty-five  per 
cent,  of  all  the  hospital  beds  in  Russia  at  the 
disposal  of  the  army,  including  those  maintained 
by  the  Russian  Red  Cross,  which  was  a  very 
extensive  organization,  was  maintained  by  the 
Union  of  Towns.  From  August  14,  1915,  the 
medical  depot  of  the  Union  issued  medicines 
to  the  value  of  3,000,000  rubles. 

Statistics  relative  to  the  activities  of  the  most 
important,  in  a  military  sense,  social  organiza- 
tion, the  War  Industries  Committee,  were  not 
obtainable.  But  the  industrial  mobilization  of 
Russia  for  war  purposes,  undertaken  and  exe- 
cuted by  the  Committee,  was  such  as  to  prove 
to  the  conservative  but  patriotic  elements  in 
the  nation  that  social  Russia  was  eminently 
fit  to  direct  and  develop  big  national  affairs. 

Another  factor  in  the  situation,  which  brought 

5  73 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

about  the  change  in  the  views  of  the  Duma 
majority  and  the  forces  it  originally  represented, 
was  the  co-operative  movement  of  Russia.  The 
middle  classes  and  the  nobility  had  proved 
through  the  Unions  of  Zemstvos  and  of  Towns, 
and  through  the  War  Industries  Committee, 
what  they  could  do.  But  the  peasantry  and 
labor  were  yet  to  convince  the  Duma  of  their 
loyalty.  These  two  classes  maintained  a  vast 
system  of  co-operative  organizations.  There 
were  37,000  co-operative  institutions  of  all 
kinds,  which  included  13,000,000  members. 
Their  capital  approached  300,000,000  rubles. 
These  figures  showed  how  colossal  had  been  the 
development  of  the  co-operative  movement  in 
Russia.  They  pointed  to  a  mighty  agency  for 
constructive  work  in  the  life  of  the  nation. 
The  Great  War  called  upon  it  to  leave  its  ex- 
clusive domain  of  local  activities  for  the  broader 
one  of  national  work. 

The  rural  co-operatiye  bodies  combined  into 
unions.  The  urban  organizations  did  the  same. 
All  began  to  contribute  to  the  national  efforts 
to  win  the  war  in  spite  of  the  Government's 
dismal  failure.  Co-operative  Russia  provided 
one  fifth  of  the  bread  consumption  of  the  army. 
It  supplied  the  War  Department  with  hundreds 

74 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

of  thousands  of  tons  of  fodder.  The  co-operative 
workshops,  in  all  parts  of  Russia,  filled  large 
orders  of  the  War  Ministry  and  Union  of  Zems- 
tvos.  Thus  the  muzhik  and  the  laborer  did 
their  share  of  the  organized  social  work.  All 
Russia,  from  aristocrat  to  peasant,  had  set  to 
the  task  of  supporting  the  soldier  in  the  field  to 
enable  him  to  achieve  victory  over  Prussianism. 

With  the  splendid  record  of  social  Russia 
before  it,  and  the  wretched  showing  of  the 
Government,  it  became  clear  to  the  fourth 
Duma  that  the  bureaucracy  no  longer  had  the 
right  to  claim  exclusive  control  of  the  nation's 
affairs.  The  democracy  had  definitely  proved 
itself  more  patriotic  and  more  efficient  than 
the  bureaucracy.  Thus  it  came  to  pass,  after 
a  year  of  warfare,  that  the  fourth  Duma,  origi- 
nally the  most  reactionary  of  Russia's  parlia- 
ments, turned  into  a  body  of  radicals.  When 
the  Duma  met  in  the  fall  of  1915  it  presented 
a  remarkable  contrast  to  its  political  complexion 
in  the  fall  of  1914.  The  Octobrists — ^the  con- 
servative party  dominating  the  Duma — com- 
bined with  their  former  political  opponents  and 
formed  the  so-called  Progressive  Bloc. 

The  Progressive  Bloc  made  its  entry  into 

national  life  with  a  declaration  of  a  program 

75 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

of  necessary  reforms,  representing  the  demands 
of  the  various  groups  and  parties  in  the  Duma. 
The  following  were  measures  slated  for  immedi- 
ate promulgation: 

1.  The  establishment  of  a  coalition  Govern- 
ment of  persons  enjoying  the  confidence  of  the 
coimtry  and  pledged  to  the  legislative  institu- 
tions to  enact  in  the  near  futiu'e  a  definite 
program. 

2.  A  complete  change  in  the  old  govern- 
mental methods  which  were  based  on  distrust 
of  any  social  initiative;   in  particular: 

(a)  The  strict  enactment  of  elementary  laws 
in  the  Government. 

(b)  The  elimination  of  the  double  power 
exercised  by  the  military  and  civil  authorities 
in  affairs  not  directly  pertaining  to  the  conduct 
of  military  operations. 

(c)  A  change  in  the  personnel  of  the  local 
administrations. 

(d)  A  rational  and  natural  political  policy 
for  the  perpetuation  of  internal  peace  and  the 
elimination  of  discord  among  classes  and 
nationalities. 

3.  The  suspension  by  an  act  of  his  Majesty 

of   all   cases   begun   for   purely   political   and 

religious  offenses,  which  were  not  criminal  in 

76 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

their  character;  the  release  of  political  prisoners 
and  the  restoration  of  their  rights,  including 
participation  in  the  elections  to  the  Duma,  the 
Zemstvos  and  municipal  boards. 

4.  The  return  of  the  political  and  religious 
offenders  from  exile  by  administrative  processes. 

5.  The  full  and  absolute  suspension  of  all 
religious  persecution,  and  the  recall  of  all  the 
circulars  that  corrupted  the  meaning  of  the 
ukase  of  April,  1905. 

6.  The  solution  of  the  Polish-Russian  ques- 
tion; the  abolition  of  all  restrictions  shackling 
the  Pole  in  Russia,  and  the  introduction  of  a 
bill  dealing  with  the  granting  of  autonomy  to 
Poland. 

7.  The  initial  step  on  the  way  to  abolish  all 
restrictions  against  the  Jews;  the  facilitating 
of  their  entrance  into  educational  institutions; 
and  the  abolition  of  all  regulations  in  their 
choosing  of  a  professiouw  Also  the  restoration 
of  the  Jewish  press. 

8.  A  conciliatory  coiu'se  in  regard  to  Finland; 
changes  in  the  personnel  of  the  administration; 
the  ending  of  all  persecution. 

9.  The  restoration  of  the  Ukrainian  press; 
the  revision  of  the  cases  of  the  inhabitants  of 
Galicia  who  are  under  arrest  or  in  exile. 

77 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

10.  The  re-establisliment  of  labor  unions  and 
the  cessation  of  the  persecution  of  workmen 
engaged  in  hospital  activities  on  the  suspicion 
that  they  were  doing  illegal,  revolutionary  work. 

11.  Reforms  and  changes  in  the  organiza- 
tion of  the  care  of  the  wounded  and  war  refugees. 

12.  The  emancipation  of  the  peasantry  with 
the  rest  of  the  population. 

13.  Reforms  in  the  Zemstvo  system. 

14.  The  encouragement  of  all  co-operative 
movements  and  enterprises. 

15.  The  enactment  of  prohibition  as  a 
permanent  statute. 

The  outstanding  demand  in  the  program  was 
for  a  responsible  Ministry,  which  meant  a  par- 
liamentary form  of  government  in  the  true 
sense  of  the  word.  This  demand  later  became 
the  watchword  of  the  Duma  in  its  fight  with 
the  bureaucracy.  It  was  a  fight  that  no  one 
could  have  foreseen.  The  Duma  which  but  a 
year  previous  was  the  Government's  rubber- 
stamp  had  become  the  leader  of  democracy's 
battle  against  the  established  order.  The  in- 
stitution which  only  twelve  months  before  was 
sneered  at  and  scorned  by  the  people  had  be- 
come the  champion  of  liberty,  reform,  and  de- 
mocracy. 

78 


VI 

THE  DEMOCRATIZATION  OF  THE  ARMY 

NO  single  factor  in  the  revolution  was  of 
such  paramount  importance  as  the  army 
joining  the  ranks  of  the  rebels.  Without  the 
army's  support  the  Russian  democracy  would 
never  have  succeeded  in  overthrowing  the  Czar. 
A  united  nation  meant  a  great  deal  as  a  force 
for  a  successful  revolution.  A  parliament  solid 
in  its  opposition  to  the  Government  was  of 
profound  import  in  the  same  sense.  But  so 
long  as  the  military  organization  was  on  the 
side  of  the  established  order,  all  revolt  and  at- 
tempt at  revolt  was  doomed  to  failure.  The 
alienation  of  the  army  from  its  traditional  mas- 
ters, therefore,  became  the  most  vital  necessity 
of  all  for  a  successful  revolution.  The  democ- 
ratization of  the  army  during  the  war  may  con- 
sequently be  regarded  as  the  process  over- 
shadowing all  others  in  the  course  of  the  rapid 
evolution  undergone  by  all  Russia  in  the  thirty 

79 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

months  between  August,  1914,  and  March, 
1917. 

Russia's  military  organization  before  the  war 
was  the  very  foundation  of  Czarism.  As  such 
it  was  the  hereditary  foe  of  democracy.  The 
Russian  army  was  the  most  soulless,  blind,  and 
obedient  military  machine  in  Europe,  with  the 
exception  of  the  army  of  Germany.  As  a  tool 
of  the  Government  in  crushing  internal  dis- 
turbances it  was  hated  and  feared  by  the  people. 
The  army  paid  the  nation  in  the  same  coin, 
fully  justifying  its  reputation.  A  Zabern  affair 
was  a  very  common  occurrence  in  Russia, 
though  seldom,  if  ever,  reported  in  the  foreign 
press.  Russian  junker  ism  thickened  and  forti- 
fied the  wall  dividing  the  army  and  the  people. 

At  the  outbreak  of  the  war  the  Russian  army 
was  loyal  to  the  Czar.  No  one  could  imagine 
a  process  by  which  this  pillar  of  Czarism  could 
be  turned  into  a  revolutionary  force  in  a  short 
time.  But  the  unthinkable  happened.  And 
no  factor  was  as  potent  in  the  transformation 
of  the  army 's  traditional  status  as  the  Union  of 
Zemstvos  and  the  other  organizations  of  social 
Russia.  Social  Russia  devoted  itself  with  ex- 
traordinary energy  to  relieving  the  soldiers' 
hard  lot.    If  democratic  Russia  was  to  achieve 

80 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

its  aims,  it  was  imperative  to  defeat  Prussianism. 
And  only  the  army  could  do  that.  Hence  the 
spontaneous  and  universal  response  on  the 
part  of  the  Russian  people  to  the  needs  of  their 
soldiery.  Phenomenal  changes  were  wrought 
by  the  war.  The  mutual  hatred  and  suspicion 
that  existed  between  liberal  and  military  Russia 
were  suddenly  replaced  by  a  strong  current  of 
affection  on  the  part  of  the  former.  The  soldier 
at  the  front  and  his  wife  and  parents  at  home 
soon  felt  this  new  attitude.  At  the  front  the 
social  organizations  were  taking  care  of  him  as 
no  government  department  ever  did.  The  baths 
established  in  the  rear  of  the  battle-line,  the 
feeding-stations,  the  various  medical  relief  sta- 
tions, brought  the  soldier  nearer  to  the  democ- 
racy than  propaganda  ever  could.  Above  all, 
the  humane  treatment  accorded  the  soldier  by 
the  social  workers  was  something  new  to  him. 
The  bloody  Cossack  and  the  disciplined  regular 
could  not  remain  unmoved  at  such  care  and 
affection.  Under  the  Russian  soldier's  uniform, 
which  stood  for  inhumanity  and  rigidity,  a 
warm  human  heart  began  to  stir  itself. 

This  reaction  of  the  Russian  army  to  the 
activities  of  the  democracy   was  reflected  in 

numerous  tributes  paid  by  oflScers  of  various 

81 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

grades  to  the  social  organizations.  The  Presi- 
dent of  the  All-Russian  Union  of  Zemstvos  re- 
ceived countless  expressions  of  gratefulness  from 
the  rank  and  file,  as  well  as  from  the  com- 
manders of  divisions,  corps,  and  armies.  The 
latter's  attitude  demonstrated  that  even  the 
heads  of  the  army  had  come  to  recognize  that 
the  old  system  had  dismally  failed,  and  that 
the  Russian  public  had  proved  itself  more  loyal 
to  the  soldiery  than  the  bureaucracy.  The 
commander  of  the  N  infantry  division  issued 
the  following  typical  order  on  the  anniversary 
of  the  Zemstvo  Union's  activities  with  his 
division: 

"To-day  it  is  a  year  since  the  Third  Front 
Detachment  of  the  All-Russian  Zemstvo  Union 
inaugurated  its  field  activities  with  us,  a  year 
of  hard,  strenuous  work  under  the  most  un- 
favorable conditions  of  warfare. 

"Every  wounded  man  will  remember  with 
profound  gratitude  that,  tender  care  and  help 
which  the  personnel  of  the  detachment  had 
given  to  him  in  these  trying  days,  disregarding 
all  danger  and  working  under  fire  without  for  a 
moment  deserting  its  noble  and  honorable  post. 
I  consider  it  my  moral  duty  to  point  out  the 
exceptionally  useful  and  sincere  work  of  this 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

detachment,  which  voluntarily  assumed  the 
mission  of  serving  humanity  and  rendered  great 
aid  to  the  division  which  fought  against  the 
superior  forces  of  the  enemy.  Did  not  the  re- 
alization of  every  fighter  that  right  here  at  the 
front  the  most  tender  aid  and  attentive  care 
awaited  him,  help  him  to  devote  all  his  powers 
and  energy  to  the  battle-field,  where  he  faced  at 
every  step  the  destructive  and  relentless  fire  of 
the  enemy?  What  amount  of  labor  and  initia- 
tive had  been  expended  for  the  purpose  of  light- 
ening for  our  gray  soldiers  the  heavy  burden 
of  war  and  making  them  feel  the  attention  and 
devotion  of  our  best  citizens !  Baths,  laundries, 
tea-rooms  at  the  front  lines,  established  by  the 
detachment,  keep  up  the  spirits  and  conserve 
the  strength  of  our  fighters.  It  is  hard  to  de- 
scribe in  figures  the  actual  usefulness  and  scale 
of  the  great  work  developed  by  the  detachment 
with  the  division  under  my  command." 

This  oflScial  tribute  of  a  general  to  the  work 
of  social  Russia  shows  clearly  what  part  the 
latter  had  begun  to  play  in  the  life  of  the 
soldier.  Hundreds  of  similar  documents  were 
addressed  to  the  troops  and  to  the  various 
bodies.  The  majority  of  the  social  workers  at 
the  front  were  college  students.    In  Russia  they 

83 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

constituted  a  strong  revolutionary  element. 
Their  intimate  contact  with  the  army  was  in 
itself  educational.  But  the  Zemstvos  went  fur- 
ther. They  founded  at  the  front  schools  to 
teach  elementary  subjects  to  the  illiterate  Rus- 
sian soldier.  These  schools  became  very  popu- 
lar, and  proved  a  great  success  wherever  they 
were  permitted  to  develop.  They  undoubtedly 
contributed  to  the  democratization  of  the  army 
and  the  closer  understanding  between  the  Rus- 
sian liberal  social  forces  and  the  military  organ- 
ization. The  fighter  thus  became  completely 
transformed  through  the  humanitarian  and  civ- 
ilizing influences  exerted  over  him  by  the  once- 
hated  Russian  democracy. 

But  the  soldier  was  not  alone  in  the  world. 
He  had  a  wife  and  children,  or  an  aged  mother 
and  father,  perhaps  in  the  very  region  where 
the  German  hordes  were  sweeping  toward  the 
east.  The  military  authorities  often  ordered 
the  evacuation  of  a  whole  province,  containing 
hundreds  of  thousands  of  inhabitants,  in  twenty- 
four  or  forty-eight  hoiu*s.  The  peasantry  were 
compelled  to  abandon  their  homesteads,  and, 
driving  their  live  stock  before  them,  move  from 
the  military  zone.  Thus  streams  of  ruined 
families  began  to  form  that  flood  of  refugees 

84 


i 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

which  was  to  inundate  the  entire  country.  After 
the  Teutonic  invasion  in  the  summer  of  1915 
this  inundation  developed  to  proportions  un- 
paralleled in  human  history.  From  the  Baltic 
to  the  Black  Sea  an  enormous  current  of  im- 
poverished, desolate,  hungry,  disease-afflicted 
men,  women,  and  children  of  all  ages  and  classes 
advanced  eastward.  The  number  of  these  un- 
fortunate refugees  was  estimated  as  high  as 
thirteen  million.  The  total  was  beyond  doubt 
not  less  than  ten  million.  What  such  a  vast 
vagrant  population  in  ordinary  times  would 
mean  to  a  coimtry  can  well  be  imagined.  It 
certailily  would  tax  all  the  resources  of  such  a 
fully  organized  and  efficient  government  as 
Germany's  or  Great  Britain's.  The  problems 
of  relief,  of  distribution,  of  housing,  of  rehabili- 
tation presented  by  such  a  nomadic  population 
were  colossal.  To  meet  this  situation  in  Russia 
there  was  a  collapsed  government.  The  terrific 
losses  on  the  fields  of  battle  incident  to  the 
greatest  military  defeat  in  history  were  suffi- 
cient to  keep  a  governmental  machine  going 
at  top  speed.  But  the  Czar's  Government  was 
not  fit  even  for  that.  Unable  to  stem  the  tide 
of  the  aggressive  foe,  unable  to  think  and  plan 
and  prepare  on  extraordinary  scales,  hampered 

85 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

by  traitors  in  its  councils  and  by  corruption 
in  all  its  departments,  the  Government  of  the 
bureaucracy  presented  a  miserable  sight  in  the 
second  autumn  of  the  Great  War.  The  army 
was  shattered  to  its  very  foundations.  The 
foe  considered  Russia  hors  de  combat.  And  no 
recuperation  was  really  possible  for  the  Slavic 
empire  under  the  control  of  the  bureaucracy. 
But  the  Prussians  and  the  entire  world,  which 
adopted  their  view,  were  ignorant  of  one  factor 
— social  Russia. 

Imagine  a  nation  whose  governmental  sys- 
tem collapsed  in  the  midst  of  an  unprecedented 
war;  imagine  its  army  dejected,  tired,  defeated, 
and  greatly  diminished  in  numbers;  and  further 
imagine  oceans  of  destitute,  starving,  and 
ruined  human  beings  drifting  aimlessly  and 
helplessly  along  the  country's  roads.  Then 
think  in  the  midst  of  this  bleak  and  hopeless 
picture  of  a  suddenly  arrived  savior!  This 
savior  was  social  Russia.  The  spirit  of  democ- 
racy would  not  be  broken  by  the  dismal  failures 
of  the  bureaucracy.  Its  failures  only  put  new 
life  and  vigor  into  the  democratic  forces.  New 
opportunities  were  opened  for  them  to  attack 
the  old  regime  as  well  as  to  show  their  ability 
and  fitness  to  govern  the  nation.    Thus  it  hap- 

86 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

pened  that  Russia's  great  disaster  proved  of 
immense  benefit  to  its  future.  While  the  gov- 
ernmental machine  lay  prostrate,  a  wave  of 
fiery  enthusiasm  swept  the  nation.  At  the 
moment  of  the  greatest  defeat,  when  the  bureau- 
cracy was  ready  to  quit,  the  Russian  democracy 
arose,  determined  to  continue  the  fight  against 
Prussianism.  Social  Russia  picked  up  the  torn 
thread  of  the  Government's  activities.  Bureau- 
cracy meekly  submitted  to  this  momentous  step. 
The  Zemstvos  and  other  social  bodies  took 
over  many  of  the  duties  of  the  War  Department. 
While  bureaucrats  of  the  old  school  still  re- 
mained at  the  head  of  the  entire  Government, 
the  War  Ministry  presented  an  anomalous  con- 
trast. General  Polivanoff,  the  War  Minister 
appointed  as  successor  to  the  disgraced  General 
Sukhomlinov,  was  an  efficient  and  patriotic 
soldier  who  appreciated  the  Zemstvos'  aid  to 
the  army.  He  was  only  too  glad  to  have  the 
Zemstvos  co-operate  in  the  reorganization  of 
the  military  arm  of  the  nation.  This  interesting 
situation  later  developed  into  one  of  the  big 
factors  responsible  for  the  revolution. 

The  country  was  not  ready  to  shake  off  the 
autocratic  Government  in  the  fall  of  1915.  The 
bureaucracy  retained  the  helm  of  the  state. 

87 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

But  the  bureaucracy  had  no  vigor  left.  The 
democracy  took  charge  of  the  mihtary  work, 
not  officially,  but  actually.  By  the  time  de- 
mocracy had  built  up  the  nation,  bureaucracy 
had  gathered  strength.  Then  the  most  puzzling, 
to  the  outside  world,  phase  of  the  Russian  situ- 
ation developed.  The  Government  persecuted 
the  forces  co-operating  with  one  of  its  depart- 
ments. The  War  Ministry  was  with  social 
Russia,  while  the  Government  was  against  it. 

The  winter  of  1915-16  found  social  Russia 
actually  dominating  the  nation's  life.  This 
life  was  divided  into  two  categories,  the  front 
and  the  rear.  At  the  rear  were  the  millions  of 
refugees  spreading  all  over  Russia.  They  had 
to  be  taken  care  of.  While  the  Government 
contributed  to  their  relief,  it  was  social  Russia, 
the  thousands  of  committees  and  organizations 
throughout  the  vast  empire,  that  bore  the  brunt 
of  the  work.  And  leading  all  these  organizations 
were,  of  course,  tlie  Zemstvos.  The  peasants 
who  drove  their  cattle  with  them  because  they 
could  not  sell  them  were  relieved  of  their  burden 
at  equitable  prices.  The  thousands  of  orphans 
were  gathered  in  and  sheltered  by  the  social 
bodies.  Food  and  clothing  were  distributed 
among  the  needy.     Information  bureaus  were 

88 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

established  for  the  purpose  of  finding  lost  rela- 
tives. Legal  and  medical  aid  was  furnished 
free  to  the  refugees.  And  hundreds  of  thousands 
of  these  wanderers  were  settled  for  good  with  the 
aid  of  the  Unions  of  Zemstvos  and  of  Towns 
in  the  interior  provinces  of  Russia  and  Siberia. 
Altogether  the  permanent  settlers  from  among 
the  refugees  numbered  several  million.  And 
almost  all  of  them  to  some  degree  had  received 
aid  from  the  social  bodies. 

When  one  considers  that  a  large  portion  of 
the  army  at  the  front  was  originally  recruited 
from  this  floating  refugee  population,  the  con- 
clusions as  to  social  Russia's  effect  on  this  por- 
tion are  obvious.  The  beloved  families  of 
hundreds  of  thousands  of  soldiers  had  been 
ruined  and  set  adrift  without  any  sound  justi- 
fication by  the  incompetent  and  inhuman  au- 
thorities. This  in  itself  was  enough  to  incense 
part  of  the  army  against  the  Government. 
Exposed  to  the  ravages  of  disease,  poverty,  and 
severe  weather,  their  relatives  got  succor  from 
whom.f^  From  the  Russian  democracy.  The 
mind  of  the  Russian  soldier  could  not  but  be 
affected  by  this  plain  fact.  His  heart  began 
to  turn  from  his  former  masters  to  the  people 
and  their  leaders. 

6  89 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

But  there  was  also  a  purely  military  reason 
for  the  army's  transformation,  and  that  was 
its  defeats  because  of  bureaucracy's  failures. 
When  the  Russians  were  trapped  by  Hinden- 
burg  in  the  Masurian  Lakes  in  the  fall  of  1914, 
suffering  enormous  losses,  it  was  not  the  fault 
of  the  rank  and  file,^  nor  was  it  the  genius  of 
Hindenburg  that  was  responsible  for  the  severe 
defeat.  It  was  due  to  the  treason  of  a  member 
of  the  Russian  General  Staff,  Colonel  Myaso- 
yedov,  who  delivered  the  Russian  army  to  the 
enemy  for  gold. 

Myasoyedov  was  an  extreme  reactionary,  and 
in  close  touch  with  the  Government  at  Petro- 
grad.  When  he  was  caught  and  executed  by 
order  of  the  Commander-in-Chief,  Grand-Duke 
Nicholas,  it  was  an  indictment  not  only  of 
him  as  a  Russian  army  oflficer,  but  of  the  whole 
bureaucratic  Government. 

General  Sukhomlinov,  the  War  Minister, 
who  stood  at  the  head  of  the  War  Department 
at  the  time  of  the  great  collapse  of  the  Russian 
army  in  Poland  during  the  spring  and  summer 
of  1915,  was  later  arrested  on  charges  of  having 
accepted  bribes  to  leave  the  army  unprepared, 
and  of  having  had  relations  with  traitors.  As 
a  friend  of  Myasoyedov,  the  War  Minister  had 

00 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

furnished  the  latter  with  military  secrets  which 
were  transmitted  to  the  Germans. 

Answering  an  anti-Semitic  attack  in  the 
Duma  against  Jewish  would-be  traitors,  Shin- 
garev,  one  of  the  leading  Cadets,  said: 

"I  do  not  know  whether  there  were  traitors 
at  the  front  among  the  Jews,  but  I  maintain 
that  the  enormous  number  of  victims  which 
the  Russian  people  have  lost  through  the  fault 
of  the  Russian  Minister  of  War,  those  hundreds 
of  thousands  of  unfortunate  heroes  who  have 
perished  through  the  fault  of  this  criminal  man, 
fell  by  a  Russian  hand." 

The  Sukhomlinov  incident  alone  was  enough 
to  convert  hundreds  of  thousands  of  soldiers 
into  revolutionaries.  But  when  the  popular 
Commander-in-Chief  was  retired  to  the  Cau- 
casus because  of  his  hostile  attitude  toward  the 
traitorous  reactionaries  in  control  of  the  Gov- 
ernment, the  army  began  to  realize  that  it  was 
saddled  with  a  system  which  sought  and  worked 
for  defeat  instead  of  victory.  And  no  army 
likes  to  be  defeated.  It  does  not  like  it  espe- 
cially when  it  is  convinced  that  in  fighting  quali- 
ties it  is  the  equal  of  the  enemy,  and  that  with 
proper  support  it  would  never  meet  with  re- 
verses.    Such  is  the  feeling  of   the  Russian 

91 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

soldier.  When  he  was  forced  to  meet  the  on- 
slaughts of  terrific  artillery  bombardments  with 
his  bare  breast  he  began  to  think.  In  the  sum- 
mer of  1915  there  were  cases  of  Russian  soldiers 
fighting  witk  sticks  against  their  Teuton  foes. 
The  complete  breakdown  of  the  commissariat, 
along  with  the  other  elements,  created  deep 
discontent.  And  social  Russia,  which  hastened 
to  help  reorganize  the  army,  became  to  the 
soldier  the  element  which  by  virtue  of  its  fitness 
should  have  headed  the  Government.  The 
rank  and  file  of  the  army  were  converted  to 
the  cause  of  democracy  through  social  Russia's 
constructive  activities  as  well  as  by  bureau- 
cracy's destructive  activities. 

The  Zemstvos  began  to  aid  the  army  mili- 
tarily. Munition-factories  were  built  with  their 
help.  Their  eflScient  representatives  in  Europe, 
Japan,  and  America  purchased  large  quantities 
of  munitions  and  other  necessary  materials. 
What  Lloyd  George  did  in  Great  Britain,  what 
Albert  Thomas  did  in  France,  the  Zemstvos 
began  to  do  in  Russia.  The  industrial  resources 
of  the  nation  were  mobilized  for  the  purpose  of 
rehabilitating  the  army  and  supplying  it  with 
all  necessities.  A  special  social  body — the  War 
Industries  Committee — was  formed  in  Petro- 

92 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

grad.  This  body  represented  the  commercial 
and  manufacturing  elements  of  Russian  society. 
At  the  head  of  this  committee  stood  Alexander 
Gutchkov,  an  ex-president  of  the  Duma.  Its 
activities  were  confined  exclusively  to  the  hus- 
banding of  the  country's  industrial  resources 
for  the  purpose  of  a  more  intensive  and  suc- 
cessful prosecution  of  the  war.  With  the  co- 
operation of  the  rest  of  social  Russia,  the  com- 
mittee soon  began  to  create  a  new  backbone 
for  the  army.  The  latter  felt  the  inflow  of  fresh 
blood  into  its  veins.  The  spiritual  and  the  ma- 
terial support  of  the  entire  nation  was  behind 
the  army.  And  the  entire  nation  was  now  a 
body  led  by  a  united  progressive  representation 
at  the  Duma,  inspired  by  the  close  bond  with 
democratic  France  and  Great  Britain,  disgusted 
with  bureaucracy  as  never  before,  and  bent 
upon  fighting  Prussianism  till  it  was  defeated. 
The  army  was  beginning  to  reciprocate  the 
nation's  attitude  toward  it.  The  ferment  of 
democracy  was  firmly  planted  in  the  soldier's 
soul .  The  rotten  bureaucracy,  on  one  hand,  and 
social  Russia's  great  constructive  work  on  the 
other,  had  thus  radically  transformed  the  political 
and  military  life  of  Russia,  laying  the  foundation 
for  the  wonderful  overthrow  of  Czarism. 

93 


vn 

THE   RULE    OF    GOREMYKIN 

AT  the  head  of  the  Russian  Government  at 
jLjL  the  outbreak  of  the  war  stood  Ivan  L. 
Goremykin,  a  bureaucrat  of  the  old  school,  who 
served  under  four  Czars.  His  reputation  as  a 
reactionary  was  established.  As  Assistant 
Minister  under  Durnovo,  a  notorious  tchinov- 
nik,  Goremykin  in  the  last  decade  of  the  nine- 
teenth century  inscribed  his  name  in  Russian 
history  as  a  foe  of  progressive  thought  and 
reform.  He  was  first  to  extend  the  censor's 
jurisdiction  over  the  advertising  columns  of 
the  newspapers.  He  promulgated  so  many 
restrictions  for  the  purpose  of  gagging  the  press 
that  Russian  public  opinion  found  itself  almost 
without  a  voice.  He  was  appointed  to  the 
Imperial  Council  on  his  sixtieth  birthday,  in 
1899,  but  his  career  was  not  ended  as  yet.  .  In 
1906,  after  Count  Witte's  resignation,  he  was 
called  to  head  the  Cabinet.   During  his  Premier- 

94 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

ship  the  first  Duma  met.  That  radical  body 
sought  to  make  Russia  a  real  Constitutional 
Monarchy.  But  the  reactionary  Prime  Minis- 
ter would  not  even  hear  of  the  Duma's  de- 
mands for  reform  and  liberty.  After  a  spec- 
tacular and  stormy  session  the  first  Russian 
parliament  was  dissolved.  Goremykin  was 
retired  soon  afterward.  Democratic  Russia 
thought  that  the  old  functionary's  political  life 
was  now  closed.  But  early  in  1914,  after  the 
dismissal  of  Premier  Kokovtsov,  the  seventy- 
five-year-old  Goremykin  was  again  placed  at 
the  helm  of  the  Government. 

The  immediate  effect  in  Russia  of  the  out- 
break of  the  Great  War  was  a  union  between 
the  democracy  and  the  Government.  Goremy- 
kin and  his  opponents  co-operated  in  the  prose- 
cution of  the  war.  Naturally,  the  popular 
elements  expected  gradual  concessions  on  the 
part  of  the  Government  as  a  natural  outcome 
of  their  common  labor.  But  Goremykin  never 
intended  to  grant  reforms.  The  big  issues  of 
the  war  did  not  concern  him.  To  him  it  was 
not  a  war  between  two  ideas  and  institutions 
in  the  life  of  mankind.  It  was  one  of  those 
habitual  wars  which  are  being  waged  in  our 

world  at  almost  regular  intervals.    There  was, 

m 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

therefore,  no  need  for  any  change  in  the  tra- 
ditional policy  of  the  Government. 

The  persecution  of  the  Jews  was  perhaps  the 
most  revolting  manifestation  of  this  policy. 
The  Jews  have  always  been  the  scapegoat  of 
the  Russian  Government.  During  the  winter 
of  1914-15  the  bureaucracy  used  the  Jews  to 
screen  their  own  sins.  The  provinces  where 
the  battlegrounds  lay  were  inhabited  by  mill- 
ions of  Jews.  The  military  authorities  treated 
them  with  utter  inhumanity.  But  the  civil 
authorities  went  even  further.  They  incited 
to  pogroms  and  massacres.  They  spread  re- 
ports and  rumors  to  the  effect  that  the  Jews 
were  traitors  and  were  responsible  for  Russia's 
defeats.  This  method  was  tried  by  the  bureau- 
cracy during  the  Russo-Japanese  War,  also  to 
divert  popular  attention  from  the  real  authors 
of  the  nation's  misfortunes.  The  army  and  the 
police  perpetrated  acts  of  violence  on  the 
Polish  and  Lithuanian  Jews  that  were  unparal- 
leled in  their  savagery  and  cruelty.  The  result 
of  this  campaign  was  a  quick  revulsion  of  the 
country's  attitude  toward  the  Government. 
Russian  public  opinion  was  much  provoked  by 
the  anti-Semitic  activities  of  the  Goremykin 
Ministry,  as  shown  by  the  following  speech 

96 


THE   RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

made  by  Deputy  Shingarev  in  the  Duma  in 
the  course  of  an  interpellation  of  the  Govern- 
ment on  the  Jewish  persecutions: 

A  Jew  cannot  give  an  education  to  his  child,  cannot 
see  his  own  mother,  and  a  mother  cannot  come  to  a 
wounded,  crippled  soldier-son  in  Petrograd.  A  man  who 
died  on  the  field  of  battle,  by  his  death  deprived  his  chil- 
dren of  the  right  to  live  in  the  city  in  which  he  had  lived. 
There  is  no  horror,  there  is  no  abomination,  no  outrage 
which  this  Government  has  not  practised  upon  the  Jews. 
And  this  degradation  has  been  going  on  for  decades,  and 
after  that  you  slander  a  whole  nationality  without  any 
ground.  ••^rJ( 

The  improvement  of  Russian  life  is  possible  only  when 
you  will  heal  this  wound,  this  ill  of  our  Government  life, 
and  will  grant  rights  to  nationalities  and  equality  of  rights. 
But  there  are  people  who  feed  on  discord,  who,  like  para- 
sites, live  on  it.  Without  discord  they  cannot  live.  We 
know  that  in  times  of  peace  they  persecuted  the  Jews, 
and  in  war-time  they  began  to  persecute  the  Germans. 
They  persecuted  the  Poles;  they  persecuted  all  whom  it 
was  possible  to  persecute.  For  this  subsidies  are  given. 
This  is  encouraged.  Those  parasites  live  on  the  blood,  on 
the  sweat  of  the  people.  They  thrive  on  the  ills  and 
wounds  of  the  people.  They  spread  slander  and  create 
discord. 

You  know  to  what  degree  of  moral  decay  have  come 
the  prot^g^s  of  the  Russian  governmental  authorities. 
One  is  ashamed  to  read  a  newspaper.  One  is  pained  to 
see  our  Russian  rule.  One  is  ashamed  of  the  Russian 
Government.  But  who  are  those  prot^g^s?  Are  they 
Jews?  They  came  out  of  their  own  ranks,  they  are  their 
favorites,  they  are  their  comrades.  Did  the  Russian 
Army  remain  in  Galicia  without  ammunition  because  of 
the  Jews?  Did  it  remain  without  care  when  going  back 
to  unprepared  positions  because  of  the  Jews?     Did  it 

97 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

suffer  all  that  agony  and  all  those  horrors  and  consequences 
which  awaited  them  there  because  of  the  Jews?  ...  I 
don't  know  whether  there  were  traitors  among  the  Jews, 
but  I  do  know  that  to  our  deep  sorrow  there  are  traitors 
among  our  own  nation,  and  that  this  refuse  of  our  nation 
is  an  extremely  disgusting  phenomenon.  The  former 
Minister  of  War,  Sukhomlinoff,  some  time  before  the  war 
ordered  the  army  to  subscribe  to  Zemstchina  [a  rabid  re- 
actionary journal].  He  who  enjoyed  the  confidence  of  tlie 
Government  and  stood  at  the  head  of  the  War  Ministry 
has  proved  to  have  been  in  some  relations  with  traitors, 
to  have  accepted  bribes,  and  not  to  have  prepared  the 
Russian  Army. 

And  Myasoyedov — the  former  gendarme,  the  pillar  of 
reaction  and  the  servant  of  the  Government?  He,  too, 
was  a  traitor  and  a  spy,  tried  for  treason  and  treachery. 
He,  too,  was  a  Russian.  And  General  Grigoryeff,  who 
surrendered  the  Kovno  fortress,  he,  too,  was  a  Russian. 

Another  thing  which  exasperated  the  Russian 
people  was  the  Government's  treatment  of  the 
Ruthenians.  The  latter,  inhabiting  Galicia,  are 
Little  Russians,  or  Ukrainians.  They  looked  to 
the  coming  of  the  Russians  as  their  deliverance 
from  bondage.  Austria  was  suppressing  their 
cultm'e  and  nationalistic  tendencies.  The  great 
Slavic  nation,  they  thought,  would  bring  them 
freedom  and  opportunity.  But  they  were  sadly 
mistaken.  The  Government  of  Goremykin, 
immediately  after  the  Russian  occupation  of 
Galicia,  despatched  there  a  typical  staff  of 
Russian    tchinovniks,    narrow-minded,    petty, 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

reactionary,  and  ignorant  of  local  conditions. 
They  proceeded  to  make  the  Ruthenians  into 
Russians  with  the  characteristic  methods  of 
Czarism.  They  abolished  the  Little  Russian 
dialect  in  the  schools  and  substituted  Russian. 
They  used  force  to  obliterate  the  Ukrainian 
culture.  The  result  of  these  activities  was  a 
storm  of  indignation  against  the  Government 
on  the  part  of  the  Russian  democracy. 

Even  more  provoking  was  the  attitude  of 
Goremykin's  Cabinet  toward  Poland.  When 
the  Commander-in-Chief,  Grand-Duke  Nicho- 
las, issued  his  historic  manifesto  promising  the 
Poles  reunion  and  autonomy,  both  the  Polish 
and  Russian  peoples  were  profoundly  stirred. 
It  seemed  as  if  the  Government,  after  all,  was 
making  some  concessions  to  the  spirit  of  the 
time.  But  it  was  only  a  misapprehension.  The 
manifesto  of  the  Commander-in-Chief  was 
really  never  supported  by  the  Government.  On 
the  other  hand,  the  latter  was  very  much  op- 
posed to  it.  When  Count  Wielopolsky  came 
to  thank  the  Czar  in  the  name  of  Poland  for  the 
Grand-Duke's  proclamation,  he  read  to  the 
Emperor  a  prepared  document  pointing  out 
an  equitable  solution  of  the  Polish  problem. 
A  copy  of  this  paper  had  been  sent  to  the 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

Emperor.  The  Count,  therefore,  expected  him 
to  be  acquainted  with  the  subject.  But  he  was 
not,  for  the  document  had  never  reached  the 
Czar. 

Count  Wielopolsky  then  asked  the  Emperor 
if  he  would  receive  a  PoHsh  deputation.  Nicho- 
las II.  answered  affirmatively,  adding,  "Arrange 
with  the  Minister  of  the  Court,  Baron  Freder- 
icks, about  the  day  and  the  hour."  The  depu- 
tation was  selected,  some  of  the  members  com- 
ing from  a  distance  for  the  purpose.  Then  the 
Minister  of  the  Interior,  Maklakov,  an  extreme 
reactionary,  interfered.  The  moment,  he  de- 
clared, was  not  opportune  for  such  an  occasion. 
"I  have  given  those  Poles  a  lesson,"  he  said  to 
his  friends,  "that  will  teach  them  not  to  try 
to  get  access  to  the  Emperor  another  time 
without  first  consulting  the  Ministers." 

Such  were  the  policies  of  the  Govermnent 
that  threatened  to  split  its  union  with  the 
democracy  born  of  the  Great  War.  A  small 
group  of  reactionary  bureaucrats  and  function- 
aries saw  the  imminence  of  the  rise  of  a  powerful 
democratic  tide  as  early  as  the  fall  of  1914. 
They  presented  a  note  to  the  Czar  in  which 
attention  was  drawn  to  the  possibility  of  a 
revolution,  and  they  urged  a  separate  peace 

100 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

with  the  Central  Powers.  The  nation  was 
alarmed  by  this  act.  Moscow  was  first  to 
express  its  apprehension  in  a  message  to  the 
Czar.  Many  other  communities  followed.  The 
Emperor  answered  with  a  reassuring  declara- 
tion. Still  the  reptile  press  close  to  the  Minister 
of  the  Interior,  who  believed  with  the  signers  of 
the  note  in  the  necessity  of  a  separate  peace, 
kept  on  criticizing  the  Allies.  Especially  was 
Great  Britain  attacked  in  the  reactionary  sheets. 
Anglophobia  was  fostered  by  them  openly  and 
with  the  evident  encouragement  of  the  authori- 
ties. At  the  same  time  they  continued  their 
customary  denunciation  of  all  that  was  pro- 
gressive and  liberal  in  the  country. 

An  episode  which  inflamed  public  opinion 
greatly  was  the  treatment  of  Vladimir  Burtsev, 
the  noted  revolutionist,  by  the  Government. 
He  lived  as  a  political  refugee  in  Paris  at  the 
beginning  of  the  war.  His  sentiments  were 
ardently  pro-Ally.  He  was  happy  to  see  Russia 
fight  together  with  France  and  England  against 
Prussianism.  The  feeling  of  exaltation  which 
seized  almost  all  Russians  at  the  outbreak  of 
the  great  struggle  gripped  Burtsev  also.  He 
therefore  decided  to  go  back  to  his  native  land, 
in  spite  of  the  fact  that  he  was  a  political  runa- 

101 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

way,  expecting  his  war  views  to  save  him  from 
arrest.  'But  the  poHce  were  ordered  to  arrest 
him  as  soon  as  he  crossed  into  Russia.  While  his 
trial,  which  was  watched  by  the  whole  country, 
was  approaching,  five  Socialist  members  of  the 
Duma  were  arrested  and  subsequently  exiled  to 
Siberia.  Burtsev  was  also  condemned  to  exile. 
Thus  did  the  Government  treat  a  man  who 
came  to  help  it  prosecute  the  war. 

At  about  the  same  time  the  clamor  that  the 
Duma  be  convened  was  satisfied  and  the  pre- 
liminary sessions  of  the  Budget  Committee 
were  attracting  national  attention.  Paul  Miliu- 
kov,  the  leader  of  the  Constitutional  Democrats, 
criticized  the  Government's  retrograde  policies. 
And  still,  in  spite  of  the  obvious  gulf  that  was 
daily  growing  between  the  Government  and 
the  democracy,  the  fiction  of  a  united  Russia 
was  maintained  by  the  bureaucracy.  At  a 
banquet  given  by  Premier  Goremykin,  where 
the  leaders  of  the  Duma  were  present,  toasts 
were  drunk  to  the  bond  that  held  popular  and 
bureaucratic  Russia  together.  As  a  matter  of 
fact,  that  bond  had  even  then  ceased  to  exist 
because  of  the  Cabinet's  policies.  Still  the 
Government  made  an  effort  to  persuade  its 
opponents  that  all  was  well. 

102 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

The  following  session  of  the  Duma,  however, 
dispelled  all  illusions  as  to  the  continued  sup- 
port of  the  Government  by  the  public.  This 
support  was  undermined  by  the  Ministers' 
activities.  The  discontent  in  the  nation  found 
its  expression  in  the  Duma.  The  opposition 
was  intensified  when  the  Russian  armies  began 
to  crumble  before  the  terrific  onslaughts  of  the 
Teuton  drive  of  1915.  The  failure  of  War 
Minister  Sukhomlinov  to  supply  the  army 
with  ammunition  in  spite  of  a  reassuring  state- 
ment he  had  made  to  the  Duma's  Military  Com- 
mittee some  time  previous  resulted  in  universal 
hostility  toward  the  Government.  Under  the 
pressure  of  public  opinion  several  Ministers 
were  retired.  War  Minister  Sukhomlinov  gave 
way  to  General  Polivanov.  The  hated  Minister 
of  Justice,  Stcheglovitov,  was  dismissed  in 
favor  of  Senator  A.  A.  Khvostov.  Minister  of 
the  Interior  Maklakov  was  replaced  by  Prince 
Stcherbatov.  V.  K.  Sabler,  the  reactionary 
Procurator  of  the  Holy  Synod,  was  substituted 
by  A.  D,  Samarin.  As  President  of  the  Imperial 
Council  was  appointed  A.  N.  Kulomzhin. 

These  changes  were  the  beginning  of  that 
constant  but  meaningless  shufiling  of  Ministers 
which  was  a  considerable  factor  in  bringing 

103 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

about  the  revolution.  The  new  appointees  did 
not  signify  a  change  of  policy  in  the  Govern- 
ment, but  a  desire  to  tide  over  a  crisis  which 
was  gi'owing  acute.  The  rapidly  rising  cost  of 
living,  accompanied  with  the  suffering  incident 
to  the  military  disasters,  produced  riots  in 
Moscow,  Petrograd,  Baku,  and  other  cities. 
Tens  of  millions  of  dollars'  worth  of  property 
were  destroyed  in  Moscow,  while  in  Petrograd 
and  Baku  merchants  were  attacked,  their  stores 
looted,  and  the  copper  and  silver  coins  found 
hidden  there  seized.  This  sudden  lack  of  small 
coin,  which  manifested  itseK  during  1915, 
caused  a  real  crisis  for  a  while.  The  copper  and 
silver  coins  disappeared  from  circulation  as  the 
tradesmen  hid  all  the  coins  that  they  could  get. 
The  result  was  that  when  one  wanted  to  buy 
ten  cents'  worth  of  food,  for  instance,  one  had 
to  pay  a  dollar  bill,  as  he  had  no  change  and  as 
the  seller  professed  to  have  none.  This  condi- 
tion was  the  result  of  general  fear  of  the  state's 
financial  collapse. 

In  August,  1915,  the  idea  of  a  united  majority 
in  the  Duma  first  originated  in  Russia.  The 
conservative  fourth  Duma  was  already  full  of 
opponents  of  the  Goremykin  rule.  These  oppo- 
nents, representing  various  shades  of  opinion, 

104 


THE   RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

constituted  a  majority.  The  big  task  was  to 
unite  them  on  the  same  platform  against  the 
existing  Cabinet.  For  several  weeks  negotia- 
tions and  deliberations  among  the  various 
groups  and  factions  of  the  opposition  went  on, 
finally  resulting  in  the  establishment  of  the 
famous  Progressive  Bloc.  At  first  there  were 
signs  that  the  Bloc's  program  (outlined  in 
Chapter  V)  would  be  partly,  at  least,  carried 
out  by  the  Government,  avoiding  all  conflict 
with  the  Duma.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  few 
people  realized  at  the  time  the  meaning  of  the 
fourth  Duma's  rebirth.  It  was  taken  for 
granted  that  the  demands  presented  by  a  body 
which  only  a  year  previous  supported  the 
Government  would  be  conceded  gradually  by 
the  Emperor.  Such  a  process  would  undoubt- 
edly have  satisfied  the  majority  of  the  people. 
But  Goremykin  took  alarm  when  he  became 
acquainted  with  the  Bloc's  program.  His 
Cabinet  was  divided  on  the  issue.  Minister 
of  the  Interior  Prince  Stcherbatov,  Minister 
of  Agriculture  A.  V.  Krivoshein,  Minister  of 
Communications  S.  Rukhlov,  the  Comptroller 
of  the  State,  Kharitonov,  and  the  Procurator 
of  the  Holy  Synod,  A.  Samarin,  were  willing  to 
meet  the  Duma  half-way.    Premier  Goremykin, 

7  105 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

however,  was  adamant  against  even  discussing 
the  program.  He  hurried  to  the  Emperor  to  get 
his  signature  to  a  decree  proroguing  the  Duma. 
In  this  he  succeeded.  The  effect  on  the  country 
was  naturally  disquieting.  Riots  and  strikes 
broke  out  here  and  there.  But  the  progressive 
leaders  appealed  to  the  masses  to  control  their 
passions  and  to  postpone  the  day  of  reckoning. 
How  far  the  change  in  the  nation  in  the 
direction  of  the  opposition  progressed  was  in- 
dicated by  the  elections  to  the  Imperial  Council. 
The  electors  were  universities  and  business  in- 
stitutions. The  progressives  won  everywhere. 
In  spite  of  this,  Goremykin  continued  his  re- 
pressive measures.  The  Ministers  who  favored 
a  rapprochement  with  the  Duma  were  one  by 
one  retired.  The  Duma  session  scheduled  for 
November  14,  1915,  was  postponed.  The 
dissatisfaction  of  the  masses  reached  a  high 
pitch.  Talk  of  revolution  was  in  the  air. 
The  approaching  winter  held  out  few  bright 
promises  to  the  nation.  The  millions  of  refu- 
gees, the  collapsed  army,  the  growing  food 
crisis,  the  treason  in  high  mihtary  circles,  the 
dark  and  portentous  rumors,  the  petty  reac- 
tionism  of  Goremykin,  the  suspension  of  the 
Duma's  session,  all  these  elements  created  an 

106 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

oppressive  atmosphere.  The  leaders  of  public 
opinion  exerted  all  their  energies  to  restrain 
the  popular  discontent.  Exhortations  were 
addressed  to  all  parties  and  classes  by  their 
respective  chiefs.  The  Socialist  leaders  drew 
up  a  remarkable  document,  stating  then*  posi- 
tion and  the  reasons  why  the  labor  class  should 
sacrifice  its  aims  and  even  ordinary  comforts  in 
the  interests  of  a  successful  prosecution  of  the 
war  against  Prussianism.  This  manifesto, 
which  follows,  had  a  tremendous  effect  on 
revolutionary  Russia: 

We,  the  undersigned,  belong  to  the  different  shades  of 
Russian  Socialistic  thought.  We  differ  in  many  things, 
but  we  firmly  agree  in  that  the  defeat  of  Russia  in  her 
struggle  with  Germany  would  mean  her  defeat  in  her 
struggle  for  freedom,  and  we  think  that,  guided  by  this 
conviction,  our  adherents  in  Russia  must  come  together 
for  a  common  service  to  their  people  m  the  hour  of  the 
grave  danger  it  is  now  facing. 

We  address  ourselves  to  the  politically  conscious  work- 
ing-men, peasants,  artisans,  clerks — to  all  of  them  who 
earn  their  bread  in  the  sweat  of  their  brow,  and  who,  suf- 
fering from  the  lack  of  means  and  want  of  political  rights, 
are  strugghng  for  a  better  future,  for  themselves,  for  their 
children  and  for  their  brethren. 

We  are  sending  them  our  hearty  greeting,  and  per- 
sistently ask  them:  Listen  to  us  in  this  fatal  time,  when 
the  enemy,  having  conquered  the  western  strongholds  of 
Russia,  occupied  an  important  part  of  her  territory,  and 
menaces  Kief,  Petrograd,  and  Moscow,  these  most  im- 
portant cepters  of  our  social  life. 

107 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

It  happened  before  to  our  country — to  suffer  from  the 
bloody  horrors  of  a  hostile  invasion.  But  never  before 
did  it  have  to  defend  itself  against  an  enemy  so  well  armed, 
so  skilfully  organized,  so  carefully  prepared  for  his  plunder- 
ing enterprise  as  he  is  now. 

The  position  of  the  country  is  dangerous  to  the  highest 
degree;  therefore  upon  all  of  you,  upon  all  the  politically 
conscious  children  of  the  working  people  of  Russia,  lies 
an  enormous  responsibility. 

"If  you  will  say  to  yourselves  that  it  is  immaterial  to 
you  and  to  your  less  developed  brothers  as  to  who  will 
win  in  this  great  international  collision  going  on  now,  and 
if  you  will  act  accordingly,  Russia  will  be  crushed  by  Ger- 
many. And  when  Russia  will  be  crushed  by  Germany  it 
will  fare  badly  with  the  Allies.  This  does  not  need  any 
demonstration. 

But  if,  on  the  contrary,  you  will  hold  the  conviction 
that  the  defeat  of  Russia  will  reflect  badly  upon  the  in- 
terests of  her  working  population,  and  if  you  will  help 
the  self-defense  of  our  country  with  all  your  forces,  our 
country  and  her  allies  will  escape  the  terrible  danger 
menacing  them. 

Therefore,  go  deeply  into  the  situation.  You  will  make 
a  great  mistake  if  you  will  imagine  that  the  working  people 
do  not  need  to  defend  our  country.  In  reality,  nobody's 
interests  suffer  more  terribly  from  the  invasion  of  an  enemy 
than  the  interests  of  the  working  population. 

Take,  for  instance,  the  Franco-Prussian  War  of  1870-71. 
When  the  Germans  had  besieged  Paris  and  the  prices  on 
all  stuffs  of  first  necessity  had  risen  there  enormously  it 
was  clear  that  the  poor  suffered  much  more  from  it  than 
the  rich.  In  the  same  way,  when  Germany  exacted  five 
milliards  of  contribution  from  vanquished  France  this 
sum,  in  the  final  count,  was  paid  by  the  poor;  for  paying 
that  contribution,  indirect  taxation  was  greatly  raised, 
the  burden  of  which  nearly  entirely  falls  upon  the  lower 
classes. 

More  than  that.  The  most  dangerous  consequence  to 
108 


THE   RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

France,  due  to  her  defeat  in  1870-71,  was  the  retardation 
of  her  economic  development.  In  other  words,  the  defeat 
of  France  badly  reflected  upon  the  contemporary  history 
of  her  people,  and,  even  more,  upon  her  entire  subsequent 
development. 

The  defeat  of  Russia  by  Germany  will  much  more  injure 
our  people  than  the  defeat  of  France  injured  the  French 
people.  The  war  causes  now  an  incredibly  large  expendi- 
ture. It  is  more  difficult  for  Russia,  a  country  economic- 
ally backward,  to  bear  that  expenditure  than  for  the 
wealthy  states  of  western  Europe.  The  back  of  Russia, 
even  before  the  war,  was  burdened  with  a  heavy  state 
loan.  Now,  this  debt  is  growing  by  the  hours,  and  vast 
regions  of  Russia  are  subject  to  wholesale  devastation. 

If  the  Germans  will  win  the  final  victory,  they  will 
demand  of  us  an  enormous  contribution,  in  comparison 
with  which  the  streams  of  gold  that  poured  into  victorious 
Germany  from  vanquished  France,  after  the  war  of  1871, 
will  seem  a  mere  trifle. 

But  that  v/ill  not  be  all.  The  most  consequent  and 
frank  heralds  of  German  imperialism  are  saying  even  now 
that  it  is  necessary  to  exact  from  Russia  the  cession  of 
important  territory,  which  should  be  cleared  from  the 
present  population  for  the  greater  convenience  of  German 
settlers.  Never  before  have  plunderers,  dreaming  of 
spoiling  a  conquered  people,  displayed  such  cynical 
heartlessness ! 

But  for  our  vanquishers  it  will  not  be  enough  to  exact 
an  unheard-of  enormous  contribution  and  tear  up  our 
western  borderlands.  Already,  in  1904,  Russia,  being  in 
a  difficult  situation,  was  obliged  to  conclude  with  Ger- 
many a  commercial  treaty  very  disadvantageous  to  her- 
self. The  treaty  hindered  at  the  same  time  the  develop- 
ment of  our  agriculture  and  the  progress  of  our  industries. 
It  affected,  with  equal  disadvantage,  the  interests  of  the 
farmers  as  well  as  those  engaged  in  industries.  It  is  easy 
to  imagine  what  kind  of  a  treaty  victorious  German  im- 
perialism would  impose  upon  us.  In  economic  matters, 
109 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

Russia  would  become  a  German  colony.  Russia's  further 
economic  development  would  be  greatly  hindered,  if  not 
stopped.  The  farmers,  forced  out  of  their  country  homes 
by  stress,  will  face  the  possibility  of  finding  themselves 
piteous  tramps.  Degeneration  and  deprivation  would  be 
the  result  of  German  victory  to  an  important  part  of  the 
Russian  working  people. 

What  will  German  victory  bring  to  western  Europe? 
After  all  "we  have  already  said  it  is  needless  to  expatiate 
on  how  many  unmerited  economic  calamities  it  will  bring 
to  the  working  population  of  the  western  countries  allied 
to  Russia.  We  wish  to  draw  attention  to  the  follow- 
ing: England,  France,  even  Belgium  and  Italy,  are  in  a 
political  sense  far  ahead  of  the  German  Empire,  which 
has  not  as  yet  grown  up  to  a  pariiamentary  regime. 
German  victory .  over  those  countries  would  be  the 
victory  of  the  old  over  the  new,  and  if  the  democratic 
ideal  is  dear  to  you,  you  must  wish  success  to  our 
western  allies. 

Indifference  to  the  issue  of  this  war  would  be  for  us  equal 
to  a  political  suicide.  The  most  important,  the  most  vital 
interests  of  the  proletariat  and  of  the  farming  population 
demand  of  you  an  active  participation  in  the  defense  of 
the  country.  .  .  .  Your  watchword  must  be  victory  over 
the  foreign  enemy.  In  an  active  trend  toward  such  vic- 
tory the  live  forces  of  the  people  will  become  free  and 
strong. 

Obedient  to  this  watchword,  you  must  be  as  subtle  as 
serpents.  Although  in  your  hearts  may  bum  the  flame 
of  noble  indignation,  in  your  heads  must  reign  invariably 
cold,  political  reckoning.  You  must  know  that  zeal 
without  reason  is  sometimes  worse  than  complete  indif- 
ference. Every  fit  of  agitation  in  the  rear  of  the  army, 
fighting  against  the  enemy,  would  be  equal  in  its  meaning 
to  high  treason,  as  it  would  be  a  service  to  the  foreign 
enemy. 

The  thunders  of  war  certainly  cannot  make  the  Russian 
suppliers  more  disinterested  than  they  were  in  the  time  of 
110 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

peace,  in  the  distribution  of  numerous  orders,  inevitable 
at  the  mobilization  of  the  industry;  gentlemen  enter- 
prisers will,  as  they  are  accustomed  to,  take  great  care  of 
the  interests  of  capital,  but  will  not  take  care  of  the  inter- 
ests of  hired  labor.  You  will  be  entirely  right  by  getting 
indignant  at  their  conduct.  But  in  all  cases,  whenever 
you  may  like  to  answer  by  a  strike,  you  must  first  think 
if  such  action  would  not  be  detrimental  to  the  cause  of  the 
defense  of  Russia. 

The  private  must  be  subject  to  the  general.  The 
working-men  of  each  factory  must  remember  that  they 
would  commit,  without  any  doubt,  the  greatest  mistake, 
if,  considering  only  their  own  interests,  they  forgot  how 
severely  the  interests  of  the  entire  Russian  proletariat  and 
farming  class  would  suffer  from  German  victory. 

The  tactics  which  can  be  defined  by  Ihe  motto  "All  or 
nothing"  are  tactics  of  anarchy,  fully  unworthy  of  the 
conscious  representatives  of  the  proletariat  and  peasantry. 
The  General  Staff  of  the  German  army  would  greet  with 
great  pleasure  the  news  that  such  tactics  were  adopted 
by  us.  Believe  us  that  this  staff  is  ready  to  help  all  who 
would  like  to  preach  it  in  our  country.  They  want  the 
troubles  in  Russia,  they  want  strikes  in  England,  they 
want  everything  that  would  facilitate  the  fulfilment  of 
their  conquering  schemes. 

But  you  will  not  make  them  rejoice.  You  will  not  for- 
get the  words  of  our  great  fabulist,  "What  an  enemy  ad- 
vises is  surely  bad."  You  must  insist  that  all  your  repre- 
sentatives take  the  most  active  part  in  all  organizations 
created  now  under  the  pressure  of  public  opinion  for  the 
struggle  with  the  foreign  foe.  Your  representatives  must, 
if  possible,  take  part  not  only  in  the  work  of  the  special 
technical  organizations,  such  as  the  War  Industries  Com- 
mittees, which  have  been  created  for  the  needs  of  the  army, 
but  as  well  in  all  other  organizations  of  social  and  political 
character. 

The  situation  is  such  that  we  cannot  achieve  freedom 
in  any  other  way  than  the  way  of  national  defense, 
lU 


THE   RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

While  pressure  was  exerted  on  the  masses 
not  to  rise,  a  determined  effort  was  made  to 
oust  Goremykin.  The  President  of  the  Duma, 
Rodzianko,  addressed  a  bold  letter  to  the  senile 
Premier,  holding  him  responsible  for  the  grave 
condition  in  which  the  country  found  itself. 
"If,  at  your  advanced  age,"  wrote  Rodzianko, 
"you  no  longer  have  the  vigor  necessary  to  deal 
with  so  difficult  a  situation,  at  least  be  man 
enough  to  vacate  your  post,  and  make  way  for 
another  with  more  youth  and  energy  on  his 
side."  The  result  of  this  letter  was  the  resig- 
nation of  Goremykin. 
J 


VIII 

THE   DARK   FORCES 

BEHIND  the  arena  where  the  struggle  be- 
tween autocracy  and  democracy  was  being 
waged  a  mysterious  figure  began  to  make  it- 
self felt  in  the  winter  of  1915-16.  About  this 
figure  clustered  a  group  of  silhouettes  destined 
to  go  down  in  history  under  the  designation 
of  the  "  dark  forces."  Pregnant  as  the  elements 
in  the  contest  between  the  Russian  bureaucracy 
and  people  were,  it  is  doubtful  if  they  would 
have  led  to  revolution  had  it  not  been  for  these 
dark  forces.  It  is  certain  that  the  old  regime 
could  have  held  out  much  longer  had  it  only 
put  up  a  clean  fight.  But  Czarism  was  too 
corrupt,  degenerate,  and  uncivilized  for  that. 
Essentially  medieval  in  character,  it  suffered 
from  all  the  vices  of  a  monarchy  of  the  Dark 
Ages.  Superstition,  prejudice,  cowardice,  and  , 
ignorance   dominated   and   permeated   it.     In 

these  circumstances  it  was  very  easy  for  a 

US 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

religious  impostor  to  gain  access  to  the  Court 
and  become  there  a  powerful  influence.  Such 
was  the  career  of  the  man  who  was  the  leading 
figure  of  the  dark  forces.  He  became  known 
as  the  monk  Rasputin,  and  since  his  activities 
were  closely  knit  with  the  fortunes  of  Russia 
during  the  fifteen  months  preceding  the  revolu- 
tion, his  remarkable  story  really  forms  a  vital 
part  of  the  history  of  Russia  anteceding  the 
overthrow  of  Czarism. 

Gregory  Novikh  was  born  in  the  village  of 
Pokrovsky,  county  of  Tinmen,  Siberia,  in  the 
year  1873.  The  son  of  a  common  muzhik, 
Gregory  was  absolutely  uneducated  and  illit- 
erate. It  was  only  late  in  his  life,  when  he 
became  a  power  in  the  Court,  that  he  learned 
to  scrawl  most  ungrammatically  and  unin- 
telligibly. His  father  was  a  fisherman,  and  he 
pursued  at  first  the  same  occupation.  He 
early  showed  himself  to  be  a  degenerate  even 
in  his  native  village.  He  acquired  the  reputa- 
tion of  a  drunkard  and  a  rogue.  His  disorderly 
behavior  made  him  the  outcast  of  the  com- 
munity. A  number  of  times  he  was  caught 
stealing,  and  punished  by  the  village  court. 
Even  as  late  as  1917,  the  year  of  his  death, 
there    were    still    criminal    charges    standing 

m 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

against  him  in  the  courts.  His  fellow-peasants 
nicknamed  him  Grishka,  which  is  a  contemptu- 
ous form  of  Gregory,  and  under  this  name  he 
became  widely  known  throughout  the  land. 
Cartoonists  and  feuilletonists  made  Grishka  the 
subject  of  their  productions,  but  did  not  dare  to 
mention  the  name  Rasputin,  by  which  Novikh 
had  become  known.  Rasputin  means  a  rake, 
a  libertine,  a  morally  irresponsible  person. 
Novikh  was  called  Rasputin  for  his  frivolous 
conduct,  but  he  evidently  liked  the  name  so 
much  that  he  adopted  it  instead  of  his  original 
name.  And  under  this  new  nickname  he  pro- 
ceeded to  build  his  amazing,  almost  stupefying 
career  of  an  omnipotent  power  behind  the 
throne. 

There  are  in  Russia  thousands  of  wanderers 
who,  under  the  disguise  of  holy  pilgrims,  collect 
alms  for  various  so-called  sacred  purposes. 
These  "pilgrims"  are  treated  by  the  peasants 
as  saints,  and  their  word  is  accepted  as  in- 
spired from  above.  In  reality,  most  of  these 
"saints"  are  rascals  of  first  degree,  indulging 
in  horrible  vices  and  appropriating  all  their 
collections  for  their  own  use.  Some  of  them 
have  in  the  past  founded  sects  which  were  de- 
voted to  sensuous  practices  under  the  cloak  of 

115 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

religion.  These  sects  have  penetrated  even 
some  of-  the  monasteries  of  the  Orthodox 
Church,  where  immorality  was  practised  in 
most  abhorrent  forms.  It  was  with  some  such 
kind  of  a  monastery  that  Gregory  Rasputin 
first  came  in  contact.  After  this  Rasputin  left 
his  fisherman's  job  for  an  easier  life.  He  became 
a  professional  pilgrim,  collecting  money  for 
various  holy  enterprises,  but  appropriating  it 
for  his  own  use. 

With  his  collections  Rasputin  established 
himself  in  his  village  as  a  well-to-do,  pleasure- 
loving  peasant,  seeking  especially  the  company 
of  women.  He  married  and  became  the  father 
of  a  boy  and  two  girls.  He  built  a  large  house, 
where  three  rooms  were  occupied  by  his  family, 
while  the  remaining  eight  rooms  were  reserved 
for  his  "devotees"  or  mistresses.  Under  a 
religious  cloak,  conforming  to  certain  teachings 
propounded  by  Rasputin,  abominable  things 
were  practised  there. 

Rasputin's  power  over  women  seemed  almost 
superhuman.  From  princesses  to  the  humblest 
peasants,  the  fair  sex  succumbed  to  his  influence. 
His  neighbors  complained  to  the  authorities 
about  his  pursuits.  He  was  severely  beaten  on 
several  occasions.     On  his  pilgrimages  he  fre- 

116 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

quently  encountered  trouble  because  of  his 
misconduct.  In  spite  of  all  that,  his  reputation 
as  a  "saint"  grew  steadily,  increasing  especially 
after  visits  to  the  capital. 

Women  of  noble  birth,  wives  and  daughters 
of  the  great,  visited  Rasputin  in  his  village. 
He  taught  them  that  part  of  his  body  was 
divine,  and  that  to  be  purged  of  sin  it  was 
necessary  to  unite  with  him  spiritually  and 
physically.  It  was  astounding  how  popular 
Rasputin  became  in  high  feminine  society.  His 
despicable  manners  did  not  seem  to  offend  the 
titled  aristocrats  who  invited  him  to  their 
homes.  Influential  officials  later  sought  his 
company  at  the  expense  of  his  abominable 
liberties  with  their  wives  or  daughters.  Like 
an  animal,  he  ate  with  his  fingers  and  his  dis- 
ciples would  often  lick  them  clean  at  his  com- 
mand. The  men  among  his  followers  were 
mostly  seekers  for  high  offices,  who  would 
sacrifice  almost  anything  to  ingratiate  them- 
selves with  the  muzhik  who  was  becoming  a 
powerful  influence  behind  the  throne. 

"The  fascination  of  the  man  lay  altogether 

in  his  eyes,"  wrote  a  newspaper  correspondent. 

Otherwise  he  looked  simply  a  common  muzhik, 

with  no  beauty  to  distinguish  him;    a  sturdy 
117 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

rogue,  overgrown  with  a  forest  of  dirty,  un- 
kempt hair,  dirty  in  person  (dirt  is  holiness  in 
some  coimtries),  and  disgusting  in  habits.  His 
language  oscillated  between  the  stock-in-trade 
odds  and  ends  of  Scripture  and  mystic  writ  and 
the  foulest  vocabulary  of  Russian,  which  of  all 
white  men's  tongues  is  the  most  powerful  in  the 
expression  of  love  and  affection  and  of  abomi- 
nable abuse.  But  the  eyes  of  this  satyr  were 
remarkable — cold,  steely  gray,  with  that  very 
rare  power  of  expanding  and  contracting  the 
pupils  at  will  regardless  of  the  amount  of  light 
present.  He  possessed  without  doubt  the  very 
strong  natural  hypnotic  powers  which  seem 
always  to  go  with  that  peculiarity.  It  was  this 
that  in  the  first  place  differentiated  Grishka 
Rasputin  from  the  hundreds  of  other  "holy" 
rascals  of  erotic  type  known  to  history  and  in 
daily  life  in  that  unfathomable  land  of  Russia. 
To  the  Court  Rasputin  was  introduced  in 
1905  as  the  creator  of  a  new  religious  cult. 
The  monk  soon  acquired  tremendous  influence 
over  the  Czar  and  the  Czarina.  His  influence 
over  the  Empress  was  greatly  enhanced  by  his 
pretensions  to  wield  a  miraculous  power  over  the 
well-being  of  the  Grand-Duke  Alexis,  the  heir 
to  the  Russian  throne.    The  Grand-Duke  was 

U8 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

suffering  from  an  illness  which  was  declared 
incurable  by  some  of  the  leading  physicians 
of  Europe.  Rasputin  had  a  close  colleague 
and  friend  in  Madame  Virubova,  the  favorite 
lady-in-waiting  to  the  Czarina.  In  order  to 
prove  his  divine  power,  Rasputin  would  leave 
the  Court  occasionally,  his  departure  always 
being  accompanied  by  the  apparent  sinking 
of  the  Grand-Duke's  health.  The  secret  of 
this  effect  on  the  young  Alexis  was  only  dis- 
closed after  the  revolution.  Madame  Viru- 
bova would  mix  a  harmful  powder  in  the 
Grand-Duke's  food  during  the  absence  of  Ras- 
putin. The  Czarina,  the  Czar,  and  all  those 
who  came  in  contact  with  the  Court  were 
unable  to  explain  the  strange  phenomena  in 
the  condition  of  the  ill  Alexis.  The  only  ex- 
planation was  that  Rasputin  was  possessed  of 
some  occult  power.  It  was  but  natural  for  the 
Czarina,  under  the  circumstances,  to  have  im- 
plicit faith  in  the  holiness  of  the  impostor. 
Rasputin  became  a  member  of  the  Czar's  house- 
hold. He  came  and  went  whenever  he  pleased. 
The  Imperial  Guard,  responsible  for  the  safety 
of  the  royal  family,  was  also  held  responsible 
for  the  well-being  of  Gregory.  His  influence 
grew  to  such  an  extent  that  he  began  to  inter- 

119 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

fere  with  the  affairs  of  the  Church.  When,  for 
instance}  a  friend  of  his  was  condemned  by  the 
Holy  Synod  to  exile  in  a  remote  monastery, 
Rasputin  intervened  in  his  behalf,  with  tlie  re- 
sult that  an  imperial  ukase  was  issued  ordering 
the  Synod  to  reconvene  and  nullify  its  own 
decision.  This  was  perhaps  the  first  case  of 
its  kind  in  modern  Russian  history.  No  crime 
was  punishable  if  the  criminal  could  only  win 
Rasputin's  favor.  Decisions  of  Governors,  Min- 
isters, high  Church  dignitaries  were  made  void 
as  if  by  magic.  This  continued,  with  inter- 
missions, for  several  years.  In  1912  Alexander 
Gutchkov,anOctobrist  and  therefore  a  monarch- 
ist, spoke  of  Rasputin  from  the  tribune  of  the 
Duma  as  follows: 

"You  all  know  the  oppressive  drama  which 
Russia  is  living  through.  With  pain  in  our 
hearts,  with  horror  we  follow  its  climaxes.  In 
the  center  of  this  drama  is  a  mysterious  tragi- 
comic figm^e,  an  apparition  of  the  Dark  Ages,  a 
weird  figure  in  the  light  of  the  twentieth  cen- 
tury. What  were  the  means  by  which  this  in- 
dividual reached  his  dominating  position,  exert- 
ing a  power  before  which  the  highest  dignitaries 
in  the  Government  and  the  Church  bow.'*  .  .  • 
Behind  him  there  is  a  whole  band  of  charlatans, 

120 


THE   RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

who  are  buying  his  good  graces  and  favors; 
greedy  adventurers  seeking  power;  dark  specu- 
lators and  bankrupt  journalists.  This  enter- 
prising company  skilfully  and  cunningly  plays 
its  game.  It  is  our  duty  to  cry  out  that  the 
Church  is  in  danger  and  that  the  State  is  in 
danger.  No  revolutionary  and  anti-Church 
propaganda  could  accomplish  as  much  as  this 
sinister  coalition." 

All-powerful  Prime  Ministers  tried  to  get  rid 
of  the  pernicious  monk,  but  met  with  no  suc- 
cess. The  crafty  Siberian  muzhik  surrounded 
himself  with  a  number  of  political  charlatans 
and  functionaries  who  paid  their  respects  to 
him  in  order  to  win  his  good- will.  Not  long 
before  the  beginning  of  the  Great  War  Premier 
Kokovtsov  succeeded  in  having  Rasputin  ban- 
ished from  the  Court.  But  through  the  in- 
fluence of  his  friend  Virubova  and  others  he 
was  returned.  Kokovtsov  was  retired  with 
remarkable  promptness.  The  Assistant  Min- 
ister of  the  Interior,  head  of  the  Imperial 
Police,  Dzhunkovsky,  once  knocked  Rasputin 
down  for  his  rough  and  impudent  behavior 
toward  him.  Dzhunkovsky  was  immediately 
dismissed.  The  Procurator  of  the  Holy  Synod, 
Samarin,  showed  a  disposition  toward  purging 

8  121 


THE   RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

the  Orthodox  Church  of  the  sinister  influences 
permeating  it.  He  was  retired  very  soon  after 
his  appointment.  Perhaps  the  Czar  himself 
would  have  dispensed  with  Rasputin,  but  to 
the  Czarina  the  monk  became  the  very  soul  of 
existence.  She  really  believed  that  he  was  a 
saint,  a  divine  missionary  sent  to  save  her  son. 
She  would  listen  to  no  stories  about  him,  con- 
sidering them  all  inventions  of  enemies  due  to 
jealousy  of  his  high  position.  Rasputin  per- 
suaded the  Czarina  that  in  case  of  his  being 
killed  her  only  son,  the  Grand-Duke  Alexis, 
would  also  expire.  It  became  a  byword  in 
Russian  high  spheres  that  "better  have  one 
Rasputin  than  ten  fits  of  hysteria."  These 
words  were  once  uttered  by  the  Czar.  For  the 
Czarina  would  become  hysterical  as  soon  as 
the  monk  was  threatened  with  removal  from 
the  Court. 

Thus  it  came  to  pass  that  a  morally  degen- 
erate Siberian  peasant  wielded  the  power  of  an 
emperor  in  Russia.  His  whims,  however  petu- 
lant and  fanciful,  would  be  satisfied.  But  up 
to  the  end  of  1915  Rasputin  never  used  his  vast 
influence  in  the  molding  of  Russia's  internal 
and  foreign  policies.  Swindlers  would  get  all 
they  wanted  through  him  for  adequate  com- 

122 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

pensation.  Tchinovniks  would  receive  high 
appointments,  bishops  would  be  elevated  and 
their  enemies  degraded  through  his  machina- 
tions.   But  the  general  life  of  the  country  was 


THEY  WHO  SEEK  SHALL  FIND 


left  alone  by  the  crafty  impostor.  That  was 
why  the  Russian  people  regarded  him  only  with 
amusement  up  to  the  outbreak  of  the  war. 
They  felt  that  he  was  but  another  proof  of 
the  imbecility  of  Czarism.  With  the  passing 
away  of  the  old  order  Rasputin  would  become 
impossible.  They  never  dreamed  that  this 
monk  was  destined  to  stage  the  greatest  trag- 
edy in  the  life  of  the  Russian  nation. 

The   Russian    autocracy    and    part   of    the 
bureaucracy,  to  whom  the  interests  of  absolute 

123 


THE   RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

ism  were  above  those  of  patriotism,  realized 
soon  after  Russia  entered  the  Great  War 
that  it  was  a  war  for  democracy.  To  fight 
Prussianism,  they  soon  perceived,  meant  to 
fight  Czarism.  The  war  had  given  powerful 
impetus  to  the  democratic  forces  of  the  country. 
Its  continuation  and  victorious  conclusion 
spelled  nothing  but  the  doom  of  absolutism  in 
Russia  and  in  Europe.  The  defeat  of  Russia,  or 
the  victory  of  the  Central  Powers,  therefore 
became  essential  in  the  eyes  of  the  reactionary 
bureaucrats  and  Court  functionaries.  There 
were  not  many  of  these.  The  larger  part  of  the 
bureaucracy  stood  for  victory  and  the  crush- 
ing of  Prussianism.  But  the  Teutonic  Russians 
in  the  Czar's  Court,  together  with  a  hundred  or 
so  of  the  most  extreme  reactionary  and  Black 
Hundreds  leaders,  began  to  advocate  a  separate 
peace  for  Russia.  This  movement  had  gained 
no  momentum  before  the  end  of  the  summer  of 
1915.  It  was  only  after  the  terrible  military 
disasters  in  Poland  and  Lithuania  that  the 
separate-peace  group  commenced  to  show  signs 
of  activity.  And  who  but  Rasputin  could 
have  served  them  as  a  tool  in  their  sinister 
schemes.^  Rasputin  was  closer  to  the  Czar  and 
Czarina  than  any  of  them.     It  was  only  nec- 

124 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

essary  to  convert  him  to  the  idea  of  a  separate 
peace  in  order  to  get  control  of  the  Govern- 
ment reins.  How  this  was  accompHshed  does 
not  really  matter.  Rasputin  may  have  been 
bribed  by  the  pro-German  plotters  or  he  may 
have  been  honestly  convinced  that  the  inter- 
ests of  the  country  demanded  the  conclusion 
of  a  separate  peace  with  Germany.  The 
fact  is  that  Rasputin  did  come  to  work 
for  the  Germanophile  elements.  He  found  in 
the  Czarina  a  willing  convert,  as  she  was,  before 
her  marriage,  a  German  princess.  Rasputin 
therefore  changed  his  traditional  policy.  He 
began  to  use  his  enormous  influence  in  matters 
of  vital  importance  to  the  Russian  people  as 
well  as  to  the  entire  human  race.  It  was  at  this 
stage  of  the  war  that  the  great  drama  of  Rus- 
sian life,  the  struggle  between  Czarism  and 
democracy,  began  to  assume  a  sharply  defined 
form.  On  one  hand  were  the  pro-German  dark 
forces;  on  the  other,  liberal,  progressive,  and 
enlightened  Russia. 

The  leading  figures  associated  with  Rasputin 
were  the  Petrograd  Metropolitan,  Pitirim,  the 
chief  dignitary  of  the  Orthodox  Church,  and 
Manasevitch-Manuilov,  a  swindler  of  inter- 
national reputation,  whose  part  in  the  events 

125 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

leading  up  to  the  Russian  revolution  was  by 
no  means  inconsiderable. 

The  "king  of  swindlers"  is  the  term  with 
which  the  Russian  press  characterized  Manu- 
ilov.  His  past  certainly  warrants  such  a  de- 
scription. As  far  back  as  1895  he  was  com- 
mandeered by  the  police  department  to  Paris 
to  act  as  a  spy  on  the  notorious  Ratchkovsky. 
The  latter,  it  will  be  recalled,  was  the  head  of 
the  Russian  secret  service  in  France,  whose 
activities  were  wholly  devoted  to  espionage 
work  in  connection  with  the  Russian  revolu- 
tionary movement. 

Next  Manuilov  was  sent  to  Rome  to  watch 
for  the  Catholic  priests  arriving  from  Russia  to 
the  Pope.  He  established  connections  with 
some  individuals  close  to  the  Vatican,  and  de- 
manded enormous  sums  from  the  Russian 
Government  as  rewards  to  his  informants.  In 
reality,  however,  he  pocketed  the  money  him- 
self, giving  the  agents  little  remuneration.  The 
latter,  convinced  that  the  fabulous  sums  prom- 
ised by  Manuilov  for  their  work  would  never 
be  paid  to  them,  raised  such  a  public  scandal 
that  Manuilov  had  to  be  recalled. 

One  of  his  most  brilliant  acts  was  perpetrated 
during  the  Russo-Japanese  War.    He  got  hold 

126 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

of  the  key  to  a  Japanese  secret  code,  which 
enabled  him  to  furnish  the  Russian  Govern- 
ment some  very  valuable  information.  The 
Japanese  authorities,  however,  soon  discovered 
that  their  code  was  known  in  Russia,  and 
changed  it.  Manuilov,  facing  the  loss  of  large 
sums  of  money,  which  he  received  in  return 
for  his  Japanese  despatches,  continued  to  supply 
the  Russian  Government  with  false  information 
fabricated  by  himself.  He  did  this  till  the  con- 
clusion of  the  war,  going  sometimes  as  far  as 
photographing  pages  of  a  Chinese  dictionary 
and  substituting  them  for  the  would-be  Japanese 
documents. 

When  this  was  discovered  by  the  authorities 
it  seemed  that  Manuilov's  career  would  be 
ended  quickly  by  a  military  court.  But  here 
Rasputin's  influence  interfered.  Manuilov  and 
Rasputin  were  already  friends.  The  latter 
was  even  then,  in  1906,  a  power  in  the  Court. 
The  result  was  that  Manuilov  for  his  criminal 
activities  was  punished  only  with  dismissal 
from  the  service  of  the  state. 

Manuilov  then  began  exploiting  his  connec- 
tion with  the  Court  for  all  kinds  of  illegal  and 
dark  purposes.  He  openly  boasted  to  all  those 
who  came  in  contact  with  him  that  he  occupied 
1%1 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

a'  very  high  secret  post  in  the  Government, 
that  all  the  Ministers  were  at  his  service,  that  he 
was  a  frequent  visitor  in  Tsarskoye  Selo  (the 
Czar's  residence),  and  that  for  a  "decent" 
reward  he  could  obtain  anything. 

His  fame  soon  spread  far  and  wide.  Tchinov- 
niks  who  wanted  promotion  paid  secret  visits 
to  him.  Criminals  condemned  for  participation 
in  pogroms  came  to  him  to  seek  pardon  from 
the  Czar.  All  kinds  of  speculators  and  mys- 
terious agents  did  their  work  through  him. 
Jews  who  sought  right  of  residence  paid  Manu- 
ilov  huge  sums  for  it.  Men  who  wanted  to  es- 
cape military  service  came  to  seek  his  aid. 

Manuilov's  connections  were  so  powerful  that 
he  was  in  a  position  to  obtain  everything  he 
wanted.  His  clients  were  therefore  satisfied. 
He  would  divide  the  large  bribes  he  received 
from  them  with  high  tchinovniks.  Some 
Cabinet  Ministers  were  his  collaborators.  He 
always  dominated  the  latter,  as  they  knew  of 
his  connection  with  Rasputin.  The  good-will 
of  Rasputin  was,  of  course,  necessary  to  the 
security  of  their  positions. 

The  reports  of  Manuilov's  activities  finally 
grew  so  much  in  volume  as  to  develop  into  a 
public  scandal.    Rumors  of  the  illegal  transac- 

\^ 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

tions  of  some  of  the  highest  officers  in  the 
Government  filled  the  air.  They  reached 
Stolypin,  the  Premier.  He  ordered  a  secret 
investigation  of  the  whole  affair.  When  the 
full  report  of  Manuilov's  busy  career  was  laid 
before  the  powerful  Prime  Minister  he  affixed 
to  it  the  following  terse  order,  "It  is  time  to 
finish  this  rascal." 

But  the  all-powerful  Stolypin,  the  man  who 
suppressed  with  his  iron  hand  the  Russian 
revolution,  was  not  strong  enough  to  "finish" 
Manuilov.  He  ordered  the  judicial  authorities 
to  take  up  the  case.  As  a  result  of  the  investi- 
gation that  followed  it  became  known  that  the 
case  of  Manuilov  involved  two  Assistant  Min- 
isters, the  head  of  the  secret  service.  General 
Gerasimovitch,  some  oflScers  of  the  Czar's 
bodyguard,  and  others.  Rasputin's  influence 
was  exerted  in  their  behalf.  An  imperial  decree 
was  issued  which  put  an  end  to  the  prosecution 
of  Manuilov  started  by  Stolypin. 

A  close  collaborator  of  Rasputin  and  Madame 
Virubova  was  General  Voyeykov,  commandant 
of  the  Imperial  Headquarters.  General  Voyey- 
kov was  bitterly  assailed  in  the  Duma  by 
Deputy  Purishkevitch.  The  answer  of  the 
Czar  to  this  criticism  was  not  the  dismissal  of 

129 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

the  General,  but  a  rescript  full  of  flattery  and 
thanks  for  his  services. 

On  the  same  day  an  Imperial  rescript  was 
addressed  to  Pitirim,  in  which  the  Emperor 
eulogized  the  noble  virtues  of  that  dark  prelate. 
Both  documents  were  issued  on  the  anniversary 
of  the  Czar's  name  day,  in  1916,  when  all 
Russia  expected  a  decree  granting  reforms,  and 
produced  an  exasperating  effect. 

The  story  of  the  ring  of  the  dark  figures 
around  the  Emperor  would  not  be  complete 
without  the  name  of  Baron  Fredericks,  Minister 
of  the  Court.  A  Baltic  German,  Baron  Freder- 
icks was  a  Prussian  junker  to  the  very  core. 
Perhaps  no  other  single  personality  was  respon- 
sible for  the  course  of  the  career  of  Nicholas  II. 
to  such  an  extent  as  Baron  Fredericks.  He 
accompanied  the  Emperor  everywhere  and 
wielded  tremendous  influence  over  him.  Nar- 
row-minded, rigid,  petty,  tyrannical,  and  char- 
acteristically Teutonic,  Baron  Fredericks  was 
essentially  opposed  to  any  progress,  reforma- 
tion, and  freedom. 

It  happened  more  than  once  that  a  Minister 
took  to  the  Emperor  a  project  for  reform.  The 
Emperor  would  approve  of  the  measure.  After 
the  Minister  left  the  Czar  would  tell  of  it  to 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

Baron  Fredericks.  The  latter  would  seize  his 
own  head  and  cry  out  in  horror,  "What  did  you 
do?"  Whereupon  the  Czar  would  get  fright- 
ened, imagining  that  his  reform  would  under- 
mine his  throne,  and  revoke  his  decision. 

Nicholas  II.,  who  was  born  in  1868,  was  not 
endowed  by  nature  with  the  talents  necessary 
to  successfully  rule  such  an  empire  ^s  Russia. 
He  was  short  in  stature,  nervous,  weak-willed, 
and  of  a  cowardly  disposition.  His  elaborate 
education  did  not  enhance  his  low  virility.  In 
addition,  he  suffered  from  the  effects  of  a  wound 
inflicted  on  his  head  by  a  Japanese  during  his 
journey  in  the  Far  East  in  1891,  when  he  was 
still  a  Czarevitch. 

Nicholas  II.  began  his  reign  with  a  statement 
that  marked  him  as  an  extreme  autocrat.  A 
deputation  of  Zemstvo  leaders  from  the  province 
of  Tver  went  to  ask  the  young  Czar  for  reforms. 
His  reply  was  that  they  should  drop  those 
"foolish  dreams."  But  his  initiative  in  or- 
ganizing a  conference  at  The  Hague  for  the 
creation  of  a  basis  for  international  peace,  as 
well  as  his  democratic  behavior  in  the  early 
days  of  his  reign,  gave  him  the  reputation  of  a 
progressive.  In  reality,  however,  he  was  a 
despot  to  the  last  fiber  of  his  constitution. 

131 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

"In  every  fold  of  this  little  man's  royal 
mantle  there  is  the  autocrat,"  said  the  Grand 
Duchess  Maria  Pavlova,  referring  to  Nicholas 
II.  These  words,  uttered  soon  after  his  ascen- 
sion to  the  throne,  proved  true.  Petty  and 
shrewd,  with  the  elementary  craftiness  of  tlie 
muzhik,  Nicholas  11.  was  also  jealous  and 
cynical. 

His  Ministers  were  nonentities  not  only  be- 
cause of  his  inability  to  choose  big  men,  but 
because  he  disliked  strong  personalities.  His 
hatred  for  Stolypin,  the  powerful  Prime  Minis- 
ter who  crushed  the  revolutionary  movement  ^ 
of  1905-06,  was  common  knowledge.  The 
assassination  of  Stolypin  was  even  connected 
in  some  quarters  with  this  feeling  of  the  Em- 
peror toward  him. 

His  hatred  for  Count  Witte  was  also  noto- 
rious. Its  origin  was  a  scene  in  the  Czar's 
house  on  the  eve  of  October  30,  1905,  when  the 
coimtry  had  been  paralyzed  by  a  general  strike 
and  a  revolution  seemed  imminent.  Premier 
Witte  went  to  lu'ge  the  Czar  to  grant  reforms. 
Nicholas  II.  was  obstmate.  Count  Witte,  in 
the  presence  of  the  Czarina,  made  it  appear 
that  he  was  hysterical,  and  stamped  his  feet 
on  the  floor  in  an  attempt  to  cow  the  Czar  into 

132 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

signing  the  famous  manifesto  of  October  30th. 
Nicholas  II.,  frightened,  gave  in.  But  later  he 
revoked  almost  all  the  liberties  granted,  dis- 
missing Witte. 

"He  held  on  to  his  throne  as  if  in  delirium 
and  with  a  fanatical  obstinacy,"  wrote  a  Rus- 
sian correspondent  after  the  revolution,  "as  if 
trembling  for  his  life,  with  which  he  identified 
his  authority.  His  system  was  the  complicated 
system  of  distrust  of  all.  .  .  .  The  sphere  of 
his  mental  activity  was,  of  course,  very  limited. 
He  knew  that  it  was  necessary  to  command. 
He  knew  that  in  no  case  must  one  make  con- 
cessions unless  absolutely  forced  by  circum- 
stances. His  obduracy  during  the  last  days 
was,  however,  equivalent  to  sheer  insanity." 

Such  was  the  man  in  whose  hands  the  fort- 
unes of  one  himdred  and  eighty  million  people 
lay.  A  moral  imbecile,  a  dark  and  crafty 
Church  dignitary,  a  typical  junker,  and  an 
international  swindler  surrounded  him,  con- 
trolling the  destinies  of  Russia,  Europe,  the 
world.  Around  this  invidious  force  of  destruc- 
tion there  centered  the  agents  of  Prussia,  the 
rabid  reactionaries  of  the  Czar's  Court,  and  a 
number  of  oflSce-seekers  and  adventurers.  This 
dark  force  set  out  to  undermine  the  foundations 

133 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

of  democratic  Russia,  to  stab  the  Allies  in  the 
back  by  concluding  a  separate  peace  with 
Germany,  to  deal  a  mortal  blow  to  the  cause  of 
universal  democracy  by  establishing  an  alliance 
of  monarchical,  absolutist  Europe. 


IX 

WORKING   FOR   PRUSSIANISM 

ONE  evening  in  the  eighties  of  the  nine- 
teenth century  a  man  was  trudging  along 
a  Petrograd  street.  He  was  deeply  engrossed 
in  his  thoughts,  undoubtedly  dreaming  of  a 
raise  in  salary  or  promotion  in  rank,  for  he  was 
only  a  petty  Government  tchinovnik.  In  his 
preoccupation  he  stepped  off  the  sidewalk  in 
front  of  a  carriage  bearing  the  Imperial  emblem. 
He  was  knocked  down  and  injured.  The  royal 
passenger  was  a  woman.  She  took  pity  on  the 
bruised  young  man,  had  him  placed  in  the 
carriage  and  brought  to  the  palace  to  dress  his 
wounds.  This  accident  made  of  a  petty  official 
a  future  Prime  Minister.  The  name  of  the 
man  was  Boris  Sturmer,  who  was  the  grandson 
of  an  Austrian  Teuton. 

Sturmer  was  quick  to  grasp  the  opportunity 
of  the  accident.  He  managed  to  win  the  good 
graces  of  the  Imperial  lady  and  to  become  her 
favorite.    As  a  reward  for  his  services  he  was 

135 


tHE   RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

ennobled,  endowed  with  a  wife  and  given  the 
title  of  Kammer junker.  Later  he  was  pro- 
moted to  the  Ministry  of  the  Imperial  House- 
hold, where  he  gradually  climbed  to  the  grade 
of  Hofmeister.  Afterward  he  was  appointed 
Governor  of  Tver,  where  his  political  career 
reached  what  then  seemed  to  be  its  zenith. 

The  dark  forces  launched,  early  in  1916,  the 
disastrous  campaign  that  precipitated  the  revo- 
lution. After  the  dismissal  of  Goremykin, 
which  took  place  under  the  pressure  of  public 
opinion,  Boris  Sturmer  was  appointed  as  his 
successor.  He  was  called  by  the  Czar  to  head 
the  Government  in  the  diflficult  winter  of  1916, 
in  spite  of  the  fact  that  he  had  not  been  active 
in  public  life  for  more  than  a  decade.  Russia 
had  almost  forgotten  that  such  a  personality 
still  existed  in  bureaucratic  circles.  His  name 
belonged  to  a  long-past  period  of  Russian  his- 
tory, to  the  days  anteceding  the  revolution  of 
1905.  Sturmer  had  made  himself  notorious  as 
a  collaborator  of  Plehve,  who  had  shackled 
Russian  democracy  as  no  Minister  of  the  Czar 
ever  did.  Sturmer  was  one  of  his  lieutenants. 
He  was  used  by  him  in  the  destructive  cam- 
paign waged  by  the  Russian  Government  early 
in  this  century  against  the  Zemstvos,  Russia's 

136 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

great  educational  institutions.  As  Governor  of 
the  province  of  Tver,  Sturmer  enacted  a  series 
of  outrageous  measures  against  the  liberal  and 
enlightened  Zemstvo  of  that  province.  After 
1904,  when  his  chief,  Plehve,  was  assassinated 
by  the  revolutionists,  Sturmer's  career  was  to 
all  appearances  ended.  In  the  tempestuous 
twelve  years  that  followed,  perhaps  the  most 
turbulent  in  the  entire  course  of  modern  Russian 
history,  Sturmer  had  taken  no  part  whatever 
in  the  country's  oflScial  life.  Like  many  other 
reactionary  tchinovniks,  he  was  attached  to 
the  Court  circle  which  constituted  that  invisible 
but  powerful  camarilla  which  molded  the 
destinies  and  policies  of  the  great  Slavic  nation. 
To  appoint  Sturmer  Prime  Minister  in  the 
trying  days  of  an  unprecedented  world  crisis 
was  in  itself  a  challenge  to  the  Russian  democ- 
racy. A  man  of  narrow  and  selfish  views,  in- 
capable .  of  understanding  the  psychology  of 
men  and  nations,  unfit  for  coping  with  large 
problems,  he  also  lacked  the  vision  necessary 
for  the  head  of  the  Government.  "I  have 
known  Sturmer  for  thirty  years,"  wrote  a 
European  publicist,  "and  always  considered 
him  intellectually  and  morally  a  poor  creature 
whose  highest  ideal  was  a  successful  career  and 

9  137 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

whose  horizon  was  circumscribed  by  the  walls 
of  his  Ministry."  Such  was  the  individual  whom 
tlie  camarilla  had  nominated  for  Premier.  His 
name  was  another  disturbing  feature  about 
him.  Its  Teutonic  derivation  was  enough  to 
irritate  the  Russian  public,  to  whom  anything 
that  sounded  or  looked  like  German  was  ob- 
noxious. The  masses  hailed  his  rise  with  a 
flood  of  rumors  as  to  his  connection  with 
Prussia  and  his  views  on  a  separate  peace. 
A  story  that  made  the  rounds  of  Petrograd 
in  1916  had  it  that  two  men  in  a  railway  car- 
riage argued  about  the  regulation  making  it 
an  offense  to  speak  German  in  public  places. 
One  of  the  two  men  declared  that  he  could  speak 
that  language  with  impunity.  The  other 
threatened  to  have  him  arrested  in  case  he  did. 
"Well,"  said  the  first,  "I  will  speak  three  con- 
nected German  words  and  no  one  will  dare 
touch  me."  The  second  challenged  him  to  do 
so.  "All  right,"  said  the  first,  "now  please 
listen  carefully — *Hofmeister  von  Sturmer.'  " 
Though  his  ancestors  were  of  Teuton  stock, 
Sturmer  himself  was  a  typical  Russian  bureau- 
crat of  the  old  regime.  There  could  be  no 
doubt  that  in  common  with  the  other  extreme 
reactionaries  in  the  Court  he  looked  with  dis- 

138 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

favor  on  Russia's  aligning  herself  with  the 
democratic  nations  of  Europe  as  against  the 
absolutist  Germany  and  Austria.  There  was 
ground  for  the  belief  that  Sturmer  was  a  direct 
protege  of  Rasputin,  and  his  subsequent  actions 
warranted  such  an  assumption.  His  initial 
step  as  Premier,  however,  was  to  counteract 
the  hostile  reception  accorded  him  by  the  people. 
He  announced  a  speedy  convocation  of  the 
Dmna,  which  had  been  prorogued  by  his  pred- 
ecessor. For  a  moment  the  tide  of  popular 
dissatisfaction  caused  by  his  appointment  was 
checked.  It  was  thought  that  the  Sturmer  of 
yore  was  no  more;  that  the  long  years  of 
democratic  progress  had  had  an  effect  on  him. 
In  reality  it  was  nothing  of  the  kind.  The 
attitude  toward  the  Duma  was  evidently  noth- 
ing but  a  shrewd  act  on  the  part  of  the  dark 
forces  intended  to  mislead  the  country  and  the 
world. 

The  first  shock  that  came  to  the  Russian 
public  with  the  rise  of  Sturmer  was  his  employ- 
ment of  Manasevitch-Manuilov,  the  interna- 
tional swindler,  as  his  private  secretary.  An- 
other close  adviser  of  the  new  Premier  was 
Gurliand,  one  of  the  dark  personalities  in  the 
annals  of  Russian  life  for  the  last  three  decades, 

139 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

A  tool  of  reactionism,  a  traitor  to  his  Jewish 
race  and  to  the  cause  of  democracy,  Gurhand 
had  affiliated  himself  with  all  that  was  perni- 
cious and  destructive  in  the  Russian  Govern- 
ment. Gurliand,  who  was  a  highly  educated 
man,  was  more  exasperating  to  the  Russian  de- 
mocracy than  an  ordinary  ignorant  tchinovnik. 
With  Manuilov  on  one  hand  and  Gurliand  on 
the  other,  Sturmer's  debut  in  the  capacity  of 
director  of  Russia's  national  affairs  could  pro- 
duce but  one  impression  on  the  mind  of  the 
people.  While  democracy  was  striving  with  all 
its  primitive  ardor  to  save  the  coimtry  from 
disintegration  and  disgraceful  defeat  at  the 
hands  of  Prussian  militarism,  bm-eaucracy  had 
sent  forward  its  worst  and  darkest  representa- 
tives to  control  the  helm  of  the  Government. 
A  spectacular  fight  ensued  between  the  two 
birds  of  prey,  Manuilov  and  Gurliand.  The 
latter  lost  the  battle,  being  forced  to  content 
himself  with  the  post  of  chief  of  the  Govern- 
ment's press  bureau  and  news  agency.  The 
former  began  to  conduct  his  notorious  opera- 
tions which  were  to  become  historic  in  the 
critical  twelve  months  that  followed. 

The  fields  of  activity  of  Sturmer  and  his 
associates  were  of  two  kinds:   first,  there  were 

140 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

the  international  relations;  second,  the  internal 
situation.  His  policies  in  both  realms  were  of 
a  provoking  and  disquieting  nature.  To  the 
former  class  belonged  steps  taken,'  or  supposed 
to  have  been  taken,  by  the  Government  toward 
an  understanding  with  the  Central  Powers  and 
the  conclusion  of  a  separate  peace.  From  the 
mass  of  reports  and  ruqiors  which  filled  the 
world  during  1916  on  this  subject  certain  facts 
stood  out  as  indisputable.  First,  there  was  the 
mission  of  Princess  Wasiltchikova,  who  came 
from  Austria  to  Russia  in  the  early  weeks  of 
1916.  The  princess  belonged  to  the  inner 
circles  of  the  Court,  being  close  to  the  Czarina 
and  her  favorite  lady  in  waiting,  Madame 
Virubova,  Rasputin's  agent  in  Court.  Of 
Rasputin's  belief  that  Russia  should  terminate 
the  war  as  early  as  possible  there  was  not  a 
shadow  of  doubt.  Of  Rasputin's  tremendous 
influence  over  the  Czarina  there  was  again  no 
doubt  whatsoever.  That  the  Empress  was  doing 
everything  in  her  power  to  bring  about  a  sepa- 
rate peace  was  certain.  The  journey  of  Princess 
Wasiltchikova  from  Austria  undoubtedly  was 
encouraged  by  the  group  centering  about  Ras- 
putin and  the  Czarina.  The  princess  was 
exposed  and  in  her  possession  were  found  in- 

141 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

criminating  documents,  one  of  which  was  a  list 
of  Russian  bureaucrats  friendly  toward  Ger- 
many and  favoring  a  separate  peace. 

After  this  abortive  attempt,  secret  Russian 
envoys  were  despatched  to  Switzerland  to  get 
in  touch  with  Teuton  representatives.  How 
far  these  secret  negotiations  went  it  was  diflBcult 
to  say.  But  in  so  far  as  they  affected  Russian 
public  opinion  they  could  not  have  proceeded 
any  further.  The  nation  plainly  demonstrated 
to  the  dark  forces  that  any  effort  to  conclude  a 
separate  peace  would  result  in  the  immediate 
overthrow  of  the  Government.  There  was  an 
elemental  force  in  that  popular  attitude  which 
frightened  the  cowardly  bureaucracy. 

"Sturmer  is  a  traitor,"  a  correspondent  over- 
heard a  common  Russian  say  on  a  train.  "He 
has  just  concluded  a  separate  peace  with  Ger- 
many; a  draft  of  it  is  already  in  Berlin." 

To  which  a  soldier  with  a  crutch  remarked, 
"It  won't  matter  if  he  did,  since  a  few  of  us 
will  just  march  back  on  Petrograd,  settle  things 
there,  and  then  go  on  with  Germany's  busi- 
ness." 

Such  was  the  typical  view  of  the  Russian 
soldier,  worker,  politician,  or  intellectual.  This 
meant  that  potentially  Russia  had  been  trans- 

14£ 


THE   RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

formed  already,  that  the  democracy  had  gath- 
ered into  its  ranks  nearly  all  classes  of  Russians. 
It  was  dangerous  for  the  dark  forces  to  endeavor 
to  conclude  a  separate  peace  against  the  national 
will.  That  alone  was  something  new  in  Russian 
life.  Up  to  the  war  the  national  will  was  never 
considered  by  the  bureaucracy.  It  was  ignored, 
disregarded,  and  sneered  at  by  the  reactionaries. 
Russia  to  them  was  an  absolute  monarchy. 
The  will  of  the  autocracy  and  not  the  will  of 
the  people  made  Russian  history.  But  the 
war  created  forces  in  Russian  life  which  com- 
pelled the  autocratic  system  to  recognize  the 
will  of  the  people.  It  is  difficult  to  state  with 
accuracy  the  exact  moment  of  this  recognition, 
which  marked  a  new  epoch  in  the  existence  of 
Russia.  The  Government  was  in  the  hands  of 
the  old  clique,  but  it  was  forced  to  modify  its 
traditional  attitude  toward  the  democracy. 
The  steadily  increasing  power  of  the  latter 
augured  little  good  for  the  medieval  camarilla. 
It  felt  the  advent  of  a  new  era;  in  despair  it 
sought  to  sever  relations  with  France  and  Eng- 
land and  create  a  basis  for  a  rapprochement 
with  autocratic  Germany  and  Austria.  Treaties, 
promises,  and  sacred  bonds  meant  nothing  to 
this  sinister  group.    Nothing  would  have  pre- 

143 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

vented  it  from  stabbing  Russia's  allies  in  the 
back  through  a  separate  peace.  There  was  one 
power  only  that  stood  in  the  path  of  the  con- 
summation of  such  a  policy,  and  that  was  the 
potential  colossus  of  the  Russian  democracy. 

The  dark  forces,  therefore,  directed  most  of 
their  activities  toward  striking  at  this  democ- 
racy. Finding  themselves  unable  to  work  for 
Prussianism  through  diplomacy,  they  began  to 
promote  the  cause  of  a  separate  peace  through 
the  creation  of  internal  conditions  that  would 
lead  to  the  same  end.  The  Sturmer  Ministry 
inaugurated  a  series  of  acts  each  of  which  was 
calculated  to  disorganize  the  nation  and  break 
its  power  of  resistance  and  its  mighty  demo- 
cratic spirit.  First  to  suffer  was  the  press,  the 
organ  of  the  country's  public  opinion.  It  had 
been  gagged  and  muzzled  to  an  extent  un- 
dreamed of  even  in  Russia  by  Premier  Goremy- 
kin.  Sturmer  continued  this  policy.  The  mili- 
tary censorship  was  used  for  the  suppression  of 
news  and  comment  which  had  no  relation 
whatsoever  to  military  conditions.  Blank 
spaces  filled  the  Russian  papers  day  after  day. 
Every  Governor  or  local  official  exercised  the 
powers   of   a   dictator   over   the   newspapers. 

Petrograd  periodicals  were  forbidden  to  pub- 

U4 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

lish  news  which  was  printed  in  Moscow  or 
Odessa,  and  vice  versa.  The  Government's 
treatment  of  the  press  became  so  outrageous 
that  the  Duma  was  forced  to  take  a  determined 
stand  on  the  question,  demanding  more  freedom 
for  the  expression  of  pubHc  opinion.  At  the 
same  time  the  two  or  three  Black  Hundred 
yellow  sheets,  openly  pro-German,  were  allowed 
to  develop  their  pernicious  propaganda.  On  the 
face  of  it  the  Ministers  seemed  to  respect  the 
press.  Every  new  Minister  upon  his  appoint- 
ment would  grant  an  interview  to  the  represen- 
tatives of  the  country's  newspapers,  promising 
reforms  and  improvement,  but  in  actuality 
these  promises  were  never  carried  out.  Even 
utterances  of  leading  deputies  in  the  Duma 
were  partly  or  wholly  barred  from  print. 

The  muzzling  of  the  press  was  only  the  fore- 
runner of  a  treacherous  campaign  against  social 
Russia.  The  nation's  social  organizations  were 
co-operating  with  the  War  Ministry  in  supply- 
ing materials  and  aid  to  the  army.  Little  by 
little  the  social  bodies  were  rehabilitating  the 
shattered  military  organizations  of  the  country. 
It  became  evident  to  the  dark  forces  that 
Russia  was  fast  becoming  ready  to  deliver  a 
powerful  blow  at  the  Central  Powers,  and  this 

145 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

they  did  not  want  to  see.  They  aimed  at 
Russia's  defeat  as  the  only  guarantee  for  the 
preservation  of  their  power.  To  make  Russia 
unfit  for  fighting  became  the  goal  of  the  dark 
forces.  In  order  to  accomplish  this  it  was  es- 
sential to  paralyze  the  activities  of  social 
Russia.  This  the  traitorous  Government  set 
out  to  do.  Early  in  the  spring  of  1916  the 
Cabinet  issued  an  order  forbidding  any  kind 
of  national  conventions  or  conferences  of  the 
country's  social  organizations.  The  Unions  of 
Zemstvos  and  of  Towns  and  the  War  Industries 
Committee,  which  contributed  to  the  army  most 
of  its  fighting  ability,  were  all  affected  by  this 
order.  Since  the  entire  nation  was  behind  these 
bodies,  it  was  but  natural  that  a  wave  of  re- 
bellion seized  all  classes  and  institutions.  The 
pretext  for  the  Government's  action  was  de- 
clared to  be  the  would-be  revolutionary  activi- 
ties of  the  social  organizations,  but  it  was  noth- 
ing more  than  a  flimsy  excuse,  for  in  the  ranks 
of  these  organizations  was  also  enlisted  all  that 
was  conservative  and  patriotic  in  Russia.  The 
leader  of  the  extreme  reactionaries  in  the  Duma, 
once  the  notorious  chief  of  the  Black  Hundreds, 
Vladimir  Purishkevitch,  was  one  of  these  social 
workers  at  the  front.    To  accuse  him  of  revolu- 

m 


THE   RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

tionism  was  to  make  him  a  bitter  opponent  of 
the  Government.  This  was  just  what  happened. 
He  was  only  typical  of  the  thousands  and  hun- 
dreds of  thousands  of  Russians  who  became 
enemies  of  the  Government,  although  their 
views  before  the  war  were  very  moderate,  be- 
lieving and  upholding  the  autocratic  institution 
with  all  their  heart  and  energy. 

When  Prince  Lvov,  the  head  of  the  All- 
Russian  Union  of  Zemstvos,  appealed  to  the 
War  Minister,  General  Shuvaiev,  to  recall  the 
ban  on  national  conventions,  he  met  a  sym- 
pathetic attitude  on  the  part  of  the  Minister, 
but  he  could  obtain  no  action  on  the  part  of  the 
Sturmer  Government.  A  remarkable  situation 
developed.  The  head  of  the  War  Department, 
appreciating  the  aid  of  social  Russia  to  the 
army,  did  his  best  to  co-operate  with  the  nation's 
efforts  in  the  cause  of  national  defense.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  head  of  the  whole  Government 
did  his  best  to  paralyze  these  very  efforts. 
Every  now  and  then  the  War  Minister  would 
place  with  the  Zemstvos  large  orders.  Prince 
Lvov  would  call  his  attention  to  the  fact  that 
the  Government  could  hardly  expect  the  social 
organizations  whose  activities  it  shackled  and 
blocked  to  execute  the  orders.    Still  the  Govern- 

147. 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

ment  continued  its  policy  of  deliberate  injury 
to  the  cause  of  the  country's  defense.  The  next 
step  in  this  direction  was  the  putting  of  all 
meetings  of  the  public  bodies  under  the  super- 
vision of  the  police.  Such  an  act  was  an  out- 
rage, in  itself.  The  inept  and  corrupt  Russian 
police  were  put  in  charge  of  vast  organizations, 
whose  sole  activities  were  devoted  to  the  in- 
terests of  the  state,  with  the  power  to  put  an 
end  to  all  meetings  and  conferences  even  of  a 
local  character.  The  army  and  the  people 
recognized  that  Sturmer  was  helping  Prussia  to 
win  the  war. 

Sturmer,  shortly  after  his  accession  to  the 
Premiership,  also  became  Minister  of  the  In- 
terior. His  predecessor,  A.  A.  Khvostov, 
served  only  a  few  months,  but  helped  consider- 
ably to  increase  the  national  debacle,  A  man 
of  little  ability  but  much  vanity,  a  bureaucrat 
of  the  old  school,  Khvostov  took  up  his  duties 
as  Minister  of  the  Interior  with  much  noise  and 
bombast.  He  evidently  sincerely  believed  him- 
self to  be  fully  capable  of  solving  the  many 
hard  problems  confronting  the  nation.  His 
motto  was  "Down  with  German  influences." 
He  was  a  reactionary,  but  a  patriot,  and  he 
meant  what  he  said.    But  he  was  unaware  of 

148 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

whom  his  program  aimed  at.  He  was  soon  to 
realize  that  the  German  influences  in  Russia 
were  located  in  a  place  over  which  he  could 
have  no  control.  The  all-powerful  Rasputin 
was  in  his  path.  Khvostov  saw  the  menace  and 
decided  to  remove  it.  As  Minister  of  the  In- 
terior he  had  control  of  the  police  and  secret 
service  departments.  He  therefore  set  himself 
to  the  task  of  "removing"  Rasputin.  He  dele- 
gated an  agent  by  the  name  of  Rzhevsky  to  go 
to  Copenhagen,  where  a  former  friend  of  Ras- 
putin, the  so-called  "mad  monk"  Iliodor,  lived. 
The  latter  was  now  a  bitter  enemy  of  his  former 
colleague.  He  was  urged  to  come  to  Russia  and 
participate  in  a  plot  to  assassinate  the  omnipo- 
tent monk.  Iliodor  is  alleged  to  have  consented 
to  the  proposition  of  Rzhevsky,  at  first,  but 
later  repented  and  communicated  the  details  of 
the  scheme  to  Rasputin.  At  the  same  time  the 
wife  of  Rzhevsky  told  the  whole  story  to  a 
friend,  who  carried  it  to  Assistant-Minister  S. 
P.  Beletzky.  The  latter  wished  to  force  out  his 
chief,  Khvostov,  and  win  the  favor  of  Rasputin, 
who  had  already  been  notified  of  the  plot.  He 
had  Rzhevsky  arrested  upon  his  return  from 
Scandinavia.  A  sharp  battle  developed  between 
Khvostov  and  his  assistant.     At  first  the  latter 

149 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

was  "exiled"  to  Siberia,  as  the  Governor  of  a 
province,  after  an  investigation,  instituted  by 
Sturmer  at  the  instigation  of  Rasputin.  Later 
Khvostov  himself  was  dismissed.  Beletzky, 
who  had  not  left  for  Siberia  as  yet,  was  also  dis- 
missed. In  the  course  of  this  scandal  it  devel- 
oped that  the  Metropolitan  of  Petrograd, 
Pitirim,  was  an  active  member  of  the  camarilla. 
Such  was  the  result  of  a  Minister  of  the 
Interior's  attempt  to  get  rid  of  Rasputin.  The 
latter  triumphed  completely.  The  country 
watched  this  disgraceful  scene  in  Government 
circles  with  nothing  short  of  stupefaction. 
Sturmer  took  over  the  post  of  Khvostov,  which 
afforded  his  secretary,  Manuilov,  additional 
opportunity  for  swindling  and  blackmailing. 
His  office  became  the  Mecca  of  the  sharks  and 
speculators  responsible  to  a  large  extent  for 
the  disorganization  of  the  country's  food  sup- 
plies. Contrabandists  and  traders  with  the 
enemy  found  immunity  from  the  law  through 
Manuilov.  German  agents  were  flocking  to 
Russia  in  large  numbers.  Sturmer 's  private 
secretary  was  the  man  who  received,  protected, 
and  helped  them,  in  return  for  German  gold, 
to  infuse  more  chaos  into  the  national  organi- 
zations.   Unparalleled  events  were  taking  place. 

150 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

The  very  top  of  the  Government  became  a  nest 
of  graft,  treason,  and  open  robbery.  When  the 
Director  of  the  Police  Department,  General 
Klimovitch,  called  Sturmer's  attention  to  his 
secretary's  activities  and  to  the  necessity  of  his 
removal,  Sturmer  at  first  assented.  On  the 
following  day,  however,  he  called  up  Klimo- 
vitch and  ordered  him  not  to  touch  Manuilov. 
Shortly  afterward  General  Klimovitch  was  dis- 
missed, but  almost  immediately  he  was  returned 
to  his  post  by  the  newly  appointed  Minister  of 
the  Interior,  A.  A.  Khvostov. 

The  latter  had  been  Minister  of  Justice  in 
the  Cabinet.  His  place  was  taken  by  the 
reactionary  A.  A.  Makarov.  Another  change 
in  the  Cabinet  was  that  of  the  dismissal  of  the 
progressive  Minister  of  Agriculture,  A.  N. 
Naumov,  who  had  succeeded  in  winning  the 
favor  of  the  Duma  and  the  people.  His  suc- 
cessor, Count  Bobrynsky,  occupied  the  post 
only  a  short  time.  He  was  succeeded  by  A. 
Rittich,  who  at  first  made  the  appearance  of 
attacking  the  food  problem  with  considerable 
energy.  In  the  Ministry  of  Finance  there  were 
also  several  shifts.  Comptroller  of  the  State 
Kharitonov  was  retired  and  followed  by  N.  M. 
Pokrovsky,  who  later  became  Foreign  Min- 

151 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

^  ister.  In  the  Holy  Synod,  the  Procurator,  who 
was  a  Cabinet  member,  A.  D.  Samarin,  was 
dismissed  in  favor  of  A.  N.  Volzhin,  who  in 
turn  was  succeeded  by  N.  P.  Raiev.  In  the 
War  Ministry  General  Polivanov  was  replaced 
by  General  Shuvaiev  in  the  spring  of  1916. 
All  these  changes  in  the  Government  were 
meaningless  as  far  as  its  policy  was  concerned. 
The  new  appointees  were  all  bureaucrats  of 
the  old  school.  Most  of  them  had  not  been  in 
public  life  for  years.  They  were  all  inexperi- 
enced and  incapable  of  solving  the  complicated 
problems  that  confronted  the  country.  It  was 
evident  that  the  only  purpose  of  the  numerous 
shifts  was  to  demoralize  the  national  organism. 
After  a  Minister  had  made  a  sincere  effort 
toward  the  solution  of  a  certain  question  he 
would  be  dismissed,  and  his  successor  would 
begin  all  over  again. 

The  heaviest  blow  to  the  Russian  people  and 
the  Allies  was  the  retirement  of  S.  D.  Sazonov, 
Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs.  So  long  as 
Sazonov  remained  in  the  Cabinet,  all  rumors  of 
a  separate  peace  were  to  a  certain  extent  dis- 
counted. The  stanchest  supporter  of  the  En- 
tente cause  in  Russia,  a  close  friend  of  Great 
Britain,  Sazonov,  typified  to  the  Russian  de- 

152 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

mocracy  the  bond  that  existed  between  Russia 
and  the  AHies.  There  could  be  no  doubt  of 
the  fact  that  Sazonov  was  the  chief  obstacle  in 
the  path  of  the  dark  forces  toward  the  attain- 
ment of  their  goal.  To  remove  him  was  their 
object  for  months.  He  was  the  only  member 
of  the  Cabinet  who  was  instrumental  in  the 
origination  of  the  alliance  with  England.  His 
influence  on  the  Czar  was  considerable.  Sturmer 
and  Rasputin  found  in  him  an  opponent  dan- 
gerous to  their  schemes.  His  intimate  rela- 
tions with  the  British  and  French  embassies  in 
Petrograd  enabled  the  Allies  to  know  of  all  the 
dark  machinations  in  the  Czar's  Court.  To 
force  Sazonov  out  meant  a  triumph  of  the 
invisible  camarilla  over  the  people.  But  the 
shock  to  the  democracy  was  greater  yet  when 
it  was  announced  that  Premier  Sturmer  had 
taken  over  the  post  of  Sazonov.  The  nation 
became  alarmed  to  an  extent  unprecedented 
since  the  rise  of  Sturmer  to  power.  The  Prem- 
ier had  no  experience  and  no  relation  what- 
soever to  foreign  affairs.  His  appointment  was 
a  slap  at  the  Allies.  It  spelled  the  increasing 
influence  in  the  Court  of  the  dark  forces.  It 
further  intensified  the  state  of  excitement  which 
pervaded  the  country. 

10  153 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

Another  irritating  factor  was  the  PoHsh  prob- 
lem. Early  in  the  war,  Grand-Duke  Nicholas, 
Commander-in-Chief  of  the  Russian  armies, 
issued  a  manifesto  promising  the  restoration  of 
Poland.  But  the  political  authorities  disre- 
garded the  army's  proclamation.  They  pro- 
ceeded to  oppress  and  persecute  the  Poles  as 
of  old.  When  in  the  summer  of  1916  the  Polish 
question  became  the  subject  of  universal  dis- 
cussion, the  Russian  democracy  urged  the 
Government  to  issue  some  kind  of  an  official 
document  on  the  promised  autonomy  to  Poland. 
These  exhortations  were  redoubled  when  it 
became  known  that  the  Central  Powers  were 
preparing  some  kind  of  a  diplomatic  stroke  in 
connection  with  the  future  reconstruction  of 
Poland.  The  Russian  people  wanted  to  fore- 
stall any  action  on  the  part  of  the  Teutons. 
But  the  Russian  Government  did  not.  Sturmer 
and  his  clique,  in  the  old-fashioned  style  so 
characteristic  of  the  Russian  bureaucracy,  per- 
verted the  original  promise  of  Grand-Duke 
Nicholas.  When  early  in  July  the  Council  of 
Ministers  held  a  meeting  at  the  Czar's  head- 
quarters, where  the  Polish  question  came  up 
for  discussion,  several  projects  granting  auton- 
omy to  Poland  in  a  larger  or  less  degree  were 

154 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

submitted  as  solutions,  but  Sturmer  favored  no 
such  settlement  of  the  matter.  Instead  of  in- 
dependence or  autonomy  he  merely  proposed 
to  grant  Poland  limited  local  self-government. 
And  even  this  proposal  was  not  acted  upon 
definitely.  Shortly  afterward  the  Central  Pow- 
ers announced  the  establishment  of  a  Polish 
kingdom.  The  chagrin  of  popular  Russia  at 
its  Government's  inaction  was  profound.  The 
ineptitude  and  rottenness  of  the  Government 
were  demonstrated  once  more  in  an  unmistak- 
able manner. 

On  top  of  it  all  was  the  disorganization  of 
the  food  supply  of  the  country.  Russia  had 
plenty  of  food,  and  still  starvation  was  staring 
Russians  in  the  face.  There  were  many  causes 
for  this  condition.  There  was  the  demoraliza- 
tion of  the  transportation  facilities.  There 
were  the  needs  of  the  army.  There  were  the 
speculators  and  the  corrupt  tchinovniks.  But, 
above  all,  there  was  the  lack  of  a  centralized  and 
honest  control  of  the  situation.  The  Govern- 
ment empowered  special  officials  to  requisition, 
first  of  all,  supplies  for  the  army.  These 
officials  had  it  in  their  power  to  put  a  ban  on  the 
exports  of  food  from  one  province  to  another. 
Besides,  the  Governors  of  the  provinces  and 

155 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

^  their  local  representatives  exercised  the  au- 
thority of  Czars  in  their  individual  districts. 
Russia  became  a  country  governed  by  hundreds 
of  separate  autocrats.  A  province  containing 
fifty  million  bushels  of  grain  would  be  barred 
from  selling  its  reserves  on  the  ground  that 
the  army  might  need  them.  As  a  matter  of  fact, 
the  province's  contribution  to  the  army  later 
would  turn  out  to  be  only  one-tenth  of  its 
supplies.  Such  cases  were  numerous  through- 
out the  empire.  To  add  to  the  chaos  there 
were  the  rising  prices.  The  peasantry  was  re- 
luctant to  sell  its  bread,  hoping  to  sell  it  for  still 
higher  profits.  The  disorganization  in  the 
transportation  facilities  only  intensified  the 
crisis.  Thus  on  one  occasion  over  2,800,000 
pounds  of  meat  were  brought  to  Moscow  in 
putrid  condition  because  it  had  been  on  its 
way  not  less  than  thirty  days  in  ordinary  closed 
trucks.  On  another  occasion  a  vast  number  of 
carcasses  were  being  transported  from  Siberia, 
but  on  the  way  they  were  partly  plundered  by 
dishonest  oflScials,  partly  perished  through 
putrefaction,  and  had  to  be  buried  in  the  ground 
alongside  the  railway  line,  and  partly  devoured 
by  dogs. 
But  even  more  disastrous  proved  the  ac- 

156 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

tivities  of  certain  financial  interests.  The 
latter  simply  bought  up  enormous  quantities 
of  food  and  stored  them  till  such  a  time  when 
the  prices  would  net  them  vast  incomes.  In 
this  they  had  the  protection  of  the  Govern- 
ment. Sturmer's  secretary,  Manuilov,  secured 
them  immunity  from  the  law  for  remuneration. 
The  speculators  then  ran  riot.  While  the  masses 
were  groaning  under  the  yoke  of  terribly  in- 
flated prices,  millions  of  tons  of  food  were 
rotting  in  storehouses.  It  happened  more  than 
once  that  putrid  meat  in  large  quantities  would 
suddenly  appear  in  the  market  where  a  day 
before  meat  was  an  unknown  article.  Per- 
haps no  other  factor  was  as  potent  in  solidi- 
fying the  nation  against  the  Government  as 
this  famine  created  through  its  corruptness 
and  incompetence.  The  Cossack  as  well  as 
the  civilian,  the  Government  clerk  along  with 
the  common  laborer,  faced  starvation.  The 
cry  of  the  people  was  increasing  in  volume 
and  vigor.  The  Government  made  an  unsuc- 
cessful attempt  to  solve  the  difficulties  by 
fixing  the  prices.  But  this  only  tended  to  keep 
the  independent  farmer  from  marketing  his 
goods.  The  authorities  were  also  compelled  to 
deal   severely    with   the   speculators.      Many 

157 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

arrests  were  made  in  Petrograd,  Moscow,  and 
other  leading  cities.  In  the  capital  a  number  of 
bankers  who  also  traded  in  contraband  were 
seized,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  Manuilov,  the 
collaborator  of  Rasputin  and  secretary  of  the 
Premier,  was  their  protector.  For  a  while  it 
seemed  that  the  food  situation  would  be 
straightened  out.  It  looked  as  if  the  arrests  of 
the  crooked  manipulators  would  check  the 
confusion.  But  in  reality  such  could  not  be 
the  case.  For  the  cause  of  all  the  trouble  lay 
in  the  dark  forces,  which  controlled  the  Govern- 
ment and  labored  for  chaos  and  ultimate 
internal  collapse.  And  these  forces  would  not 
be  checked.  They  were  on  the  aggressive. 
Sturmer  alone  was  not  sufficient  for  them.  To 
attain  their  destructive  aims  they  introduced 
into  the  Cabinet  a  personality  who  was  destined 
to  develop  the  tragedy  of  Russia  to  its  climax. 
His  name  was  Alexander  Dmitrovitch  Pro- 
topopov. 


A  TRAITOR  TO  DEMOCRACY 

ALEXANDER  D.  PROTOPOPOV  was  a 
L  cloth  manufacturer  in  the  province  of 
Simbirsk,  and  the  owner  of  a  large  estate.  Born 
in  1865,  he  received  a  military  education  and 
served  in  the  cavalry  up  to  1890,  when  he  re- 
signed. He  settled  on  his  estate,  devoting  him- 
self to  business  and  social  work.  It  was  only 
in  1908  that  Protopopov  entered  national  poli- 
tics. As  an  Octobrist,  he  was  elected  to  the 
Duma  in  that  year  from  Simbirsk.  There  was 
nothing  about  his  personality  to  distinguish 
him  from  the  many  other  manufacturers  and 
land  proprietors  who  largely  composed  the 
Octobrist  party,  which  was  a  conservative  body 
co-operating  with  the  Government  of  the  Czar. 
No  one  could  have  possibly  forecast  the  fatal 
role  which  he  was  destined  to  play  in  the  life  of 
his  country.  He  lacked  the  brilliancy,  intellect, 
education,  and  idealism  characteristic  of  the 
leaders  of  Russian  liberalism.  When  the 
159 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

Octobrist  Duma  majority  became  progressive 
after  the  outbreak  of  the  war,  forming  the 
Progressive  Bloc,  Protopopov  also  shifted  tow- 
ard the  Left.  On  numerous  occasions  he 
showed  himself  to  be  an  advocate  of  reforms  in 
the  Government.  Still  it  was  by  mere  chance 
that  he  attained  prominence.  The  junior  vice- 
president  of  the  Duma  resigned,  and  quite 
unexpectedly  Protopopov  was  proposed  as  a 
candidate. 

There  was  no  opposition.  There  was  no 
reason  for  such  opposition.  The  post  belonged 
to  an  Octobrist  and  the  standing  of  Protopopov 
in  his  party  was  good.  He  was  elected  vice- 
president  of  the  Duma,  thus  reaching  the  posi- 
tion which  later  enabled  him  to  become  the 
leading  figure  in  the  crisis  which  shook  Russia 
before  the  revolution. 

In  the  summer  of  1916  a  Russian  parliamen- 
tary delegation  was  despatched  to  visit  Eng- 
land, France,  and  Italy.  This  delegation 
included  some  of  the  most  illustrious  members 
of  the  Duma.  But  Protopopov,  by  virtue  of  his 
official  position,  stood  at  the  head  of  it.  To 
Russia  this  meant  little,  as  he  was  considered 
a  negligible  figure  in  the  ranks  of  Russian 
democracy.    To  the  world  his  official  title  meant 

160 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

a  great  deal.  The  Duma  and  the  people  later 
regretted  their  original  attitude  toward  Pro- 
topopov.  He  showed  himself  to  be  shrewd, 
cunning,  and  ambitious,  endeavoring  to  make 
capital  out  of  his  trip  at  the  head  of  the  delega- 
tion. From  Paris,  London,  and  Rome  his  fame 
spread  all  over  Europe.  The  German  Govern- 
ment reached  the  conclusion  that  he  was  im- 
portant enough  to  be  communicated  with  in 
regard  to  the  possibility  of  a  separate  peace 
with  Russia.  On  his  way  back  to  Petrograd, 
in  Stockholm,  a  representative  of  Berlin  met 
him  in  conference.  This  meeting  was  respon- 
sible for  the  strange  course  of  his  career  in  the 
next  few  months.  How  this  meeting  came  to 
take  place  became  the  subject  of  a  controversy 
which  lasted  for  more  than  half  a  year  in  the 
Russian  press.  It  seemed  definitely  established 
that  the  initiative  was  taken  by  the  German 
Government.  The  latter  had  its  agents  in 
Petrograd's  financial  circles.  Protopopov  was 
interested  in  several  business  institutions  of 
the  Russian  capital.  He  was  very  popular  in 
commercial  circles.  As  later  events  have 
proved,  some  of  his  friends  were  trading  with 
Germany.  Protopopov  claimed  that  the  sug- 
gestion to  meet  a  German  representative  was 

161 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

first  made  to  him  by  one  Pollack,  whom  he  met 
on  his  way  back  from  England.  On  the  other 
hand,  Count  Olsuffiev,  of  the  Imperial  Council 
and  a  member  of  the  delegation,  stated  that  the 
idea  of  the  conversation  originated  with  him. 
The  German  representative  was  one  Warburg, 
a  financial  agent  of  Germany  and  the  senior 
councilor  of  the  German  Embassy  at  Stock- 
holm. Protopopov  later  explained  the  circum- 
stances to  the  president  of  the  Duma.  He 
stated  that  the  Russian  consul  at  Stockholm, 
A.  V.  Nekhludov,  had  consented  to  the  conver- 
sation with  Warburg.  But  the  Count  denied 
any  previous  arrangement  with  Protopopov, 
claiming  that  he  had  been  informed  of  the 
engagement  only  after  it  had  been  made.  It 
became  evident  that  there  were  two  meetings 
instead  of  the  one  referred  to  by  the  vice- 
president  of  the  Duma. 

There  was  in  Russia  an  organization  called 
the  Society  of  1914,  whose  purpose  was  to  weed 
out  Prussian  influence  in  the  country.  This 
society  included  in  its  membership  some  of  the 
leading  public  men  of  the  nation.  It  was 
enough  for  a  prominent  personality  to  be  sus- 
pected of  any  relations  with  the  enemy  to  be 
publicly  branded  by  the  society.     Protopopov 

162 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

was  a  member  of  it.  When  the  news  of  his  peace 
conversations  in  Stockholm  reached  Russia,  the 
Society  of  1914  took  up  the  case  for  investiga- 
tion. The  entire  country  followed  the  proceed- 
ings with  profound  interest,  especially  after  the 
investigation  committee  had  recommended  the 
"blacklisting"  of  Protopopov.  He  defended 
himself  in  the  press,  proving  to  the  satisfaction 
of  the  president  of  the  Duma,  at  least,  that  the 
conference  had  not  been  initiated  by  himself. 

About  this  time  the  nation  was  suddenly 
treated  to  the  most  bewildering  piece  of  news  of 
the  year.  Protopopov  was  appointed  Minister 
of  the  Interior.  A  member  of  the  Progressive 
Bloc,  which  warred  so  bitterly  against  Sturmer, 
had  been  called  to  occupy  one  of  the  most  im- 
portant places  in  the  Cabinet.  For  a  moment 
it  seemed  that  a  new  wind  had  begun  to  blow  in 
the  high  spheres.  It  was  thought  that  internal 
reforms  were  finally  to  be  granted,  that  the 
press  would  be  unmuzzled,  the  chaotic  food 
problem  solved,  and  the  social  organizations 
aided  in  their  patriotic  labor  in  the  cause  of 
national  defense.  Disillusionment  was  quick 
to  follow.  A  little  reflection  was  enough  to 
convince  one  that  Protopopov's  rise  was  due 
not   to   his   progressive   views,   but   to   some 

163 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

sinister  connections.  It  will  be  remembered 
that  Manuilov,  Sturmer's  secretary,  was  in 
touch  with  Germany's  business  interests  in 
Petrograd,  the  same  interests  which  were 
probably  responsible  for  the  Stockholm  meet- 
ing. Manuilov  was  evidently  used  by  them  for 
the  purpose  of  getting  Protopopov  into  the 
Cabinet.  There  could  be  no  doubt  of  that,  for 
there  was  no  other  connection  between  the 
Court  and  the  vice-president  of  the  Duma. 
Had  the  Czar  suddenly  decided  to  select  a 
member  of  the  Progressive  Bloc  for  a  minis- 
terial post,  he  could  have  and  undoubtedly 
would  have  chosen  a  more  important  and  more 
reputable  Deputy.  Protopopov's  candidacy 
was  urged  upon  Sturmer  by  his  secretary. 
Sturmer  took  the  matter  up  with  Rasputin. 
It  is  not  unlikely  that  Manuilov  himself  intro- 
duced Protopopov  to  Rasputin.  One  thing  is 
indisputable.  Protopopov  got  his  position  in 
the  Government  through  the  monk.  The  two 
soon  became  fast  friends.  In  this  way  one  of 
the  leaders  of  the  Duma  betrayed  the  Russian 
democracy.  Identifying  himself  with  the  dark 
forces,  the  ambitious  Simbirsk  manufacturer 
opened  the  blackest  chapter  in  the  history  of 
Russia  under  the  old  regime. 

164 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

Entering  upon  the  duties  of  Minister  of  the 
Interior,  Protopopov  was  interviewed  by  a 
group  of  correspondents.  The  new  Cabinet 
member  was  expected  to  outline  his  program, 
but  he  had  none.  He  announced  that  as  a 
subordinate  member  of  the  Government  he  was 
guided  by  the  policies  of  the  head,  who  was 
Sturmer.  This  announcement  was  equivalent 
to  pouring  a  bucket  of  cold  water  on  an  excited 
individual.  Internal  conditions  were  rapidly 
culminating  in  a  general  crisis.  Unrest  was 
growing  throughout  the  country.  The  food 
situation  was  becoming  more  and  more  con- 
fused. The  army  was  getting  restless  on  ac- 
count of  the  Government's  failute  to  support 
it  with  all  its  resources.  Energetic  action  was 
required  to  check  the  rising  tide  of  rebellion. 
What  Protopopov  promised  was  a  continuation 
of  the  chaos  introduced  by  Sturmer.  Popular 
feeling  was  running  so  high  that  it  was  nearly 
impossible  to  control  it.  Especially  was  the 
nation  exasperated  by  a  typical  quarrel  between 
two  Ministries.  Originally  it  was  the  Ministry 
of  Agriculture  that  was  in  charge  of  the  food 
problem.  Its  head,  Count  Bobrynsky,  was 
elaborating  all  kinds  of  schemes  for  the  solution 
of  the  involved  question.    Practically  none  of 

165 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

these  schemes  met  with  the  approval  of  the 
people.  When  Protopopov  assumed  the  post  of 
Minister  of  the  Interior  he  began  to  busy  himself 
with  the  food  situation.  He  proposed  that  a 
group  of  bankers  buy  up  all  the  available  food 
supplies  of  the  coimtry  and  take  charge  of  their 
distribution.  This  proposition  met  with  undis- 
guised hostility.  The  financial  interests  with 
whom  Protopopov  did  business  were  not  known 
for  their  integrity  or  patriotism.  To  deliver 
the  nation's  vitals  to  those  sinister  speculators 
whose  corrupt  activities  incensed  the  whole 
country  was  equal  to  paralyzing  the  nation 
completely.  But  Protopopov  proceeded  with 
his  plans.  Very  soon  his  actions  conflicted  with 
those  of  Count  Bobrynsky.  He  insisted  most 
positively  that  the  question  of  transferring  the 
food  problem  from  the  jurisdiction  of  the 
Ministry  of  Agriculture  to  that  of  the  Interior 
had  been  decided  by  the  Government.  On  the 
other  hand,  Count  Bobrynsky  asserted  that  the 
question  had  not  even  been  discussed  in  the 
Council  of  Ministers.  The  starving  people 
were  treated  to  a  circus-like  spectacle.  There 
was  chaos  in  the  Government.  Indecision  ruled 
its  policies.  The  country  was  evidently  being 
driven  to  ruin  by  its  management.    For  weeks 

166 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

the  squabble  between  the  two  Ministers  con- 
tinued, while  the  tension  was  increasing  and 
discontent  spreading. 

Still  the  Government  chiefs  continued  to  add 
fuel  to  the  developing  conflagration.  The  food 
speculators  arrested  before  Protopopov  became 
Minister  and  held  without  bail  were  released  by 
him.  Some  of  these  swindlers  had  made  enor- 
mous fortunes  by  trading  in  contraband.  The 
masses  were  under  the  impression  that  the  food 
difficulties  were  entirely  the  result  of  crooked 
business.  When  the  Minister  of  the  Interior  took 
this  crooked  business  under  his  protection  the 
people  placed  only  one  construction  upon  his 
act.  It  meant  to  them  that  the  Government 
was  in  a  conspiracy  with  the  robbers,  and  it 
only  further  provoked  popular  emotion. 

Another  inflaming  act  of  Protopopov  was  the 
secret  appointment  of  General  Kurlovtothepost 
of  Assistant  Minister  of  the  Interior.  General 
Kurlov  had  inscribed  some  of  the  bloodiest 
pages  into  the  history  of  Russia  in  the  years 
following  the  revolution  of  1905.  When  in 
charge  of  a  punitive  expedition,  Kurlov  left  a 
trail  of  blood  and  war  wherever  he  went.  He 
ordered  hundreds  and  thousands  of  intellect- 
uals, Jews,   and   common   peasants  shot  and 

167 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

hanged.  He  was  one  of  the  main  tools  in  the 
hands  of  the  reactionaries  in  crushing  all  move- 
ments toward  freedom.  Appointed  about  1910 
to  the  post  of  Director  of  the  Department  of 
Police,  Kurlov  continued  his  destructive  activi- 
ties up  to  the  fall  of  1911,  when  Premier  Stolypin 
was  shot  in  the  presence  of  the  Czar  at  the  Kiev 
theater.  Kurlov  at  that  time  was  in  charge  of 
the  police  arrangements  of  the  Czar's  journey, 
and  was  personally  responsible  for  the  Emperor's 
safety.  The  man  who  shot  Stolypin  was  a  secret- 
service  agent.  On  the  night  of  the  murder 
Kurlov  was  indulging  in  an  orgy  in  his  hotel. 
As  Stolypin  was  an  enemy  of  Rasputin  and 
Kiu'lov  a  friend  of  the  latter,  it  was  reported 
that  the  Police  Director  was  aware  of  the 
scheduled  assassination  which  was  said  to  have 
been  engineered  by  the  monk.  Kurlov  escaped 
punishment,  which  alone  was  suflScient  to  prove 
his  powerful  connections.  Protopopov  had  now 
restored  Kurlov  in  the  Government  service,  but 
only  secretly.  It  had  never  happened  before 
that  a  Minister  was  appointed  without  a  record 
of  the  fact  in  the  official  organ  of  the  Govern- 
ment. This  was  what  Protopopov  did.  When, 
in  his  absence,  Kurlov  once  signed  a  paper  as 
Assistant  Minister,  the  story  leaked  out  and 

168 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

amazed  the  nation.  It  demonstrated  once  more 
the  hopelessness  of  Russia's  condition  under 
such  men  as  Sturmer  and  Protopopov. 

All  these  measures  on  the  part  of  the  dark 
forces  were  aimed  at  one  goal,  the  demoraliza- 
tion of  the  national  organism  so  as  to  render  it 
unfit  to  achieve  victory  over  Prussianism.  The 
spirit  of  patriotism  was  dampened.  The  trans- 
portation facilities  were  disorganized,  social 
work  hampered,  the  press  gagged,  the  people 
deliberately  starved,  all  for  the  purpose  of  ren- 
dering Russia's  democracy  receptive  to  peace 
proposals.  But  democracy  would  not  be  misled. 
The  Government  then  embarked  upon  a  delib- 
erate campaign  of  fomenting  dissatisfaction  with 
existing  conditions  among  the  labor  classes. 
The  idea  was  to  create  a  sentiment  for  peace 
on  the  ground  that  the  country's  troubles  were 
purely  a  product  of  the  war  and  not  of  the . 
efforts  of  the  dark  forces.  The  leaders  of  the 
Duma  and  those  of  the  labor  groups  periodically 
addressed  exhortations  to  the  masses  not  to  be 
deceived  by  the  treasonable  Government  agi- 
tators. Mysterious  leaflets  were  circulated  in 
factories  and  shops  calling  for  peace  demon- 
strations on  the  part  of  the  workers.  It  was  an 
extraordinary  situation,  which  was  destined  to 

II  169 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

culminate  in  the  great  event — the  revolution. 
The  dark  forces  did  not  realize  that  they  were 
playing  with  fire.  They  sowed  rebellion  so  as 
to  be  justified  in  starting  negotiations  for  a 
separate  peace.  Their  efforts  were  fruitful. 
Rebellion  was  growing,  but  they  did  not  under- 
stand its  nature.  They  were  preparing  the 
elements  responsible  for  their  own  destruction. 
When  Sturmer  was  Minister  of  the  Interior  these 
activities  first  assumed  an  organized  character. 
Under  Protopopov  they  developed  even  further. 
The  country  was  filled  with  all  kinds  of  alarm- 
ing rumors.  Everybody  was  excited  and  ner- 
vous. The  pent-up  energy  of  exasperation  was 
nearing  the  bursting-point.  Popular  indigna- 
tion had  to  find  a  channel  of  expression.  Sturm- 
er, Protopopov,  and  their  agents  worked  the 
country  up  to  such  a  pitch  of  excitement  that 
revolution  seemed  imminent.  In  fact,  Moscow 
was  full  of  rumors  that  Petrograd  had  revolted; 
Kharkov  heard  the  same  news  about  Moscow; 
and  Petrograd  was  full  of  stories  about  rebellion 
in  those  cities.  There  was  only  one  thing  that 
kept  the  people  from  breaking  out,  and  that 
was  the  expected  meeting  of  the  Duma  on 
November  14,  1916.  The  nation  waited  in 
suspense  for  the  voice  of  its  parliament,  in 

170 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

which  it  put  its  trust  and  confidence  to  an 
extent  and  with  a  unanimity  unequaled  in 
Russian  history. 


XI 

THE   CRISIS 

THE  meeting  of  the  Duma  on  November  14, 
1916,  marked  the  opening  of  the  critical 
round  in  the  great  battle  between  democracy 
and  Czarism.  For  a  century  the  forces  of  free- 
dom had  fought  the  powers  of  autocracy.  One 
by  one  the  latter  were  seceding  from  their  tra- 
ditional position  and  joining  the  ranks  of 
democracy.  On  several  occasions  the  long  con- 
test seemed  to  reach  a  climax.  The  Crimean 
War,  which  demonstrated  the  utter  failure  of 
Czarism,  generated  a  popular  movement  which 
was  responsible  for  the  liberation  of  the  serfs  and 
which  came  close  to  giving  Russia  a  parlia- 
mentary form  of  government.  The  Russo- 
Japanese  War,  which  again  proved  autocracy's 
ineptitude  and  corruption,  produced  a  mighty 
revolutionary  movement  which  gave  Russia  the 
Duma  and  brought  her  to  the  brink  of  liberty. 
Finally  the  Great  War,  which  once  for  all 
branded  the  bureaucratic  monarchy  with  the 

172 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

stamp  of  ignominy  and  failure,  was  destined 
to  free  the  Slavic  nation  from  the  shackles  of 
Czarism. 

It  was  a  remarkable  situation  that  the 
country  presented  on  the  opening  of  the  Duma's 
session.  On  one  side  was  a  nation  united  as 
never  before.  On  the  other  were  several  hun- 
dred bureaucrats,  reactionaries,  functionaries, 
and  political  adventurers  who  controlled  the 
Government,  pervaded  the  Court,  and  influenced 
the  Czar  himself.  It  was  the  unprecedented 
union  of  all  the  elements  in  the  nation  which 
was  responsible  for  the  force  of  the  concerted 
attack  upon  the  Government  by  the  Duma. 
All  factions  and  groups  joined  in  it.  The  leaders 
of  the  Black  Hundreds,  who  were  instrumental 
in  the  origination  of  pogroms  a  short  time  before; 
the  conservative  landlords  and  capitalists;  the 
moderate  Octobrists;  the  liberal  Constitutional 
Democrats;  the  radical  Labor  party,  and  the 
Socialists — all  fused  into  one  solid  wall  of  oppo- 
sition. 

Never  in  the  modern  history  of  Russia  was 
the  tension  so  great  as  on  November  14th.  The 
nation  held  its  breath.  The  country  was  already 
ripe  for  the  revolution  which  broke  out  four 
months  later.    Had  not  the  Duma  met,  it  un- 

173 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

doubtedly  would  have  occurred  then.  But  it 
would  have  been  a  far  bloodier  and  more  dan- 
gerous affair  in  November,  1916,  than  in  March, 
1917.  For  the  four  months  which  elapsed  be- 
tween the  two  dates  showed  that  the  cup  of 
Russia's  suffering  was  not  filled  at  the  beginning 
of  that  period.  New  trials  were  awaiting  the 
martyred  nation,  trials  that  solidified  the  revo- 
lutionary ranks  and  fortified  the  revolutionary 
spirit  to  an  extent  unknown  in  the  annals  of 
history. 

Michael  Rodzianko,  the  moderate  President 
of  the  Duma,  who  once  supported  the  Govern- 
ment, opened  the  historic  session  with  a  speech 
in  which  the  Government  of  Sturmer  was  criti- 
cized for  its  dubious  policies.  Rodzianko,  a 
large  landowner  and  a  skilled  parliamentarian* 
commanded  the  fullest  respect  and  confidence 
of  the  conservative  forces  in  the  country.  Be- 
fore the  Great  War,  he  co-operated  with  the 
Czar's  Cabinet  in  its  reactionary  legislation. 
No  one  could  ever  suspect  Rodzianko  of  radical- 
ism. It  must  indeed  have  been  a  serious  situa- 
tion if  the  President  of  the  Duma  came  out 
against  the  Prime  Minister.  His  restrained 
criticism,  therefore,  carried  much  more  weight 
than  the  fiery  denunciation  of  a  radical  leader. 

174 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

"The  Government  must  learn  from  us  what 
the  country  needs,"  said  Rodzianko.  "In  the 
course  of  a  struggle  and  an  exertion  of  national 
faculties,  the  spirit  of  the  country  must  not  be 
dampened  by  unnecessary  restrictions.  The 
Government  must  not  follow  a  path  different 
from  the  people.  With  the  confidence  of  the 
nation  it  must  head  the  social  forces  in  the 
march  toward  victory  over  the  enemy  along 
the  path  that  harmonizes  with  the  aspirations 
of  the  people.  There  is  no  other  path  to  be 
followed.  Any  deviation  from  it  means  delay- 
ing success  and  postponing  victory.  ...  In 
close  union  with  our  allies  we  wage  the  bloody 
conflict.  .  .  ,  It  is  necessary  to  remember  here 
that  there  is  no  discord  among  us.  .  .  . 

"There  is  no  trick  to  which  our  enemy  will 
not  resort  with  the  treacherous  object  of  wreck- 
ing our  alliance.  In  vain,  however,  are  his 
efforts.  In  vain  his  hostile  intrigues.  Russia 
gave  her  word  to  fight  in  common  with  the 
Allies  till  complete  and  final  victory  is  won. 
Russia  will  not  betray  her  friends,  and  with 
contempt  refuses  any  consideration  of  a  separate 
peace.  Russia  will  not  be  a  traitor  to  those 
who  are  fighting  side  by  side  with  her  sons  for 

a  great  and  just  cause." 

175 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

Rodzianko's  utterance  was  interrupted  by 
thunderous  outbursts  of  applause,  especially 
when  he  alluded  to  the  movement  for  a  separate 
peace  and  the  pro-German  intrigues.  Sturmer, 
who  was  present  during  the  address  of  Rod- 
zianko,  left  at  its  conclusion,  while  the  Allied 
ambassadors  received  a  tremendous  ovation 
during  the  speech. 

But  the  voice  of  the  people  was  yet  to  be 
heard  from  the  tribune  of  the  Duma.  And  this 
voice  arraigned  Sturmer  in  a  scathing  manner 
for  his  pro-Germanism,  demanding  the  resig- 
nation of  the  Cabinet  and  the  appointment  of 
a  Ministry  responsible  to  the  Duma. 

Leading  the  popular  charge  against  the 
Government  was  Paul  Miliukov,  the  brilliant 
leader  of  the  Constitutional  Democrats.  In  a 
historic  speech,  which  was  the  main  factor  in 
the  overthrow  of  the  Prime  Minister,  Miliukov 
showed  the  favor  with  which  the  Teutons  re- 
garded Sturmer  and  the  consternation  caused 
in  the  Allied  camp  by  his  activities.  Quoting 
German  and  Austrian  newspapers,  the  speaker 
brought  out  the  fact  that  the  Central  Powers 
regarded  Sturmer  as  a  member  "of  those  circles 
which  look  on  the  war  against  Germany  without 
particular   enthusiasm";     that   Sturmer's   ap- 

176 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

pointment  to  the  Foreign  Ministry  was  greeted 
in  the  Teutonic  countries  as  the  beginning  of  a 
new  era  in  Russian  politics,  while  the  dismissal 
of  Sazonov  produced  in  the  Entente  countries 
an  effect  "such  as  would  have  been  produced 
by  a  pogrom." 

The  crowning  sensation  of  the  speech,  how- 
ever, was  a  statement  revealing  Sturmer's  con- 
nection with  the  blackmailing  operations  of  his 
private  secretary,  Manasevitch-Manuilov.  A 
few  weeks  before,  Manuilov  had  been  arrested 
on  a  charge  of  bribery.  He  informed  the  direc- 
tors of  a  Petrograd  bank  that  proceedings  were 
being  instituted  against  them  by  the  Ministry 
of  the  Interior  for  alleged  trading  with  the 
enemy.  He  offered  to  suppress  the  case  through 
influential  friends  for  a  large  consideration. 

The  representatives  of  the  bank  had  special 
reasons  to  get  even  with  the  "dark  forces," 
since  the  retired  Minister  of  the  Interior,  A.  N. 
Khvostov,  was  a  brother  of  the  president  of  the 
bank.  A.  N.  Khvostov  owed  his  dismissal  to 
his  plot  to  kill  Rasputin,  which  was  investigated 
and  largely  uncovered  by  Manuilov.  The  di- 
rectors of  the  bank,  therefore,  accepted  Manu- 
ilov's  offer,  handing  over  to  him  a  large  sum  of 

money  in  marked  bills. 

177 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

A  few  minutes  later  Manuilov  was  arrested 
by  the  military  authorities  with  the  bribe  in  his 
possession.  His  release,  however,  followed  soon 
after  the  arrest.  The  country  was  greatly  exer- 
cised over  the  lawlessness  of  the  Government. 
The  name  of  Manuilov  was  on  everybody's 
lips.  Miliukov,  in  his  famous  speech,  said,  re- 
garding Manuilov's  liberation: 

*'Why  was  this  gentleman  arrested?  That 
has  been  known  long  ago,  and  I  shall  be  saying 
nothing  new  if  I  tell  you  what  you  already  know, 
namely,  that  he  was  arrested  for  extorting 
bribes  and  that  he  was  liberated  because — 
that  is  also  no  secret — ^he  told  the  examining 
magistrate  that  he  shared  the  bribes  with  the 
President  of  the  Council  of  Ministers." 

"Miliukov's  accusation  could  not  have  star- 
tled the  Duma  more,"  wrote  a  correspondent, 
"if  it  had  been  an  exploding  bomb.  The  writer 
was  in  the  Chamber  when  the  speech  was  de- 
livered, and  will  never  forget  its  effect  upon 
the  Deputies.  It  is  indeed  a  rare  thing  in  the 
annals  of  parliaments  for  the  Prime  Minister 
of  a  great  power  to  be  openly  accused,  from  the 
tribune,  of  sharing  in  the  depredations  of  a 
common  blackmailer." 

The  nation  was  in  a  state  of  extreme  ex- 
178 


Copyright  by  Underwood  &  Underwood 

PAUL  N.  MILIUKOV,  LEADER  OF  THE  CONSTITUTIONAL  DEMOCRATS 

AND    FIRST    FOREIGN    MINISTER    IN    THE    PROVISIONAL 

GOVERNMENT 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

citement,  and  the  statement  of  Miliukov  only 
further  intensified  popular  indignation.  Sturmer 
prohibited  the  publication  of  the  speech,  but 
hundreds  of  thousands  of  copies  of  it,  printed  by 
special  societies,  were  circulated  all  over  the 
country.  The  contest  between  the  Duma  and 
the  Government  reached  a  point  where  decisive 
action  one  way  or  the  other  was  imperative. 
Some  members  of  the  Cabinet,  among  them 
Alexander  Trepov,  Minister  of  Communica- 
tions, insisted  that  Sturmer  start  court  pro- 
ceedings against  Miliukov  for  his  accusation. 
The  Premier,  for  obvious  reasons,  was  reluctant 
to  do  it,  but  he  was  compelled  to  take  steps  in 
that  direction. 

Meanwhile,  the  Duma  attacks  against  the 
Government  shifted  to  the  Right.  A  conserva- 
tive leader,  Shulgin,  assailed  the  Cabinet  with 
unparalleled  violence.  Vladimir  Purishkevitch, 
a  reactionary  of  reactionaries,  delivered  a  crush- 
ing assault  against  the  Sturmer-Protopopov 
combination  and  the  dark  forces  behind  them. 

For  a  while  the  fate  of  Russia  seemed  to  hang 
in  the  balance.  Sturmer's  position  was  des- 
perate under  the  concerted  attacks  of  the 
Duma.  He,  therefore,  proposed  to  his  Cabinet 
to  dissolve  the  Duma.    A  majority  of  members 

179 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

opposed  this  suggestion.  Sturmer  proceeded 
to  execute  it  on  his  own  initiative.  He  drew  up 
a  document  to  that  effect,  but  needed  the 
signature  of  the  Czar  to  make  it  a  law.  But 
the  Czar  was  at  General  Headquarters. 

The  Duma  or  Sturmer? — this  was  the  issue. 
The  two  were  incompatible.  The  victory  of  the 
latter  would  mean  revolution.  The  triumph 
of  the  Duma  would  indicate  the  winning  of  the 
battle  by  the  democracy.  To  achieve  his  pur- 
pose, Sturmer  needed  an  audience  with  the 
Czar.  But  the  Czar  was  in  the  midst  of  the 
army  chiefs  who  were  hostile  to  the  dark  forces. 
A  short  but  tensely  dramatic  struggle  occurred. 
Sturmer  strained  all  his  energies  toward  ob- 
taining an  audience  with  the  Emperor.  Such 
an  audience  would  have  meant  the  dissolution 
of  the  Duma. 

At  the  critical  moment  there  suddenly  and 
unexpectedly  appeared  in  the  Duma  the  Minis- 
ters of  War  and  Marine,  General  Shuvaiev  and 
Admiral  Grigorovitch.  They  announced  that 
they  had  a  statement  to  make.  The  representa- 
tives of  the  people  held  their  breaths  in  sus- 
pense. The  War  Minister  mounted  the  tribune 
and  paid  a  tribute  to  the  people's  efforts  in  the 
cause  of  national  defense,  requesting  the  Duma's 

180 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

and  country's  future  co-operation  in  the  work 
of  equipping  the  army.  The  Minister  of  Marine 
reiterated  General  Shuvaiev's  demand  for  co- 
operation between  the  Government  and  the 
Duma.  The  latter,  perhaps,  never  witnessed 
such  a  scene  as  that  which  followed  the  two 
Ministers'  speeches.  A  tremendous  demon- 
stration took  place.  Roditchev,  the  Duma's 
golden-tongued  orator,  arose  and  said: 

"It  has  rarely  happened  at  our  sessions  that 
the  necessary  word  has  been  said  unexpectedly 
and  weightily  at  the  opportune  moment.  The 
representatives  of  the  army  tell  us  that  in 
accordance  with  the  wish  of  the  Emperor  and 
the  will  of  the  people  our  army  will  fight  until 
the  end.  And  that  is  precisely  what  we  want, 
that  is  precisely  why  we  are  sitting  here." 

The  salient  fact  about  the  event  was  pointed 
by  Paul  Miliukov,  when  he  declared  to  a  news- 
paperman: "The  War  and  Marine  Ministers 
have  declared  themselves  on  the  side  of  the 
Duma  and  the  people.  We,  on  our  part,  have 
said  that  the  Duma  is  with  the  army  and  the 
people."  The  long-existing  bond  of  under- 
standing and  mutual  affection  between  the 
nation  and  the  army  thus  became  a  formal 
union.    This  was  the  tremendous  factor  of  all, 

181 


THE   RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

in  the  succeeding  miraculous  transformation  of 
Russia. 

The  declarations  of  the  War  and  Marine 
Ministers  sealed  the  fate  of  Sturmer.  While 
on  his  way  to  General  Headquarters  to  urge  the 
Emperor  to  dissolve  the  Duma,  the  Prime 
Minister  was  intercepted  by  a  messenger  from 
the  Czar  and  a  decree  of  dismissal  handed  to 
him.  In  shame  he  returned  to  Petrograd. 
"The  Duma  has  won  the  first  victory,"  said 
Adjemov,  a  leading  deputy.  "It  is  as  yet  a  far 
cry  to  the  satisfaction  of  all  our  demands.  But 
it  is  the  first  time  in  the  history  of  Russia's 
parliament  that  Government  heads  have  openly 
given  to  it  their  moral  support." 

It  was  a  clear-cut  victory  of  the  people  and 
the  army  over  the  dark  forces.  But  it  was  not 
a  decisive  victory.  Sturmer  was  driven  out. 
But  the  man  appointed  as  his  successor,  Alex- 
ander Trepov,  was  not  the  kind  of  a  Premier 
the  Duma  and  the  nation  desired.  They  aimed 
at  a  Cabinet  responsible  to  the  Duma.  Trepov 
was  only  a  bureaucrat,  although  sincere  in  his 
effort  to  co-operate  with  parliament.  As  a 
member  of  Sturmer's  Cabinet,  in  which  he  was 
Minister  of  Communications,  he  showed  himself 
incompetent  and  incapable  as  the  traditional 

182 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

Russian  tchinovnik.  The  transportation  system 
of  the  empire  under  his  rule  reached  a  greater 
degree  of  demorahzation  than  ever  before. 

Trepov's  first  appearance  in  the  Duma  as 
Premier  was  met  with  a  hostile  demonstration 
on  the  part  of  the  extreme  radicals.  He  tried 
to  conciliate  the  nation  by  announcing  that  an 
agreement  had  been  concluded  in  1915  by  the 
terms  of  which  Russia  was  to  get  Constanti- 
nople. The  majority  of  the  Duma  was  tolerant 
toward  Trepov  because  he  was  not  affiliated 
with  the  dark  forces.  It  was  also  known  that 
the  new  Premier  was  making  every  effort  to 
oust  the  obnoxious  Minister  of  Interior  Proto- 
popov.  When  Sturmer  fell  it  was  taken  for 
granted  that  Protopopov  would  go  also.  But 
as  the  days  passed  by  and  no  announcement 
was  made  about  Protopopov's  retirement,  it 
began  to  dawn  upon  the  people  that  the  dark 
forces  were  by  no  means  broken.  In  fact,  they 
rallied  almost  immediately  after  Sturmer's 
downfall,  when  Rasputin  and  the  camarilla 
found  themselves  under  fire  from  all  directions. 
The  "dark  forces"  henceforth  became  a  familiar 
figure  of  speech  in  every  Russian  community  as 
well  as  in  foreign  countries. 

The  month  of  December,   1916,  witnessed 

183 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

some  of  the  tensest  scenes  in  the  contest  between 
the  democracy  and  the  dark  forces.  Protopopov 
defied  the  Premier  and  the  Duma.  He  became 
a  favorite  of  the  Court  circle  and  with  the  aid 
of  Rasputin  practically  controlled  the  Govern- 
ment. The  Duma  continued  to  attack  the 
Prime  Minister,  ignoring  the  fact  that  the  latter 
was  helpless.  The  nation  was  momentarily 
awaiting  the  dismissal  of  Protopopov  as  the 
natural  sequel  to  the  fall  of  Sturmer.  But  soon 
the  name  of  the  retired  Premier  again  began  to 
be  mentioned  in  connection  with  a  Government 
post.  There  were  rumors  that  he  was  to  be 
appointed  ambassador  to  a  neutral  country. 
What  this  meant  was  obvious.  Sturmer  was 
to  negotiate  for  a  separate  peace.  It  was  an- 
nounced officially  that  he  was  attached  to  the 
Foreign  Ministry.  It  is  hard  to  describe  the 
effect  of  such  news  on  the  nation  within  two  or 
three  weeks  after  the  downfall  of  the  Germano- 
phile  Prime  Minister.  The  Duma  continued  its 
concerted  attack  on  the  dark  forces,  demanding 
a  responsible  Ministry.  Even  half  of  the  extreme 
right,  the  most  rabid  monarchical  faction  in  the 
Duma,  joined  the  opposition.  At  the  same  time 
there  occurred  the  most  significant  event  in  the 
evolution  of  Russian  public  opinion. 

184 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

The  Imperial  Council,  Russia's  Upper  Cham- 
ber, for  the  first  time  in  its  history,  allied  itself 
with  the  Duma  by  an  overwhelming  majority. 
The  importance  of  this  event  could  be  realized 
only  from  a  survey  of  the  Council's  status. 
The  Council  was  the  scrap-heap  of  the  Czar's 
Government.  Retired  Premiers,  Ministers, 
Governors  and  other  high  tchinovniks  were 
appointed  to  the  Council  for  life.  Part  of  the 
members  were  elected  by  the  country's  business 
interests  and  by  high  educational  institutions. 
Traditionally,  the  Imperial  Council  was  the 
pillar  of  Czarism,  the  very  embodiment  of 
bureaucracy.  No  one  could  have  imagined 
this  body  opposing  the  Government.  But  even 
the  bureaucrats  could  not  stand  the  machina- 
tions of  the  dark  forces.  Criticism  of  the 
Government  grew  so  severe  in  the  Council  that 
it  resembled  a  liberal  organization  rather  than 
a  congregation  of  bureaucrats.  This  criticism 
finally  culminated  in  a  resolution,  passed  by  the 
Council,  demanding,  together  with  the  Duma, 
a  Government  responsible  to  the  legislative  in- 
stitutions. The  stronghold  of  autocracy  had 
thus  joined  the  popular  forces. 

The  peace  offer  of  Germany  made  on  Decem- 
ber 12th,  gave  the  feelings  of  the  Duma  and  the 

12  185 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

Council  an  opportunity  for  expression.  That 
the  dark  forces  favored  the  acceptance  of  the 
offer  there  was  no  doubt.  But  the  Czar  himself 
had  on  many  occasions  proved  his  loyalty  to 
the  Allies. 

To  pacify  the  nation,  the  newly  appointed 
Foreign  Minister,  Pokrovsky,  who  represented 
the  best  type  of  bureaucrat,  hiu*ried  to  the 
Duma  three  days  after  the  Teuton  proposal 
was  made  to  announce  Russia's  rejection  of  a 
"premature  peace."  Immediately  after  the 
Foreign  Minister's  declaration  the  Duma  passed 
a  resolution  which  contained  the  following 
declaration: 

"Having  heard  the  statement  by  the  Minis- 
ter of  Foreign  Affairs,  the  Duma  unanimously 
favors  a  categorical  refusal  by  the  Allied  Govern- 
ments to  enter,  imder  present  conditions,  into 
any  peace  negotiations  whatever."  The  Im- 
I>erial  Council  adopted  a  similar  resolution  on 
December  19th,  demonstrating  the  unanunity  of 
the  nation's  opposition  to  the  pro-German 
forces  in  the  Court  and  the  Government. 

Meanwhile,  the  Minister  of  the  Interior, 
Protopopov,  continued  his  destructive  activi- 
ties. He  muzzled  the  press  more  closely  than 
ever.     He  personally  directed  the  police  de- 

186 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

partment's   traitorous   work,   such   as   sowing 
discontent   among    the    masses    by    spreading 
mysterious  leaflets  calling  for  rebellion  on  the 
issue  of  peace.    To  succeed  in  this  provocative 
work  it  was  necessary  to  increase  the  suffering 
of  the  people  and  to  disrupt  the  organic  life  of 
the  country  and  the  army.    Protopopov's  plan 
was  to  bring  about  by  extreme  suffering  an 
uprising  which  would  result  in  a  clamor  for 
peace.    Such  a  clamor,  it  was  calculated,  would 
justify  the  Government  in   opening   separate 
peace    negotiations.      There    were    reports    in 
Russia  that  the  agreement  concluded  among 
the  Allies  early  in  the  war,  binding  each  party 
not  to  make  a  separate  peace,  contained  the 
stipulation  on  the  part  of  Russia  that  in  case 
of  internal  trouble  she  would  be  justified  in  such 
an  act.     What  Protopopov  was  working  for 
was,  therefore,  the  creation  of  internal  trouble. 
But  so  long  as  the  Unions  of  Zemstvos  and  of 
Towns  and  the  other  social  organizations  con- 
tinued  their   patriotic   and   tireless   efforts,   a 
complete  state  of  chaos  could  not  be  produced  as 
the  dark  forces  wished.    Social  Russia  supplied 
the  army  and  it  also  helped  the  interior  to  get 
along  somehow  in  the  distressing  conditions 
created  by   the  Government's  deliberate  cam- 

187 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

paign  of  disorganization.  Harassed  and  ham- 
pered as  social  Russia  was,  Protopopov  went 
still  further  in  his  desire  to  restrict  its  indus- 
trial work.  He  prohibited  altogether  meetings 
of  the  Unions  of  Zemstvos  and  Towns.  In 
Moscow  the  police  dispersed  such  meetings. 

No  clearer  proof  of  the  purpose  of  Protopo- 
pov's  policies  was  necessary.  Demonstrations 
and  riots  resulted  from  the  action  of  the  police* 
Protopopov  became  known  as  the  "most  hated 
man  in  Russia,"  so  intense  was  feeling  against 
him.  The  prevailing  state  of  mind  was  indi- 
cated by  the  resolution  of  the  Congress  of 
Nobility. 

The  Russian  nobility,  like  the  Imperial  Coun- 
cil, was  a  centuries-old  stronghold  of  conserva- 
tism. To  move  it  to  revolutionary  sentiments 
it  was  necessary  for  the  Czar's  Government  to 
go  to  the  limit  of  maladministration.  And  to 
the  limit  it  went,  so  far,  indeed,  that  the  Con- 
gress of  Nobility  which  met  in  December  joined 
the  rest  of  the  nation  in  a  unanimous  denun- 
ciation of  the  dark  forces,  and  petitioned  the 
Emperor  to  form  a  Government  in  conformity 
with  the  wishes  of  the  people. 

The  Emperor  remained  deaf  to  all  pleas  and 
warnings.     His  mother  had  warned  him  re- 

188 


I 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

peatedly  of  the  threatening  danger.  Grand- 
Duke  Nicholas  made  persistent  but  vain  efforts 
to  acquaint  the  Czar  with  the  actual  condition 
of  the  country.  Once  he  took  to  the  Emperor 
a  letter  which  he  had  written  on  the  situation, 
and  read  it  aloud  to  the  sovereign  and  his  wife. 
It  was  a  direct  warning  of  the  approaching 
collapse  and  a  plea  for  quick  action.  Nicholas 
II.  was  unmoved.  Charging  that  Rasputin  had 
become  the  real  ruler  of  the  empire,  that 
Protopopov  had  been  appointed  through  Ras- 
putin's influence,  that  a  clique  of  enemy  spies 
and  charlatans  centered  about  the  monk,  the 
Grand-Duke  flew  into  a  rage  at  the  Czar's  in- 
difference. When  the  Czarina's  name  was 
mentioned  by  the  Grand -Duke  she  angrily 
snatched  the  letter  from  the  Duke's  hand  and 
tore  it  to  pieces.  The  Czar  did  not  believe  the 
stories  of  Rasputin's  and  the  Czarina's  pro- 
German  machinations.  Seventeen  Grand-Dukes 
next  addressed  an  appeal  to  the  Czar  to  protect 
himself  against  the  influence  of  his  wife,  who 
was  imder  Rasputin's  domination.  But  it  was 
all  in  vain.  "What  has  Alexandra  to  do  with 
politics?"  asked  the  Emperor.  "I  refuse  to 
believe  that  she  is  unpopular  among  the  people." 
At  the  same  time  all  the  nation  spoke  of  the 

189 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

Empress  as  "the  German,"  considering  her  the 
bulwark  of  pro-Germanism  in  the  court. 

The  Grand-Duke  Nicholas  Milchailovitch  was 
banished  to  his  estates  for  telling  the  Czar  the 
truth  about  the  situation  and  the  Rasputin 
scandal.  When  he  had  finished  his  statement, 
fearing  that  he  had  gone  too  far,  the  Grand- 
Duke  said,  "Now  call  your  Cossacks  and  have 
me  killed  and  buried  in  your  garden."  Nicholas 
II.  merely  smiled.  A  few  days  later  he  wrote  a 
note  to  the  Grand-Duke  ordering  his  retirement 
to  his  coimtry  estate.  Before  retiring  the  Grand- 
Duke  addressed  a  letter  to  the  Emperor  as 
follows: 

You  have  frequently  proclaimed  your  will  to  continue 
the  war  to  a  victorious  end.  Are  you  sure  that  the  present 
condition  of  the  country  permits  this?  Do  you  hear  the 
whole  truth,  or  is  much  concealed?  Where  is  the  root  of 
the  evil? 

Often  did  you  tell  me  your  country  could  put  faith  in 
no  one  and  that  you  were  being  deceived.  If  this  is  so, 
then  it  appUes  particularly  to  your  wife,  who  loves  you 
and  yet  led  you  into  error,  being  surrounded  by  evil- 
minded  intimates.  You  believe  in  Alexandra  Feodorovna. 
This  is  natural.  But  the  words  she  utters  arc  the  product 
of  skilful  machinations,  not  of  truth.  K  you  are  powerless 
to  liberate  her  from  these  influences,  then  at  all  events 
be  on  your  guard  against  the  constant  and  systematic  in- 
fluence of  intriguers  who  are  using  your  wife  as  their 
instrument. 

Your  first  impulse  and  decision  are  always  remarkably 
true  and  to  the  point,  but  as  soon  as  other  influences  super- 

190 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

vene  you  begin  to  waver,  and  your  ultimate  decisions  are 
not  the  same.  If  you  could  remove  the  persistent  inter- 
ference of  dark  forces  in  all  matters  the  regeneration  of 
Russia  would  instantly  be  advanced,  and  you  would  re- 
gain the  confidence  of  the  enormous  majority  of  your  sub- 
jects, which  you  have  forfeited.  Everything  will  go 
smoothly.  When  the  time  comes — and  it  is  not  far  dis- 
tant— you  can  yourself  proclaim  from  the  throne  the  gift 
of  the  desired  responsibility  of  Ministers  to  yourself  and 
to  the  legislative  institutions.  That  will  come  about 
simply  of  itself  without  pressure  from  outside,  not  like 
the  memorable  enactment  of  October  30,  1905. 

I  long  hesitated  to  tell  you  the  whole  truth,  but  decided 
to  do  so  after  I  had  been  convinced  by  your  mother  and 
sisters  that  it  must  be  done.  You  are  on  the  eve  of  new 
troubles — I  say  more,  on  the  eve  of  attempts  on  your  life. 

Vladimir  Purishkevitch,  the  member  of  the 
Duma  who  opposed  the  Government  in  spite  of 
his  notorious  monarchical  affiliations,  went  to 
see  the  Emperor  for  the  special  purpose  of  warn- 
ing him  against  the  activities  of  the  dark  forces. 
But  Nicholas  II.  took  no  heed  also  of  the  urg- 
ings  of  one  of  his  leading  public  supporters. 
Purishkevitch  returned  to  the  Duma  convinced 
of  the  necessity  for  quick  action.  Toward  the 
end  of  December  he  delivered,  from  the  tribune 
of  the  Duma,  a  powerful  assault  against  the 
camarilla. 

Paul  Miliukov,  who  had  wrecked  Sturmer's 

Premiership,  now  made  another  violent  attack 

upon  the  Government,  aiming  at  Protopopov. 

19X 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

For  his  first  attack  he  had  nearly  paid  with  his 
life.  A  plot  to  kill  him  was  organized  by  the 
leader  of  the  Black  Hundreds,  Dubrovin,  who 
was  a  close  associate  of  the  dark  forces. 

Prohozhi,  a  trusted  member  of  the  organiza- 
tion, imdertook  to  remove  Miliukov  for  a  cer- 
tain sum  of  money  and  a  guarantee  of  immu- 
nity from  the  law.  But,  after  thinking  it  over, 
the  selected  assassin  repented  and  disclosed  the 
whole  scheme.  There  was  no  doubt  in  the 
minds  of  the  people  that  the  plot  originated 
with  the  reactionary  forces  working  for  a 
separate  peace  with  Germany,  as  Miliukov  was 
the  sharpest  thorn  in  their  side.  In  his  latest 
indictment  of  the  Government  there  was  a  ring 
that  resounded  throughout  the  world. 

Before  adjourning  for  Christmas,  the  Duma 
adopted  a  resolution  protesting  against  the 
forces  undermining  the  nation's  efforts  toward 
winning  the  war  and  indorsing  the  activities 
of  the  social  organizations.  But  the  end  of 
1916  was  yet  to  inscribe  the  most  dramatic 
chapter  of  all  in  the  history  of  the  year. 


XII 

RASPUTIN   AND   PROTOPOPOV 

IN  the  early  hours  of  December  30th  a 
poKceman  on  duty  at  the  Moika  Canal, 
Petrograd,  heard  the  sounds  of  shots  and  cries 
coming  from  a  house  belonging  to  the  young 
Prince  Felix  Yusupov,  who  had  married  a  cousin 
of  the  Czar.  In  the  house  were  Grand-Duke 
Dmitri  Pavlovitch,  ex-Minister  of  the  Interior, 
Khvostov,  Deputy  Purishkevitch,  and  others. 
When  the  policeman  went  to  the  gate  of  the 
house  to  ask  what  had  happened,  he  received 
no  explanation. 

A  short  while  later  two  motor-cars  drove  up 
to  the  door  and  into  the  garden.  In  one  of  the 
cars  a  large  bimdle  was  placed.  Beside  this 
bundle  a  man  took  his  seat  and  ordered  the 
chauffeur  to  drive  to  an  island  at  the  mouth  of 
the  Neva.  Traces  of  blood  were  left  in  the 
garden.  There  were  also  marks  of  blood  on  the 
ice  of  the  frozen  Neva  where  the  car  had  stopped. 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

Near  these  marks  was  a  freshly  made  hole. 
And  close  to  the  hole  lay  a  pair  of  blood-stained 
rubber  shoes. 

The  bundle  that  was  taken  out  of  the  house 
of  Prince  Yusupov  was  the  body  of  Rasputin, 
the  omnipotent  monk  who  had  ruled  Russia 
from  behind  the  throne  of  the  Czar.  He  had 
been  lured  by  the  aristocratic  company  to  the 
dwelling  of  the  young  Prince  Yusupov,  shot 
there,  carried  to  the  river,  and  dropped  into 
the  hole.  The  dark  forces  had  received  a 
powerful  blow.     Their  leader  was  gone. 

Russia  celebrated  the  event  with  unbounded 
joy.  Seldom  had  that  turbulent  country  been 
thrilled  as  it  was  by  the  sensational  news  of 
Rasputin's  end.  The  slayers,  although  known, 
were  left  alone  by  the  Government  of  Trepov 
for  obvious  reasons.  First,  they  were  of  too  high 
a  rank  to  be  arrested;  secondly,  Trepov  was 
liimself  glad  of  the  destruction  of  the  chief  of 
the  dark  forces,  seeing  in  it  the  downfall  of 
Protopopov  and  a  relief  of  the  tension  between 
the  nation  and  the  Cabinet. 

Protopopov  was  so  profoundly  affected  by 
the  news  of  Rasputin's  death  that  he  fainted. 
The  Czarina  and  the  camarilla  were  thunder- 
struck.    Madame  Virubova,  the  collaborator 

J94 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

of  the  slain  monk,  took  his  daughters  to  her 
home  as  a  sign  of  her  profound  emotion.  The 
Czar  and  his  son,  Alexis,  who  were  at  General 
Headquarters  at  the  time  of  the  murder,  hur- 
ried to  Tsarskoye  Selo  as  soon  as  information 
of  it  reached  there. 

When  the  Czar  arrived  home  the  body  of  the 
monk  had  already  been  recovered  from  the 
river.  A  mass  was  served  by  the  Petrograd 
Metropolitan,  Pitirim,  an  associate  of  the  assas- 
sinated muzhik.  The  body  was  then  taken  to 
Tsarskoye  Selo,  where  the  camarilla  paid  their 
last  respects  to  the  impostor.  Minister  Proto- 
popov  was  one  of  the  chief  mourners.  He, 
General  Voyeykov,  the  Emperor,  and  others 
carried  the  silver  coffin  in  which  Rasputin's 
body  had  been  placed  to  the  burying-ground. 
The  Czarina  and  the  Court  intriguers  followed 
in  deep  mourning.  This  scandal  only  enraged 
the  people  the  more. 

Alexander  Yablonovsky,  one  of  Russia's  lead- 
ing feuilletonists,  summarized  the  part  of  Ras- 
putin in  history  as  an  era  in  itself. 

Practically  the  entire  historic  role  of  Rasputin,  he  wrote, 
consists  of  the  fact  that  he  united  all  Russia  in  a  general 
hatred  for  the  dark,  irresponsible  forces. 

The  Imperial  Duma,  the  Imperial  Council,  the  United 
NobiUty,   the  social   organizations,   the  press — all  were 

195 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

permeated  by  the  same  conviction — namely,  that  it  was 
high  time  to  remove  from  the  Russian  poUtical  arena  the 
Government  gamblers. 

More  than  that,  Rasputin  became  even  a  matter  of 
concern  to  Europe.  The  foreign  press  printed  articles 
about  him.  The  foreign  ambassadors  cabled  long  reports 
in  code  to  their  governments  in  connection  with  him.  But, 
of  course,  to  Europe  he  was  more  of  a  sad  anecdote  than 
an  historical  fact.  To  us,  on  the  other  hand,  he  was  not 
only  a  fact,  he  was  an  era. 

We  have  experienced  immeasurable  humiliation  on 
account  of  him.  But  this  humiliation  has  fused  Russia 
into  a  single  body,  creating  citizens  out  of  human  pulp. 

All  our  life  we  fought  the  irresponsible  bureaucracy. 
Our  literature,  our  press,  our  science,  our  parties — all, 
according  to  their  resources,  plucked  the  roots  of  this 
rotten  plant.  But  how  big  were  the  results  of  our  half- 
century  of  labor.'' 

And  then  a  Siberian  muzhik  appeared,  and  against  his 
own  will  he  cut  the  arteries  of  the  dark  force,  he*  stamped 
it  in  the  mud,  spitting  at  the  very  principle,  the  very  idea, 
of  autocratic  bureaucracy. 

Rasputin  was  killed  for  the  purpose  of  cleans- 
ing Russia  of  the  dark  forces.  The  people  ex- 
pected momentarily  the  fall  of  the  camarilla  and 
the  dismissal  of  Protopopov.  But  these  ex- 
pectations were  soon  shattered.  Instead  of 
dissolving,  the  dark  forces  rallied  imder  a  new 
head.  The  subtle  and  crafty  Protopopov  has- 
tened to  replace  Rasputin's  influence  over  the 
Czarina  by  spiritualistic  seances  organized 
under  his  supervision  at  the  palace.  The  spirit 
of  the  dead  impostor  was  conjured  up  to  con- 

196 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

tinue  the  activities  of  his  life  on  earth.  Proto- 
popov  used  the  spirit  for  even  larger  purposes 
than  Rasputin  himself  ever  did.  The  result 
was  that  the  Minister  of  the  Interior  virtually 
replaced  the  slain  monk  in  power  and  authority. 
Premier  Trepov  had  allowed  the  press  to 
print  almost  everything  on  the  Rasputin 
scandal.  He  also  continued  to  exert  his  in- 
fluence for  the  retirement  of  Protopopov.  But 
the  latter  was  too  powerful,  and  it  was  Trepov 
who  was  forced  to  resign  after  holding  the 
Premiership  for  about  six  weeks.  With  the 
Premier  also  resigned  Minister  of  Education 
Ignatyev,  the  most  popular  Minister  in  the 
country.  Public  opinion  felt  outraged  by  the 
dismissal  of  the  latter.  He  received  more  than 
a  thousand  telegrams  of  sympathy  from  all  the 
corners  of  the  land.  As  successor  to  Trepov 
Prince  Nicholas  Golitzin,  a  bureaucrat  of  the  old 
school  and  a  man  of  little  personality,  was  ap- 
pointed. One  of  the  blackest  reactionaries  in 
the  country,  Kultchitsky,  obtained  the  portfolio 
of  Minister  of  Education.  The  new  Premier 
announced  promptly  that  no  reforms  were  to 
be  expected  from  him.  Indeed,  he  could  grant 
none,  as  the  real  ruler  of  the  Government  was 

Protopopov. 

197 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

At  the  reception  held  at  the  palace  on  the 
night  of  the  Russian  New- Year,  which  begins  on 
the  14th  of  January,  by  the  new  style,  Presi- 
dent Rodzianko  of  the  Duma  was  present. 
Protopopov,  once  vice-president  and  colleague 
of  Rodzianko,  approached  the  latter  to  shake 
hands.  But  the  head  of  the  Duma  turned  away 
from  the  ex-member  of  the  Progressive  Bloc  who 
betrayed  the  Duma  to  affiliate  himself  with  the 
pernicious  camarilla.  This  incident  produced  a 
profound  impression  on  the  nation.  It  was  re- 
ported that  Protopopov  would  challenge  Rod- 
zianko to  a  duel,  but  nothing  of  the  kind  oc- 
curred. Another  time  the  all-powerful  Minister 
of  the  Interior  strolled  into  one  of  the  most 
exclusive  and  aristocratic  clubs  of  Petrograd. 
He  took  a  seat  at  one  of  the  tables.  Immediately 
all  his  neighbors  arose  and  silently  moved  to  the 
other  end  of  the  room,  so  complete  and  solid 
was  the  ring  of  hate  surrounding  the  heir  to 
Rasputin. 

On  January  1, 1917,  old  style,  the  Czar  struck 
a  blow  at  the  liberal  forces  of  the  Imperial 
Council.  He  issued  an  edict  retiring  a  large 
number  of  progessive  members  and  replacing 
them  with  reactionaries.  The  new  president 
of  the  Council  was  Stcheglovitov,  one  of  the 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

blackest  and  most  hateful  of  bureaucratic 
charlatans.  He  was  responsible  for  the  trial  of 
a  Jew  named  Beilis  on  the  charge  of  ritual 
murder.  The  name  of  Stcheglovitov  alone  was 
enough  to  excite  the  democracy.  To  put  him 
at  the  head  of  the  Imperial  Council  meant  to 
alienate  further  those  few  elements  who  still 
clung  to  the  belief  that  autocracy  was  sacred. 

The  month  of  January  was  a  period  of  per- 
fect chaos  in  the  Government.  With  the  rise  of 
Golitzin  it  was  announced  that  the  opening  of  the 
Duma's  session  was  postponed  till  January  25th 
in  order  to  let  Golitzin  reorganize  the  Cabinet. 
Later  a  ukase  fixed  February  27th  as  the  date 
of  the  meeting  of  the  Duma.  The  reorganiza- 
tion of  the  Cabinet  began  with  the  dismissal  of 
General  Shuvaiev,  the  War  Minister,  who 
appeared  at  the  Duma  during  the  fatal  fight 
against  Sturmer  to  offer  his  support  to  the 
nation.  So  long  as  Shuvaiev  was  at  the  head 
of  the  War  Ministry,  the  Zemstvos  still  had  an 
opportunity  to  labor  for  the  cause  of  national 
defense.  But  Protopopov  wanted  to  break 
down  the  remaining  support  of  the  army.  He 
did  not  dare  to  appoint  a  member  of  the 
camarilla  to  the  post,  for  that  might  have  pro- 
voked the  soldiery.    So  he  simply  changed  men, 

199 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

bringing  about  the  appointment  of  General 
Beliaef  to  the  post.  At  the  same  time  Foreign 
Minister  Pokrovsky,  hardly  five  weeks  in  office; 
Minister  of  Finance,  Paul  Bark;  and  Minister 
of  Commerce,  Shakhovskoy,  were  reported  to 
have  been  granted  sick  leaves  of  two  months. 
Nobody  knew  for  some  time  who  were  in  the 
Cabinet.  All  kinds  of  rumors  and  stories  made 
the  rounds  of  the  country.  The  conservative 
Minister  of  Justice  Makarov  was  replaced  by 
the  still  more  conservative  Dobrovolsky,  while 
the  Ministry  of  Communications  was  intrusted 
to  Voinnovsky-Kriger,  an  Assistant  Minister. 
A  number  of  Assistant  Ministers  of  the  various 
departments  were  dismissed  and  shifted.  The 
arrested  ex-War  Minister  Sukhomlinov,  accused 
of  treason,  was  released  through  the  personal 
intervention  of  the  Empress.  The  press  was 
forbidden  to  write  about  it. 

The  general  situation  in  the  country  became 
extremely  critical  in  February.  The  anarchy 
reigning  in  the  Government  and  the  severe 
frosts  completely  disorganized  the  transporta- 
tion system  of  the  empire.  The  food-supplies  in 
the  big  cities  were  at  their  lowest  ebb.  Actual 
famine  was  at  hand.  Sporadic  strikes  broke 
out  here  and  there.    The  poHce  did  their  best, 

200 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

under  the  direction  of  Protopopov,  to  incite 
the  people  to  riots.  The  leaders  of  the  Duma 
repeatedly  issued  appeals  to  the  populace  not 
to  let  itself  be  trapped  by  the  German  and  pro- 
German  agents.  But  it  was  daily  becoming 
harder  to  restrain  the  starving  masses.  Again 
the  meeting  of  the  Duma  was  awaited  breath- 
lessly, but  the  situation  was  much  graver  now 
than  ever.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  it  had  reached 
the  crisis.  Protopopov,  isolated  entirely,  and 
hated  alike  by  all  classes  and  factions,  grew 
furious  against  social  and  democratic  Russia. 
For  a  while  he  annoimced  a  plan  to  emancipate 
the  Jews,  an  extraordinary  idea  for  a  mortal 
enemy  of  democracy.  The  purpose,  of  course, 
was  to  win  the  support  of  at  least  one  element 
in  the  population  of  the  country.  And  so  the 
unusual  spectacle  was  presented  of  the  Black 
Hundreds,  who  had  massacred  Jews  by  the 
thousand,  passing  resolutions  calling  for  Jewish 
emancipation.  These  resolutions  were  promul- 
gated at  the  initiative  of  the  dark  forces,  who 
were  in  need  of  allies  in  the  nation.  Fortunately 
the  Jews  were  not  caught  by  the  bait  of  Proto- 
popov, for  they  were  resolved  to  pool  their 
fortimes  with  the  Russian  democracy. 
Protopopov's  next  act  convulsed  the  nation 

13  201 


The   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

with  rage  and  rebellion.  He  attacked  the  War 
Industries  Committee,  which  mobilized  all  the 
industrial  resources  of  the  country  for  the  prose- 
cution of  the  war.  The  workers  employed  by 
the  organizations  under  the  control  of  the  com- 
mittee, numbering  hundreds  of  thousands,  con- 
sisted of  two  elements.  The  majority  section 
favored  the  co-operation  of  all  classes  in  the 
fight  against  Prussianism.  The  minority  ele- 
ment was  anti-war  and  strongly  pacifistic. 
Protopopov  did  his  best  to  encourage  all  kinds 
of  movements  among  the  latter.  But  he  found 
the  patriotic  workers  an  obstacle  to  his  plans. 
A  group  of  them  from  time  to  time  issued 
warnings  to  the  workers  not  to  heed  the  appeals 
of  police  agitators.  It  happened  more  than 
once,  when  a  speaker  was  addressing  a  crowd 
in  favor  of  a  movement  for  a  separate  peace, 
that  some  patriotic  worker  would  complain  to 
the  authorities  against  the  agitator.  But  the 
police  only  smiled,  for  they  had  orders  not  to 
disturb  their  own  men.  Protopopov,  however, 
wanted  to  weed  out  the  Labor  Group  loyal  to 
the  war.  He  had  them  arrested  and  thrown 
into  prison. 

The  nation  stood  aghast.    Protopopov  must 
have  gone  mad  to  commit  such  a  flagrant  act 

202 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

of  treason.  There  were,  indeed,  several  indica- 
tions that  he  had  become  partly  demented.  It 
became  clear  to  all  that  the  nation  was  being 
driven  to  revolution.  Few  wanted  it  dm*ing 
the  war,  fearing  that  it  might  paralyze  the 
victualing  of  the  army  at  the  front.  All  post- 
poned the  day  of  reckoning  till  after  the  war. 
But  Protopopov  and  the  camarilla  willed  other- 
wise. They  wanted  revolution,  because  they 
expected  to  crush  it  quickly  with  the  police  and 
soldiers,  meanwhile  using  it  as  a  cause  for  a 
separate  peace.  An  organized  rebellion  was 
being  prepared  by  the  secret  service.  Hundreds 
of  machine-guns  were  distributed  among  the 
police  in  the  various  sections  of  the  capital. 
The  authorities  were  instructed  to  reduce  the 
supply  of  food  arriving  daily  in  Petrograd. 
The  vast  army  at  the  front  was  left  with  food 
reserves  sufficient  only  for  a  few  days.  These 
reserves  were  then  systematically  reduced  to  a 
two  days'  supply.  While  rebellion  was  to  shake 
Petrograd,  the  army  was  to  find  itself  without 
food.  The  result,  of  course,  would  be  a  total 
collapse  and  the  conclusion  of  peace  with 
Prussia. 

On  February  27th  the  Duma  met.     Three 
hundred   thousand   workmen   walked   out  in 

203 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

Petrograd  on  that  day.  Revolution  was  in  the 
air.  Protopopov  had  distributed  machine-guns 
among  the  police.  Heavy  detachments  of 
troops  were  on  guard  everywhere.  Many  mil- 
lion hearts  trembled  with  apprehension.  The 
few  men  directing  the  affairs  of  Great  Britain, 
France,  and  Italy,  arose  that  morning  with 
their  hearts  heavy  and  oppressed.  They  knew 
that  fatal  events  were  approaching.  The  first 
day  the  expected  storm  did  not  break.  Premier 
Golitzin,  against  whom  all  attacks  were  being 
prepared,  failed  to  make  his  expected  declara- 
tion. Minister  of  Agriculture  Rittich  made 
a  long  speech  on  the  food  situation,  which  was 
received  in  chilly  silence.  The  Socialist  Deputy 
Tcheidze  delivered  an  address  which  was  weak 
for  that  occasion.  In  the  Imperial  Council, 
the  Upper  Chamber,  the  new  President,  Stche- 
glovitov,  refused  to  allow  the  leader  of  the 
Left  Group  to  make  a  declaration,  whereupon 
the  group  and  part  of  the  Center  walked  out. 
The  next  day  a  meeting  of  the  Right  Group, 
imder  the  presidency  of  ex-Premier  Trepov, 
decided  that  Stcheglovitov's  act  was  illegal. 
The  black  president  had  thus  succeeded  on  the 
first  day  to  range  against  himself  the  entire 
Council.   On  the  whole,  the  results  of  theDuma's 

«04 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

morning  session  were  received  with  a  feeling  of 
relief  abroad. 

The  big  demonstration  ended  in  peace.  The 
Czar  evidently  ascribed  it  to  Protopopov's 
preparations,  for  he  addressed  to  him  a  rescript 
of  thanks  for  his  good  work.  The  workers, 
however,  abstained  from  violence  because  they 
did  not  wish  to  fall  into  Protopopov's  trap. 
Still  not  all  returned  to  work  on  the  28th. 

The  session  held  on  the  evening  of  the  27th 
was  of  a  portentous  character.  Vladimir  Pu- 
rishkevitch,  the  Conservative,  who  was  impli- 
cated in  the  murder  of  Rasputin,  discharged 
the  opening  volley: 

Not  a  day  passes  [he  began]  but  the  German  party, 
working  for  the  success  of  our  enemy,  raises  its  head  higher 
in  this  country.  I  have  now  worked  more  than  two  and 
a  half  years  at  the  front,  and  I  can  tell  you  that  now,  in 
the  third  year  of  the  war,  the  spirit  of  the  Russian  army  is 
a  firm  guarantee  of  our  victory,  for  it  is  still  what  it  always 
was.  Words  fail  me  to  express  my  indignation  for  those 
who,  following  the  cries  of  foul  agitators,  permit  them- 
selves to  leave  their  work  and  seek  the  streets  with  political 
demand  in  the  heavy  days  which  Russia  is  living  through. 
Their  names  are  traitors,  helpers  of  German  arms  to  suc- 
cess, betrayers  of  their  country,  murderers  of  their  brothers 
who  are  lying  in  the  trenches  amid  the  snowdrifts.  But 
words  also  fail  me  to  describe  those  who  force  them  out 
into  the  streets  and  give  stone  to  a  people  that  is  asking 
for  bread.  ... 

The  cry  of  Russia  in  these  heavy  days  is  the  cry  also  of 
the  Imperial  Duma,  of  the  Council  of  Empire,  of  the  Con- 
205 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

grcss  of  the  Nobility,  of  the  local  unions  of  the  nobility,  of 
the  Zemstvo  institutions,  of  the  public  corporations.  They 
are  all  suspect  in  the  eyes  of  the  authorities,  and  their 
views  concealed  from  those  for  whom  the  hearts  of  the 
nation  are  beating.  Governmental  inquisition  has  been 
carried  to  a  pitch  unknown  since  the  days  of  Ivan  the 
Terrible  and  the  favorite  Biron.  The  words  of  the  press, 
unveiling  the  abuses  of  the  authorities,  are  torn  by  vul- 
tures, like  the  heart  of  the  fettered  Prometheus.  The 
taker  of  bribes  in  high  station  need  have  no  fears  for  the 
safety  of  his  plunder.  It  is  protected  by  the  notice,  "Do 
not  touch.'*  But,  gentlemen,  it  is  not  this  that  stirs  a 
Russia  which  is  living  through  the  Byzantine  pages  of  its 
history,  for  Russia  can  reconcile  herself  to  anything  that 
is  done  in  the  name  of  victory.  The  Imperial  Duma,  Hkc 
all  Russia,  has  been  forced  out  of  the  normal  tracks  of  its 
legislative  work,  not  by  the  devices  employed  by  the  au- 
thorities in  their  struggle  with  an  as  yet  invisible  domestic 
foe,  but  by  those  impalpable  intrigues,  perceptible  to  our 
natural  instinct,  intrigues  inspired  by  the  secret  thoughts 
of  certain  people,  to  whom  the  elemental  desire  of  the 
nation — "Peace  only  in  Berlin'* — ^is  strange  and  unin- 
telligible. .  .  . 

The  Minister  of  the  Interior  is  struggling  to  eradicate 
rebellion,  invisible  to  us,  in  all  those  institutions  of  the 
empire  in  which  the  pulse  of  Russia  now  most  loudly 
beats,  in  wliich  the  voice  of  Russian  patriotic  truth  speaks 
in  the  interests  of  an  acceleration  of  coming  victory.  Down 
with  all  public  organizations — that  is  Protopopov's  watch- 
word in  the  Council  of  Ministers.  Journalists  are  sent  into 
banishment  in  gangs,  and  the  Minister  of  the  Interior 
openly  declares  that  they  are  banished  not  for  revealing 
military  secrets,  but  for  writing  articles  unfavorable  to 
him  personally.  His  dream  is  preliminary  censorship,  for 
that  is  necessary  for  the  protection  of  his  personaHty. 

Realizing  what  has  been  done,  any  one  will  say  that 
there  is  at  present  no  unified  Government,  no  united  Cabi- 
net capable  of  appreciating  all  the  seriousness  of  the  events 

20G 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

we  are  living  through,  no  assurance  of  what  will  happen 
to-morrow.  The  Damocles  sword  of  dismissal  is  hung  over 
the  Duma  to  terrify  it.  .  .  . 

I  recognize  the  futility  of  all  speeches,  and  I  recognize  the 
hopelessness,  at  the  present  moment,  of  the  work  of  the 
Duma.  No  work  of  the  Duma,  no  speeches  delivered  in  it, 
can  be  of  any  succor.  I  am  convinced  that  there  will  be  no 
change,  and  that  the  Minister  of  the  Interior  will  go  to 
extremes  of  which  no  one  has  yet  dreamed.  For  his  struggle 
with  all  Russia  Protopopov  will  adopt  every  measure  to 
which  his  imagination  prompts  him.  After  all,  what  is 
Russia  to  him?  To-day  Russia  stands,  like  Hercules  of  old, 
in  the  shirt  poisoned  with  the  blood  of  the  Centaur  Nenus. 
It  burns  her.  She  writhes  in  the  agony  of  her  impotence. 
Her  cry  is  that  Russian  truth  should  penetrate  to  those 
places  where  it  should  be  spoken,  appreciated,  and  re- 
garded. Dawn  is  not  yet,  but  it  is  behind  the  hills.  Day 
will  come — I  feel  its  approach — and  the  sun  of  truth  will,  in 
the  hour  of  victory,  rise  above  a  regenerated  Fatherland. 

In  the  course  of  the  day  an  interpellation 
addressed  to  the  Government  was  read  by  the 
leader  of  the  Progressive  Bloc,  Shidlovsky.  It 
requested  the  Ministers  to  come  to  the  Duma 
and  give  explanations  of  the  measures  they  in- 
tended to  adopt  to  improve  the  condition  of  the 
country,  and  to  check  the  lawless  acts  of  the 
police.  The  Ministers  did  not  appear.  On  the 
following  day  Paul  Miliukov,  the  leader  of  the 
cadets,  and  A.  Kerensky,  the  brilliant  Socialist 
leader  of  the  Laborites,  addressed  the  Duma. 
The  former  drew  a  parallel  between  the  archaic 
llussian  Government  and  the  efficient  machines, 

m 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

of  the  Allies.  He  denounced  the  arrest  of  the 
patriotic  Labor  Group  by  Protopopov.  Keren- 
sky  spoke  passionately  and  sharply. 

"We  are  living  in  a  state  of  anarchy  un- 
precedented in  our  history,"  he  said.  "In  com- 
parison with  it  the  period  of  1613  seems  child's 
play.  Chaos  has  enveloped  not  only  the  politi- 
cal, but  the  economic  life  of  the  country  as  well. 
It  destroyed  the  very  foundations  of  the  nation's 
social-economic  structure. 

"Things  have  come  to  such  a  pass  that 
recently  one  of  the  Ministries,  shipping  coal  from 
Petrograd  to  a  near-by  city,  had  armed  the 
train  with  a  special  guard  so  that  other  authori- 
ties should  not  confiscate  the  coal  on  the  way. 
We  have  arrived  already  at  the  primitive  stage 
when  each  person  defends  with  all  the  resources 
at  his  command  the  material  in  his  possession, 
ready  to  enter  into  a  mortal  combat  for  it  with 
his  neighbor.  We  are  witnessing  the  same 
scenes  which  France  went  through  at  the  time 
of  the  revolution.  Then  also  the  products 
shipped  to  Paris  were  accompanied  by  special 
troop  detachments  to  prevent  their  being 
seized  by  the  provincial  authorities.  .  .  . 

"Behold  the  Cabinet  of  Rittich — Protopopov 
— Golitzin,  dragging  into  the  court  the  Labor 

208 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

Group  of  the  War  Industries  Committee, 
charged  with  aiming  at  the  erection  of  a  Rus- 
sian Social-Democratic  RepubKc!  They  did 
not  even  know  that  nobody  aims  at  a  'Social- 
Democratic'  republic.  One  aiming  at  a  re- 
public labors  for  popular  government.  But  has 
the  court  anything  to  say  about  all  these  dis- 
tinctions? We  know  beforehand  what  sentences 
are  to  be  imposed  upon  the  prisoners.  ...  I 
have  no  desire  to  criticize  the  individual  mem- 
bers of  the  Cabinet.  The  greatest  mistake  of 
all  is  to  seek  traitors,  German  agents,  separate 
Sturmers.  We  have  a  still  greater  enemy  than 
the  German  influence,  than  treason  and  treach- 
ery of  individual  persons.  And  this  is  the 
system.  The  system  of  a  medieval  form  of 
government.  ..." 

Irrefutable  proof  that  the  Government  wanted 
a  rebellion  was  presented  before  the  Duma  by 
Deputy  A.  Konovalov  on  March  3d.  He  dis- 
closed the  fact  that  on  March  1st  the  only  two 
members  of  the  Labor  Group  who  were  as  yet 
left  at  liberty,  seeing  the  danger  of  the  spread- 
ing strike  movement  provoked  by  the  arrests 
and  police  repressions,  drew  up  an  appeal  ex- 
horting the  workers  not  to  strike.  The  appeal 
read: 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

Comrades,  workers  of  Petrograd!  We  consider  it  our 
duty  to  appeal  to  you  to  return  to  work  immediately. 
The  working  class,  recognizing  its  responsibility  at  the 
present  moment,  must  not  weaken  its  powers  by  a  pro- 
tracted strike.  The  interests  of  the  labor  class  call  you 
to  your  shops. 

Anosovsky  and  Ostapenko,  members  of  the  Labor 
Group  of  the  War  Industries  Committee. 

The  two  signers  took  the  appeal  to  the  War 
Industries  Committee's  bureau  to  obtain  the 
censor's  permission  to  issue  it.  The  committee, 
which  was  an  influential  and  powerful  organiza- 
tion working  for  the  army's  welfare,  approved 
of  the  appeal  and  sent  it  to  the  censor  for 
approval.  But  the  Government  censor  did  not 
pass  the  proclamation  calling  for  an  end  of  the 
strikes ! 

Alexander  Guchkov,  President  of  the  War 
Industries  Committee,  thereupon  sent  copies 
of  the  appeal  to  the  Minister  of  the  Interior, 
the  chief  censor,  and  the  newspapers.  But  it 
was  never  published.  At  two  o'clock  in  the 
morning,  before  the  papers  went  to  press,  a 
mysterious  hand,  which  undoubtedly  belonged 
to  Protopopov,  interfered  and  forbade  the 
publication  of  the  appeal. 

This  incident  clinches  the  whole  mass  of 
reports  and  circumstantial  evidence  accusing 
Protopopov   of   inciting  a   revolution.     Later 

210 


1 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

events  demonstrated  that  such  was  really  the 
case.  As  the  situation  stood  in  the  first  week 
of  March,  there  was,  on  one  side,  the  Duma 
engaged  in  denunciation  of  the  Government, 
but  afraid  to  act  lest  the  war  be  lost;  and, 
on  the  other  side,  the  masses,  brought  to  the 
brink  of  revolt  by  intolerable  conditions  created 
by  the  Government  and  by  both  provocative 
and  sincere  agitation.  The  Duma  and  all  the 
other  moderate  leaders  were  rapidly  losing 
their  restraining  influence  over  the  masses. 
For  the  masses  were  being  driven  onward  by 
elemental  and  irresistible  forces.  No  moral 
power  on  earth  could  stop  their  progress.  No 
human  vision  could  calculate  their  increasing 
momentum.  The  Duma,  representing  some  of 
the  best  brains  in  mankind,  watched  with 
throbbing  hearts  the  natural  course  of  events, 
expecting  the  next  hour  to  see  Russia,  Europe, 
all  democracy,  swept  toward  ultimate  destruc- 
tion by  a  combined  Russo-German-Austrian 
autocratic  concert. 

In  the  office  of  the  Ministry  of  the  Interior 
the  man  who  was  the  immediate  author  of  this 
tidal  wave  contemplated,  with  a  cynical  smile 
on  his  face,  the  consummation  of  his  Machia- 
vellian scheme.    Outside  of  the  realm  where  the 

211 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

Duma  and  Protopopov  lived,  there  was  a  big 
world  attending  to  its  normal  and  abnormal 
business  in  perfect  ignorance  of  the  coming 
earthquake.  To  all  the  three — the  Duma,  the 
leader  of  the  dark  forces,  and  the  preoccupied 
world — the  upheaval  carried  stunning  surprises. 
To  the  history  of  civilization  it  contributed  the 
most  dramatic  chapter  in  the  annals  of  democ- 
racy. 


XIII 

THE  REVOLUTION 

IN  the  first  week  of  March  strikes  on  a 
small  scale  continued  in  Petrograd.  The 
more  radical  elements  of  the  labor  class  agi- 
tated for  the  release  of  the  arrested  Labor 
Group.  This  agitation  was  supported  by  the 
Government's  agents  provocateurs.  Disguised 
as  workmen,  they  urged  the  crowds  to  clamor 
for  food,  and  to  revolt  in  case  they  could  not 
get  it.  The  police,  armed  with  machine-guns, 
were  prepared  to  quell  any  such  revolt  so  as 
to  enable  the  camarilla  to  negotiate  for  a  sep- 
arate peace.  The  cooler  heads  among  the  labor 
people  understood  the  diabolical  plan  of  the 
Government.  Many  of  them  were  saying, 
"This  is  not  a  Zabastovka,  but  a  Protopovka,'* 
which  meant,  "This  is  not  a  strike,  but  a  trap 
of  Protopopov." 

Small  riots  occurred  in  Petrograd  on  March 
3d.    The  following  day  all  the  troops  in  the  city 

213 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

were  called  out  to  patrol  the  streets.  Martial 
law  was  declared  and  Petrograd  divided  into 
districts,  with  regimental  commanders  in  charge. 
Meanwhile,  the  police  were  denuding  the  city 
of  all  its  foodstuffs  and  storing  them  in  order 
to  decrease  the  available  supplies  for  the  popu- 
lation. The  result  was  that  prices  rose  from 
ten  to  fifteen  times  the  normal. 

The  strike  movement  began  to  expand.  The 
textile  workers  walked  out  on  March  7th.  Vari- 
ous other  trades  followed.  Popular  demon- 
strations, in  which  the  cry  was  "Give  us  bread," 
first  occurred  on  Thursday,  March  8th.  The 
troops  patrolling  the  streets  were  good-tem- 
pered and  showed  no  disposition  to  resort  to 
violence.  Soldiers  could  be  heard  saying  to 
civilians,  "Well,  you  just  start  and  we  shall 
help  you." 

Friday,  March  9th,  part  of  the  tramway  men 
struck.  Thousands  of  other  workers  also  joined 
the  spontaneous  movement.  Evidently  the 
masses  themselves  did  not  realize  whither  they 
were  drifting.  The  spacious  Nevsky  Prospect, 
the  chief  thoroughfare  of  Petrograd,  was  full 
of  people  who  came  out  to  enjoy  the  sight  of 
the  demonstrations.  The  university  students 
went  out  on  strike.     The  excitement  was  in- 

214 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

tense,  there  was  thunder  in  the  air,  and  yet 
there  was  the  spirit  of  a  hilarious  celebration 
about  it  all.  The  Cossacks  and  mounted  police 
were  everywhere.  The  former,  sent  out  to 
break  up  the  crowds,  steered  their  horses  care- 
fully in  and  out  of  the  dense  throngs,  waving 
their  whips  in  the  air  instead  of  using  them  on 
the  demonstrators.  They  were  wildly  cheered 
and  responded  with  laughter.  A  woman 
shouted: 

"Go  for  the  police,  not  for  us." 

A  Cossack  replied,  "We  shall  settle  accounts 
with  the  police  later." 

Saturday,  the  10th,  only  one  newspaper  ap- 
peared, the  Novoye  Vremya,  a  conservative 
publication.  That  was  its  last  issue  under  the 
old  regime.  The  strike  spread  further  during 
the  day,  sweeping  even  the  moderate  workers 
into  the  ranks  of  the  demonstrators.  Tramway 
traffic  was  completely  paralyzed. 

The  organized  workmen  of  Petrograd,  fol- 
lowing the  example  of  the  revolution  of  1905, 
elected  a  council  to  direct  the  general  strike 
and  the  developing  movement.  This  body 
became  known  as  the  Council  of  Workmen's 
Deputies,  and  it  was  destined  to  play  a  leading 
part  in  the  approaching  upheaval. 

215 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

The  throngs  that  filled  the  streets  were  be- 
coming aggressive.  A  well-known  baker's  shop 
was  looted  and  its  windows  smashed  when  the 
crowd  of  five  hundred  who  waited  in  line  to 
buy  bread  were  told  that  only  fifty  could  be 
served.  They  broke  into  the  store  and  found 
large  quantities  of  bread  hidden  away  for 
richer  customers. 

The  police  had  their  hands  full  dispersing  the 
crowds,  using  their  weapons  freely.  There 
were  numerous  casualties,  but  the  authorities 
issued  an  order  that  no  wounded  were  to  be 
taken  to  any  of  the  hospitals  and  no  dead  to 
the  morgues. 

The  Duma  was  in  session  all  the  time.  When 
the  situation  in  the  city  became  critical,  the 
Duma  broke  off  relations  with  the  Govern- 
ment. The  Progressive  Bloc  unanimously 
adopted  the  following  resolution: 

"The  Government  which  covered  its  hands 
with  the  blood  of  the  people  should  no  longer 
be  admitted  to  the  Duma.  With  such  a  Govern- 
ment the  Duma  breaks  all  relations  forever.'* 

The  Czar's  answer  to  the  Duma  resolution 
was  a  decree  ordering  its  dissolution. 

Sunday,  March  11th,  the  Duma  decided  to 
ignore  the  Emperor's  ukase  and  continued  in 

216 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

session.  The  workers,  exasperated  by  the  ac- 
tivity of  the  police,  were  in  a  fighting  mood. 
Hundreds  of  thousands  marched  in  processions 
to  the  Winter  Palace.  The  commander  of  the 
Petrograd  military  district  had  posted  a  proc- 
lamation forbidding  gatherings  and  threaten- 
ing that  the  soldiers  would  "stop  at  nothing  to 
restore  order."  The  proclamation  was  entirely 
ignored  by  the  population.  Troop  and  police 
patrols  were  passing  through  the  crowds  at 
regular  intervals.  The  streets  were  packed 
with  expectant  throngs,  listening  to  revolu- 
tionary speakers.  The  Cossacks  rode  through 
the  dense  masses,  again  managing  their  horses 
with  great  delicacy  and  causing  no  injuries. 
The  faces  of  the  people  were  smiling,  as  if  await- 
ing a  joyous  event. 

The  bridges  connecting  the  center  of  Petro- 
grad with  the  other  islands  making  up  the 
Russian  capital  were  guarded  by  the  police. 
Sunday  morning  the  main  bridges  leading  to 
the  northern  districts  were  cut  off,  strict  orders 
having  been  issued  not  to  let  any  person  cross 
into  the  city.  Evidently  the  workers  were  pre- 
paring for  a  decisive  action.  The  bridges  link- 
ing the  center  of  Petrograd  with  the  right  bank 
of  the  Neva  and  the  southern  districts  were, 

^4  217 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

however,  left  open.  Over  these  vast  numbers 
of  workers  poured  into  the  chief  thoroughfare, 
the  Nevsky  Prospect.  The  mass  which  filled 
the  square  in  front  of  the  Nicholas  Station  was 
enormous. 

The  police,  secreted  on  the  tops  of  buildings, 
opened  fire  with  machine-guns  at  the  demon- 
strators. A  little  later  other  police,  disguised 
as  soldiers  of  the  Volynski  Regiment,  fired  on 
the  throngs  from  a  side-street.  Altogether  about 
two  hundred  persons  were  killed  or  wounded. 
The  crowck  were  enraged  at  the  police. 

The  soldiers  of  the  Volynski  Regiment,  famous 
in  Russian  revolutionary  history,  were  enraged 
at  their  commander  for  allowing  the  police  to 
wear  the  regimental  uniforms.  They  revolted, 
killed  the  commander,  and  joined  the  people. 

The  revolt  of  the  Volynski  Regiment  oc- 
curred at  five  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  of  March 
11th,  and  marked  the  beginning  of  the  Russian 
revolution.  Up  to  that  moment  the  demon- 
strations had  been  in  the  nature  of  protests. 
After  that  they  assumed  a  revolutionary  char- 
acter. Detachments  of  other  troops  were  called 
out,  but  most  of  them  refused  point-blank  to 
obey  orders  to  fire  on  the  people.  One  or  two 
detachments  did  fire,  and  as  a  result  several 

218 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

fights  ensued  between  the  revolutionary  and 
Government  troops.  All  evening  the  struggle 
between  the  masses  and  the  police  continued 
throughout  the  city.  The  chief  of  police  was 
slain.    Disorder  became  general 

Michael  Rodzianko,  the  President  of  the 
Duma,  addressed  the  following  telegram  of 
warning  to  the  Emperor  on  Sunday  night: 

"The  situation  is  grave.  Anarchy  reigns  in 
the  capital.  The  Government  is  paralyzed. 
The  transport  of  provisions  and  fuel  is  com- 
pletely disorganized.  General  dissatisfaction  is 
growing.  Irregular  rifle-firing  is  occurring  in 
the  streets.  It  is  necessary  to  charge  imme- 
diately some  person  enjoying  the  confidence  of 
the  people  to  form  a  new  Government.  It  is 
impossible  to  linger.  Any  delay  means  death. 
Let  us  pray  to  God  that  the  responsibility  in 
this  hour  will  not  fall  upon  a  crowned  head." 

The  night  of  March  11th  was  a  fateful  one 
for  Russia.  There  was  anxiety  and  fear  in  the 
hearts  of  all.  The  Duma  received  no  answer 
from  the  Czar  to  the  message  of  Rodzianko. 
The  Deputies,  helpless  before  the  elemental 
tide  of  popular  wrath,  were  contemplating  the 
approaching  day  with  despair.  The  Govern- 
ment had  tens  of  thousands  of  troops  in  Petro- 

219 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

grad.  Was  there  any  doubt  that  it  would  be 
able  to  suppress  the  rebellious  soldiers  and 
workmen?  To  the  Duma  it  seemed  that  Russia 
was  doomed.  "The  revolution  will  be  crushed 
in  fifteen  minutes,"  said  Paul  Miliukov,  the 
leader  of  the  Constitutional  Democrats. 

While  the  Duma  assumed  this  watchful  and 
inactive  attitude,  the  leaders  of  the  socialistic, 
revolutionary,  and  labor  elements  organized 
for  a  general  attack  in  the  morning,  against  the 
old  regime.  Desultory  firing  continued  all  night. 
When  morning  broke  there  was  no  longer  a 
confused  mass  of  rebellious  people  facing  an 
organized  system.  Committees  were  appointed 
during  the  night  from  among  the  labor  leaders 
by  the  Council  of  Workmen's  Deputies  to  plan 
and  direct  the  steps  that  were  to  free  Russia. 
The  Duma  was  either  unaware  of  its  existence 
or  opposed  to  its  tactics.  In  any  event,  the 
Duma  did  not  identify  itself  with  the  actual 
fighting  that  followed;  it  did  not  come  out  into 
the  streets  to  head  the  rebel  populace;  it  only 
morally  supported  the  movement. 

Huge  crowds  filled  the  leading  streets  early 
Monday  morning.  They  were  formed  in  pro- 
cessions and  directed  to  go,  by  various  routes, 
to  the  Arsenal.    The  police  fired  upon  the  people 

220 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

from  the  roofs  and  attics  of  the  corner  build- 
ings. But  the  soldiers  who  were  ordered  to  help 
them  refused.  First  the  famous  Guards'  Regi- 
ment joined  the  rebels.  They  killed  the  officer 
who  had  ordered  them  to  shoot  into  the  crowds. 
A  second  regiment  was  sent  out  to  suppress  the 
Guards,  but  instead  it  took  the  side  of  the 
revolutionists.  A  third  regiment  soon  joined 
the  first  two.  Together  with  the  people  they 
attacked  the  police  cordon,  smashed  through, 
and  broke  into  the  Arsenal.  The  comman- 
dant. General  Matusov,  was  killed.  In  a  few 
minutes  the  rebels  had  at  their  disposal  thou- 
sands of  rifles,  revolvers,  machine-guns,  and  a 
vast  store  of  ammunition.  Loaded  with  arms 
and  ammunition,  they  formed  into  detachments 
and  went  after  the  police.  The  Artillery  De- 
partment was  taken  over  by  the  masses  at  the 
same  time. 

The  news  of  the  first  success  spread  like 
wild-fire.  The  troops  who  were  sent  to  quell 
the  uprising  began  to  waver.  Detachment 
after  detachment  and  regiment  after  regiment 
went  over  to  the  people.  "While  I  was  stand- 
ing on  the  Trinity  Bridge,'*  an  observer  of  that 
morning  wrote,  "a  picket  ten  strong  consulted 
earnestly  together.     After  a  few  moments  the 

221 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

sergeant  in  charge  looked  in  the  direction  of 
the  Arsenal,  whence  the  cheering  and  shots  were 
heard.  He  took  off  his  cap  and  crossed  him- 
self, saying:  "What  is  to  be  will  be!  Come 
along,  boys;  we  are  on  the  people's  side." 
Forming  up  his  section,  which  was  already 
in  looser  and  less  orthodox  formation,  they 
marched  off  past  the  British  Embassy  in  the 
direction  of  the  Duma.  They  had  hardly  gone 
a  few  yards  when  two  officers  galloped  up. 
The  sergeant  shouted: 

**  'Return  or  we  fire!' 

"Thex)fficers  turned  and  left  by  the  Summer 
Gardens  and  disappeared. 

"A  few  minutes  later  a  squadron  of  Cossacks 
passed  me  in  Million  Street.  They  were  gallop- 
ing and  they  were  surrounding  a  motor-car 
containing  officers,  who  were  taken  prisoners." 

At  the  same  time  the  President  of  the  Duma, 
Rodzianko,  despatched  to  the  Czar  another 
warning.     He  wrote: 

"The  situation  is  growing  worse.  It  is  neces- 
sary to  take  measures  immediately,  for  to- 
morrow it  will  be  too  late.  The  last  hour  has 
struck  to  decide  the  fate  of  the  country  and  the 
dynasty." 

President  Rodzianko  had  also  sent,  the  pre- 

222 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

vious  night,  messages  to  the  generals  command- 
ing on  the  various  fronts,  urging  them  to  sup- 
port his  plea  with  the  Emperor.  They  complied 
readily.  But  the  Czar  evidently  had  confidence 
in  Protopopov  and  his  machine-guns.  He  ig- 
nored the  warnings  of  the  Duma  and  the  gen- 
erals, making  no  reply. 

A  revolutionary  army,  composed  of  soldiers, 
armed  students,  and  workers,  turned,  after  the 
fall  of  the  Arsenal,  to  the  prisons  and  police 
courts.  The  "Kresty,"  where  the  Labor  Group 
and  Khrustalev-Nosar,  the  leader  of  the  Petro- 
grad  rising  of  1905,  were  detained,  was  stormed 
and  after  some  resistance  captured.  The 
heavy  doors  of  the  jail  were  smashed  open  and 
the  amazed  prisoners  set  free.  The  Detention 
Prison  was  also  stormed  and  set  on  fire,  as  were 
many  police  stations. 

Next  to  fall  before  the  revolutionary  forces 
was  the  famous  Peter  and  Paul  Fortress.  In 
the  history  of  Russia  it  played  the  role  of  the 
French  Bastille.  In  its  casemates  many  fighters 
for  freedom  were  languishing.  They  were  re- 
leased by  the  rebels  and  given  a  tremendous 
ovation.  The  Schluesselburg  Fortress  was  also 
seized  and  emptied  of  its  political  prisoners. 

One  of  these  released  men,  an  old  political 

223 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

prisoner,  with  a  revolver  in  hand,  led  the 
crowds  to  the  Secret  Service  Department.  On 
the  way  every  policeman  they  saw  was  shot 
down.  Military  oflScers  were  disarmed  and 
arrested;  those  who  offered  resistance  killed. 
With  bayonets,  swords,  pistols,  and  machine- 
guns  they  were  hunting  the  police.  Every 
police  nest  was  swept  of  its  contents,  ammuni- 
tion and  stored  food-supplies  requisitioned,  and 
the  places  demolished. 

The  Secret  Service  Department  symbolized 
the  old  regime  like  no  other  institution.  It  was 
with  great  bitterness  that  the  crowds  threw 
themselves  upon  this  bulwark  of  Czarism.  The 
archives,  containing  the  records  of  hundreds  of 
thousands  of  victims  of  the  despotic  system, 
were  set  afire.  So  huge  were  the  piles  of  these 
documents  that  for  three  days  the  cellars  were 
a  glowing  furnace.  Even  on  the  third  day 
people  crowded  around  the  scorched  and 
frameless  windows  to  warm  their  hands  at 
the  glow. 

Dead  and  dying  were  strewn  in  the  streets. 
The  churches  and  other  public  buildings,  in 
addition  to  the  hospitals,  were  opened  for  the 
accommodation  of  the  dead  and  wounded. 
Strict  orders  were  issued  that  the  killed  or 

^24 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

wounded  policemen  or  army  officers  were  to 
lie  were  they  fell. 

Red  flags  were  now  waving  in  the  air  every- 
where, and,  singing  the  songs  of  freedom  and 
revolution,  the  masses  continued  their  victo- 
rious fight.  The  leaders  of  the  movement 
commandeered  every  motor-car  they  could  get, 
armed  it  with  a  machine-gun  and  a  gun  crew, 
and  set  it  free  to  tour  the  city  and  round  up 
the  agents  of  the  Government. 

By  one  o'clock  twenty-five  thousand  soldiers 
had  joined  the  revolutionists.  A  deputation  of 
these  troops  arrived  at  the  Duma  to  ascertain 
its  position.  President  Rodzianko  communi- 
cated to  them  the  resolution,  wired  to  the  Em- 
peror, urging  him  to  set  up  a  Ministry  respon- 
sible to  the  people.  At  two  o'clock  the  revolu- 
tionary soldiers  began  arriving  at  the  Taurida 
Palace,  the  Duma's  meeting-place.  Deputies 
Tcheidze,  Kerensky,  and  Skobelev,  all  Socialists, 
addressed  the  revolutionary  army  and  were 
enthusiastically  cheered.  The  soldiers  then 
detailed  guards  for  the  Duma  and  took  over  its 
telephone  and  telegraph  apparatus. 

Prince  Golitzin,  the  Prime  Minister,  tele- 
phoned to  Rodzianko  his  resignation.  The 
other  Ministers  had  disappeared.    As  if  by  a 

225 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

miracle  the  gang  that  controlled  the  helm  of 
the  Governn^ent  a  few  hours  earlier  had  now 
vanished  in  the  thin  air.  The  collapse  of  the 
Protopopov-Golitzin  combination  was  as  com- 
plete as  it  was  swift  and  sudden. 

At  2 :30  o'clock  the  Duma  met.  The  question 
of  organizing  a  temporary  committee  to  restore 
order  in  Petrograd  was  discussed.  In  view  of 
the  crowded  assembly  it  was  decided  to  let  the 
Council  of  Elders  of  the  Duma  appoint  this 
committee.  Twelve  members,  representing  all 
the  parties,  were  named  for  this  body,  which 
became  known  as  the  Duma  Committee  of 
Safety. 

At  about  the  same  time  the  leaders  of  the 
revolution,  the  original  labor  council,  several 
army  representatives  and  the  chiefs  of  the 
radical  parties  met  in  aliother  hall  of  Taurida 
Palace.  Instituting  themselves  into  a  tempo- 
rary committee,  the  meeting  issued  an  appeal 
to  the  entire  revolutionary  proletariat  and 
soldiery  of  the  city  to  hold  immediate  elections 
for  the  Council  of  Workmen's  and  Soldiers' 
Deputies,  the  first  session  of  which  was  to  be 
held  at  seven  o'clock  that  evening. 

At  5 :30  o'clock  the  President  of  the  Imperial 
Council,    Stcheglovitov,    was    brought    under 


U 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

guard  to  the  Duma,  being  the  first  Minister  to 
be  arrested.  He  was  met  by  Deputy  Kerensky, 
who  asked: 

*'Are  you  former  Minister  Stcheglovitov?" 

"Yes,  I  am,"  was  the  answer. 

"You  are  arrested  by  my  order.  You  will 
have  to  stay  here.  We  do  not  wish  to  harm 
you,  but  you  are  dangerous  to  the  new  Russia 
as  a  reactionary.    You  will  have  to  stay  here." 

"I  submit,"  replied  the  black  leader. 

The  greatest  day  in  the  history  of  Russia, 
March  l^th,  drew  to  its  end.  Petrograd  that 
day  arose  under  the  rule  of  despotism  and  went 
to  bed  under  the  protection  of  the  people's  au- 
thority— the  Duma  Committee  and  the  Council 
of  Workmen's  and  Soldiers'  Deputies.  It  was 
the  workmen  and  soldiers  that  actually  fought 
and  shed  their  blood  for  the  freedom  of  Russia. 
The  Duma  took  a  hand  in  the  situation  only 
after  the  revolution  had  achieved  its  main 
successes. 

The  Committee  of  Safety  and  the  Council  of 
Deputies  were  in  session  all  night,  and  issued  in 
the  morning  of  March  13th  two  proclamations 
to  the  masses.  The  first  called  for  the  quick 
restoration  of  order  and  law.  The  second  ap- 
pealed to  the  people  to  demolish  completely 

227 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

the  old  regime  and  create  a  new  Government 
through  a  Constituent  Assembly  elected  on  the 
basis  of  universal,  secret,  and  direct  suffrage. 

The  Duma  Committee  next  issued  an  appeal 
to  the  army  officers  to  come  to  the  support  of 
the  Duma.  "  In  spite  of  the  profound  difference 
of  opinion  among  the  Duma  members  forming 
the  temporary  committee,"  read  the  appeal, 
"at  the  present  difficult  moment  complete 
harmony  has  been  reached  among  them.  We 
are  faced  by  the  urgent  task  of  organizing  the 
elemental  popular  movement.  In  organization 
only  are  there  safety  and  power.  Obey  tempo- 
rarily the  Committee  of  the  Duma." 

The  Committee  despatched  armed  men  in 
motor-cars  to  keep  order  in  the  city. 

In  front  of  the  Duma  on  March  13th  the 
various  military  organizations  and  schools,  led 
by  their  officers,  came  to  place  themselves  at  the 
disposal  of  the  Duma  Committee.  President 
Rodzianko  addressed  in  turn  the  Michailov 
Artillery  School,  the  Imperial  Guard,  the  fa- 
mous Preobrazhensky  Regiment  and  the  Ninth 
Reserve  Cavalry  Regiment.  At  the  same  time 
Miliukov  was  invited  to  address  the  First  Re- 
serve Cavalry  Regiment.  He  appealed  for  the 
support  of  both  officers  and  regulars.     The 

228 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

leader  of  the  Constitutional  Democrats  was 
carried  by  the  soldiers  to  his  automobile. 

Kerensky,  the  Socialist  Deputy,  met  with 
even  greater  enthusiasm  on  the  part  of  the 
troops  he  addressed.  "Comrades,  workers,  sol- 
diers, officers,  and  citizens!"  began  Kerensky. 
"That  we  are  all  here  together  inspires  me  with 
confidence  that  the  old  barbarous  regime  is 
destroyed  forever.  We  are  gathered  here  to 
swear  that  Russia  shall  be  free." 

"We  swear!"  resounded  a  multitude  of  voices, 
and  tens  of  thousands  of  right  hands  went  up 
into  the  air. 

"Long  live  the  free  citizenship  of  free  Russia !" 
concluded  Kerensky. 

A  prolonged  and  mighty  ovation  greeted  this 
sentiment. 

During  the  day  ex-Premier  Sturmer,  General 
Kurlov,  General  Commisarov,  and  many  other 
high  officials  were  arrested.  The  Duma  Com- 
mittee despatched  special  commissioners  on  the 
rights  of  Ministers  to  take  charge  of  the  rail- 
road, telegraph,  and  telephone  lines,  and  va- 
rious other  public  utilities  and  Government 
departments.  The  disorders  in  the  streets  con- 
tinued all  day,  largely  being  encounters  between 
the  police  and  the  revolutionists.    The  house  of 

229 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

Baron  Fredericks,  the  notorious  leader  of  the 
camarilla,  was  sacked  and  burned.  One  of  the 
biggest  hotels  in  the  city  was  attacked  by  the 
revolutionists,  and  about  two  hundred  officers 
quartered  there  arrested.  Hundreds  of  police 
were  also  arrested  during  the  day  and  brought 
to  the  Duma. 

In  the  afternoon  Grand-Duke  Cyril  addressed 
a  crowd  from  the  balcony  of  his  house,  declaring 
himself  in  support  of  the  revolution.  Telegrams 
were  sent  by  the  Committee  of  Safety  to  the 
commanders  of  the  Baltic  and  Black  Sea  fleets, 
and  to  the  commanders-in-chief  on  the  western 
and  Caucasian  fronts,  notifying  them  of  the 
fall  of  the  Golitzin  Government. 

Toward  evening  the  Metropolitan  Pitirim, 
one  of  the  members  of  the  camarilla,  was  arrest- 
ed. The  dark  head  of  the  Church,  a  pale  and 
tottering  figure  in  white  cap  and  black  robe, 
was  pushed  on  from  behind  by  not  very  respect- 
ful soldiers.  The  chief  of  the  Black  Hundreds, 
Doctor  Dubrovin,  was  also  brought  to  the  Duma 
and  imprisoned.  One  of  the  last  of  the  Minis- 
ters to  be  seized  was  Protopopov.  For  nearly 
two  days  he  hid  in  the  house  of  a  physician. 
Then  his  brother  found  him  and  suggested  that 
he  surrender  himself  to  the  new  Government. 

230 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

About  eleven  o'clock  in  the  evening  of  March 
13th,  a  man  dressed  in  civilian  clothes  came  to 
the  Duma  building.  Addressing  one  of  the 
young  people  there,  he  asked: 

"Are  you  a  student?" 

"Yes,  I  am." 

"Will  you  lead  me  to  the  Committee  of 
Safety  of  the  Duma?  I  am  the  former  Minister 
of  the  Interior,  Protopopov,  and  I  came  here 
to  surrender.  Please  take  me  to  the  right 
people." 

The  crowd  about  the  Duma,  recognizing 
Protopopov,  grew  excited.  Then  Deputy  Ke- 
rensky  came  out.  Protopopov,  pale  and  hardly 
able  to  remain  standing,  said: 

"Your  Excellency,  I  am  surrendering  to  the 
new  Government." 

The  same  night  ex-Minister  of  War  Sukhom- 
linov  was  arrested  by  a  young  oflficer  and  two 
sailors.  When  he  was  brought  to  the  Duma 
the  news  of  it  spread  among  the  soldiers  and 
workers  like  a  flame.  They  began  to  shout: 
"Give  us  Sukhomlinov!  Give  us  the  traitor!" 
With  difficulty  Deputy  Kerensky  saved  him 
from  immediate  execution.  His  epaulets,  how- 
ever, were  torn  off  and  a  soldier  was  admitted 
to  the  room  of  his  detention.     Only  through 

231 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

the  hard  efforts  of  Duma  members  was  the  ex- 
citement allayed. 

March  13th  also  saw  the  last  stand  of  the  old 
regime.  The  Admiralty  building  was  defended 
by  a  couple  of  regiments  still  loyal  to  the  Czar's 
Government.  For  several  hours  a  fierce  battle 
between  the  defenders  and  the  revolutionary 
army  followed.  Finally  the  loyal  troops  de- 
cided to  surrender  and  go  over  to  the  revolu- 
tionists. This  completed  the  army's  support 
of  the  revolution.  The  Petrograd  troops  were 
now  wholly  on  the  side  of  the  people. 

All  this  time  there  was  no  news  whatever  of 
the  Czar,  his  whereabouts  and  doings. 

March  14th  the  Committee  of  Safety  wired  to 
all  the  cities  in  the  empire  that  the  old  Govern- 
ment had  been  deposed  and  that  the  Duma 
constituted  a  temporary  Government. 

Normal  life  was  gradually  being  resumed, 
beginning  with  the  14th.  The  French  and 
British  Ambassadors  announced  to  the  Presi- 
dent of  the  Duma  that  their  Governments  had 
decided  to  enter  into  relations  with  the  Duma's 
Committee.  Moscow  and  Kharkov  also  recog- 
nized by  that  time  the  Committee. 

At  nine  in  the  morning  the  Emperor's  per- 
sonal  guard   joined   the   revolutionary   army. 

232 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

At  four  in  the  afternoon  Grand -Duke  Cyril 
appeared  in  the  Duma  and  put  his  command 
at  the  disposal  of  the  Committee.  The  Czar- 
ina's personal  guard  also  went  over  to  the  revolu- 
tionaries on  the  same  day.  The  Winter  Palace, 
the  Czar's  Petrograd  residence,  was  occupied 
by  the  rebels.  Deputy  Karaulov  was  commis- 
sioned by  the  Duma  to  issue  an  order  for  the 
arrest  of  all  drunkards,  looters,  gendarmes,  and 
secret  service  men.  The  oflScial  telegraph 
agency  was  taken  over  by  Deputy  Gronsky. 
A  city  militia  was  formed  to  keep  order.  Ex- 
President  Goremykin  was  arrested  with  many 
other  reactionaries.  A  body  of  several  hundred 
naval  and  army  officers  recognized  the  new 
Government.  The  fortress  of  Kronstadt,  its 
garrison  and  fleet  joined  in  the  revolution. 
Admiral  Viren,  the  commander,  was  killed. 
Two  Deputies  were  commissioned  to  take 
charge  of  the  situation  there. 

And  still  the  Czar  was  silent.  He  did  not 
even  communicate  with  his  family.  When  the 
Tsarskoye  Selo  garrison  revolted  and  took  over 
the  Palace,  the  Czarina  turned  to  President 
Rodzianko  to  protect  her  and  the  Czarevitch. 
Deputies  Demidov  and  Stepanov  were  de- 
spatched to  Tsarskoye  Selo  for  that  purpose. 

15  233 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

March  14th  was  closed  with  a  proclamation 
of  the  Committee  of  Safety,  which  read  in  part: 

"Citizens!  The  great  thing  has  happened. 
The  old  Government  that  oppressed  Russia  has 
dissolved  itself.  .  .  .  The  Committee  of  Safety 
and  the  Council  of  Workmen's  Deputies  are 
restoring  order  and  law  in  the  country.  .  .  . 
The  first  task  at  the  present  moment  is  the 
supplying  of  the  army  and  the  people  with 
food.  Citizens!  Help  your  country  with  bread 
and  work!" 

The  15th  of  March  still  found  Russia  with- 
out a  permanent  Government.  The  two  com- 
mittees were  successfully  running  the  ajffairs 
of  the  city  and  the  country.  But  the  Czar  was 
still  ruler  nominally.  No  new  Cabinet  had  been 
formed.  And  yet  the  population  was  behaving 
itself  wonderfully.  Daily  bulletins,  issued  by 
a  group  of  Petrograd  journalists  under  the 
auspices  of  the  Committee  of  Safety  and  the 
Council  of  Deputies,  kept  all  Petrograd  in- 
formed of  the  latest  developments.  They  were 
distributed  free.  In  the  morning  the  oflScers 
issued  a  joint  appeal  to  the  soldiers,  calling  for 
continued  alertness  on  the  part  of  the  revolu- 
tionary army. 

"The  hour  of  popular  freedom  has  struck!" 

034 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

read  the  appeal.  "The  army,  navy,  and  people 
together  have  raised  the  holy  banner  of  liberty. 
Only  a  free  Russia  can  destroy  the  German 
menace.  Remember  that  the  safety  and  vic- 
tory of  Russia  lie  in  our  mutual  confidence  and 
union.  The  old  autocratic  system,  which  for 
two  years  was  unable  to  lead  Russia  to  victory, 
let  it  perish  forever.  Together  with  you  we 
curse  the  old  regime.  Long  live  free,  great 
Russia!" 

The  Committee  of  Safety  then  proceeded  to 
restore  order.  Professor  Yurevitch  was  ap- 
pointed chief  of  police — undoubtedly  the  first 
professor  in  Russia  to  hold  such  a  post.  Minis- 
ter of  Commerce  Prince  Shakovskoy  and  ex- 
Minister  of  the  Interior  Maklakov,  a  notorious 
reactionary,  were  arrested.  A  special  commit- 
tee was  immediately  formed  to  elaborate  a  plan 
for  a  general  political  amnesty.  The  Labor 
party  issued  an  appeal  calling  for  obedience  to 
all  the  regulations  and  orders  of  the  Duma 
Committee. 

In  Petrograd  the  clergy  got  together  and 
issued  a  spirited  appeal  on  the  part  of  the 
Church  for  the  new  regime.  "The  time  has 
come  when  the  Orthodox  Russian  clergy  should 
raise  its  voice  in  the  great  popular  movement 

9i25 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

for  light,  truth,  brotherly  love,  and  freedom," 
read  the  proclamation. 

All  morning  negotiations  between  the  Com- 
mittee of  Safety  of  the  Duma  and  the  Council 
of  Workmen's  and  Soldiers'  Deputies  took 
place  in  regard  to  the  formation  of  a  new  Gov- 
ernment. The  negotiations  were  closed  at  three 
o'clock  in  the  afternoon.  A  Provisional  Gov- 
ernment was  the  result  of  the  joint  council. 
With  the  list  of  names  of  the  new  Cabinet, 
Miliukov  came  out  to  address  the  awaiting 
soldiers,  sailors,  and  citizens.    He  said: 

"We  are  passing  through  a  great  historic 
moment.  Only  three  days  ago  the  Russian 
Government  seemed  omnipotent.  Now  this 
Government  has  fallen  in  disgrace,  and  we  are 
swept  forward  by  the  revolution,  army  and 
people,  to  the  honorable  seats  of  the  first  Rus- 
sian national  Cabinet.  .  .  .  We  overthrew  the 
Government  easily  and  quickly.  But  this  is 
not  all.  The  bigger  half  of  the  task  is  still 
before  us.  We  must  retain  the  triumph  which 
we  achieved.  How  can  we  do  it?  The  answer 
is  plain  and  simple.  We  must  organize.  We 
must  first  of  all  be  of  one  will  and  one  thought. 
Many  old  differences  and  quarrels  took  place 
and  existed  among  the  members  of  the  present 

236 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

Cabinet.  Perhaps  soon  these  differences  will 
again  become  important  and  serious.  But 
to-day  they  pale,  they  disappear  before  that 
universal  and  great  problem  which  we  face — 
the  problem  of  creating  a  new  popular  power 
in  place  of  the  old  and  fallen." 

Miliukov  then  outlined  the  nature  of  the  new 
Cabinet's  program.  As  he  read  the  names  of 
the  Ministers  those  who  belonged  to  the  radical 
wing  received  the  greater  applause.  Kerensky, 
who  was  given  the  portfolio  of  Minister  of 
Justice,  was  cheered  most  of  all.  When  the 
speaker  announced  the  decision  of  the  two  com- 
mittees to  depose  "that  old  despot,"  the  Czar, 
there  was  general  applause.  But  when  he  de- 
clared that,  temporarily  at  least,  the  dynasty 
would  be  retained,  there  was  a  chorus  of  dis- 
approval. 

The  Duma  stood,  out  of  fear,  for  the  reten- 
tion of  the  Romanovs.  The  Council  of  Work- 
men's and  Soldiers'  Deputies  insisted  upon  the 
complete  overthrow  of  the  monarchy.  All 
morning  of  March  15th  conferences  were  held 
between  the  two  bodies.  Finally  it  was  de- 
cided to  demand  the  abdication  of  Nicholas  II., 
to  proclaim  temporarily  as  regent  Grand-Duke 
Michael,  his  brother,  and  to  leave  the  Czar's 

237 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

son,  Alexis,  as  heir  apparent.  The  revolution- 
ary masses  greeted  the  latter  decision  with 
outspoken  hostility.  "Again  the  Romanovs!" 
cried  the  populace,  which  had  made  up  its 
mind  during  the  revolution  that  Czarism  was 
abolished  for  good  in  Russia. 

From  all  parts  of  the  country  messages  were 
arriving  hourly  telling  of  the  nation's  unani- 
mous support  of  the  new  Government.  Grand- 
Duke  Nicholas  wired  from  the  Caucasian  front 
urging  the  Czar  to  save  Russia.  The  exiled 
leaders  of  the  revolutionary  movement  abroad 
were  urged  to  return  immediately  home.  The 
Association  of  Newspaper  Editors  met  and  de- 
cided to  resume  as  soon  as  possible  the  publi- 
cation of  their  journals.  New  army  divisions 
arriving  in  Petrograd  were  met  by  the  revolu- 
tion forces  with  music  and  cheers. 

The  arrested  Ministers  provided  enough  di- 
version for  the  still  nervous  population.  Pro- 
topopov  kept  asking  his  guards  what  would  be 
done  to  him.  Especially  alarmed  was  old 
Sturmer.  "Who  will  guarantee  that  they  won't 
cut  my  head  off?"  he  queried. 

Two  Conservative  Deputies,  Alexander  Guch- 
kov,  War  Minister  in  the  Provisional  Govern- 
ment, and  V.  V.  Shulgin,  were  delegated  by  the 

238 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

Duma  to  carry  out  the  decision  to  dethrone 
Nicholas  II.,  the  man  who  caused  his  country 
more  suffering  than  any  other  Russia-n  ruler 
since  the  days  of  Ivan  the  Terrible.  The  first 
act  of  the  great  Russian  revolution  was  over. 


XIV 

THE  FALL   OF  CZARISM 

NICHOLAS  II.  was  at  General  Headquar- 
ters when  the  revolution  broke  out.  He 
received  and  read  Rodzianko's  telegrams,  but 
did  nothing.  He  listened  to  the  exhortation  of 
General  Alexeiev,  but  made  no  move.  Just  as 
he  had  failed  to  act  at  the  warnings  of  the 
Grand-Dukes  and  his  wise  counselors,  so  now 
he  watched  events  as  if  in  a  stupor  and  acted 
like  an  automaton.  Summoned  by  his  wife, 
he  and  his  suite  started  for  Tsarskoye  Selo  on 
two  trains  commanded  by  General  Tsabel. 
With  the  Emperor  was  the  notorious  General 
Voyeykov,  the  old  Baron  Fredericks  and 
Admiral  Nilov.  The  suite  drank  heavily, 
urging  the  Czar  to  drink  also,  for  they  feared 
to  tell  him  of  the  happenings  in  Petrograd. 
General  Voyeykov,  however,  told  him  of  the 
disturbances,  adding  that  four  good  companies 
of  troops  could  suppress  the  rebellion. 

240 


THE   RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

At  two  in  the  morning,  March  14th,  the  Czar 
awoke,  went  into  the  dining-room,  and  asked 
what  was  really  happening.  General  Voyeykov, 
according  to  a  correspondent,  said: 

"A  telegram  has  just  arrived  that  a  train  of 
seven  hundred  men,  who  had  received  the 
Order  of  the  George  for  valor,  commanded  by 
General  Ivanov,  left  Moghilev.  These  noble 
heroes  are  more  than  enough  to  make  possible 
that  your  Majesty  should  go  to  Tsarskoye  Selo. 
There  you  will  find  a  faithful  garrison,  and  at 
their  head  go  to  the  Duma,  when  the  troops 
will  remember  their  allegiance  and  will  know 
how  to  deal  with  the  young  soldiers  and  revo- 
lutionaries." 

At  this  moment  Tsabel  came  in.  "All  that 
is  a  lie,"  he  said,  and  showed  a  telegram  from 
Petrograd,  signed  by  the  commandant  of  the 
Nicolas  Station,  Lieutenant  Grekov,  ordering 
the  Czar's  train  to  be  sent,  not  to  Tsarskoye 
Selo,  but  to  Petrograd. 

"What's  this — mutiny?"  cried  the  Czar. 
"Lieutenant  Grekov  commanding  me  to  Petro- 
grad?" 

"Sixty  thousand  troops  with  officers  are  on 
the  side  of  the  Provisional  Government,"  re- 
plied Tsabel. 

«4l 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

"Why  tell  me  nothing  of  this  before?"  asked 
the  Czar.  "Why  only  now,  when  it  is  already 
too  late?"  Then,  after  a  minute,  he  said,  with 
quiet  hopelessness,  "Well,  thank  God,  I  will 
go  to  Livadia.  If  the  people  want  it  I  will 
abdicate.  I  will  go  to  Livadia  to  the  gardens. 
I  am  so  fond  of  flowers." 

Tsabel  wrung  his  hands  and  went  out.  Voy- 
eykov  followed  and  ordered  the  train  to  pro- 
ceed. 

Meanwhile  the  railway  fitters  had  spoiled  the 
engine  of  the  first  train.  The  Czar's  convoy 
guarded  the  second  engine,  and  at  dawn  the 
train  moved  on  to  Bologoe  in  the  hope  of  getting 
somehow  to  Tsarskoye  Selo.  At  the  station 
another  telegram  announced  that  the  Tsarskoye 
Selo  garrison  was  on  the  side  of  the  revolution. 
The  Czar  decided  to  go  to  Moscow. 

"Mrozovsky  [Moscow  Commandant]  told  me 
Moscow  would  always  be  faithful,"  he  said. 

Another  telegram,  however,  announced  that 
the  whole  of  the  Moscow  garrison  was  on  the 
side  of  the  people.  For  some  time  the  train 
went  backward  and  forward  between  Bologoe 
and  Dno. 

At  the  last  station  General  Ivanov  arrived 
and  said  the  only  hope  was  to  go  to  the  army. 

S4« 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

General  Voyeykov  cried  out:  "The  only  hope 
is  to  open  the  Minsk  front  to  the  Germans. 
Let  German  troops  put  things  straight." 

Admiral  Nilov  protested.  "Not  much  good. 
They  will  take  Russia  and  not  give  it  back." 

Voyeykov  referred  to  the  words  of  the  trait- 
ress, Wasiltchikova,  that  Wilhelm  was  fighting 
not  with  Nicholas,  but  with  anti-dynastic 
Russia. 

"Yes,"  said  the  Czar,  "Rasputin  often  said 
that,  but  I  did  not  listen  to  him.  It  could  have 
been  done  when  the  Germans  were  before 
Warsaw,  but  I  have  never  betrayed  the  Russian 
people."  After  that  he  cried,  then  added:  "Oh, 
if  I  could  be  sure  my  children  and  my  wife 
would  be  safe  in  the  hands  of  these  muzhiks,  I 
would  go  to  Livadia  and  peacefully  finish  my 
life  there.  Let  Michael  reign.  How  he  under- 
stands it!    The  people  like  him." 

Nicholas  went  on  the  platform  very  pale. 
Beside  him  staggered  Nilov,  hopelessly  drunk 
and  singing. 

The  Czar's  first  utterances  were  evidently 
made  under  the  influence  of  liquor  or  the  first 
disappointing  news.  Later,  however,  he  still 
thought  of  continuing  to  reign.  He  wired  to 
General  Russky,  at  Pskov,  of  his  arrival.    At 

243 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

eight  in  the  evening,  March  14th,  the  Emperor's 
train  pulled  in  at  Pskov.  According  to  the 
account  of  General  Russky,  the  first  taciturn 
words  of  the  Czar  showed  that,  while  he  was 
aware  of  the  essential  happenings,  he  entirely 
failed  to  grasp  the  finality  of  the  upheaval.  At 
two  in  the  morning,  March  15th,  he  called 
General  Russky  and  said:  "I  am  resolved  to 
make  concessions  and  give  them  a  responsible 
Ministry."  The  manifesto  to  that  effect  was 
ready  signed  on  the  table. 

"I  knew  this  measure  was  useless  and  too 
late,"  Russky  told  later.  "I  begged  the  Czar 
to  talk  by  telegraph  to  Rodzianko.  I  succeeded 
in  getting  Rodzianko  on  the  telephone  at  3  a.m., 
and  talked  two  hours.  He  told  me  the  only 
way  out  for  the  Czar  was  abdication.  I  re- 
peated my  conversation  with  Rodzianko  by 
telegraph  to  General  Alexeiev  and  the  front 
commanders.  I  went  to  the  Czar  at  10  a.m. 
Meanwhile  I  had  received  replies  from  Alexeiev, 
the  Grand-Duke  Nicholas,  Brusilov,  and  others, 
unanimously  recognizing  the  necessity  of  ab- 
dication. 

"The  Czar  listened  and  declared  he  was 
ready  to  abdicate,  but  wished  to  do  so  in  the 
presence  of  Rodzianko.     At  three  o'clock  the 

244 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

Czar  summoned  me  and  said  he  had  signed  the 
act  of  abdication  in  favor  of  his  son.  I  went  to 
despatch  the  news  and  heard  that  Deputies 
Guchkov  and  Shulgin  were  on  their  way  to 
Pskov.  The  Czar  was  pleased  at  the  news, 
hoping  that  it  meant  a  change  in  the  situation. 
The  train  arrived  at  ten  in  the  evening.  The 
Czar  was  restless.  In  spite  of  my  orders  that 
Guchkov  and  Shulgin  should  be  brought  direct 
to  me,  some  one  took  them  to  the  Czar. 

"When  I  entered  the  Imperial  car  Guchkov 
was  telling  the  Czar  the  details  of  events.  He 
was  much  pained  by  the  news  that  his  body- 
guard had  gone  over  to  the  revolutionaries. 
He  scarcely  listened  to  the  rest  of  the  news. 

"The  Czar  asked  what  he  should  do,  and 
Guchkov  replied,  'Abdicate.' 

"After  a  long  pause  the  Czar  replied:  'Very 
well.  I  have  already  signed  the  abdication  in 
favor  of  my  son,  but  I  have  now  decided  that 
as  my  son  is  not  distinguished  by  good  health 
and  I  do  not  wish  to  part  with  him,  I  will  yield 
the  throne  to  Michael.'  " 

Shulgin,  the  colleague  of  Guchkov,  said  that 
the  Czar  was  dirty,  unwashed,  and  four  days 
unshaved,  and  looked  like  a  convict  released 
from  a  burning  prison  when  he  went  into  the 

245 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

brightly  lighted  dining-car.  He  was  in  the  uni- 
form of  a  Caucasian  regiment. 

"Guchkov  began  to  talk,  and  I  was  afraid 
he  would  say  something  malicious  and  cruel  to 
the  Czar,  but  he  did  not.  He  spoke  at  some 
length,  without  looking  at  the  Czar.  He  finished 
with  the  statement  that  the  only  way  out  of  the 
situation  would  be  the  Czar's  abdication  in 
favor  of  his  son,  with  Michael  as  Regent. 
General  Russky  leaned  toward  me  and  mur- 
mured, *That  is  already  settled.'  The  Czar 
spoke,  and  his  voice  and  manner  were  simpler 
and  more  business-like  than  Guchkov's  speech. 

"  'I  have  thought  all  day  yesterday  and  to-^ 
day,  and  have  decided  to  abdicate,'  he  said. 
*  I  cannot  part  with  my  son.  I  hope  you  under- 
stand this.  Therefore  I  have  decided  to  abdi- 
cate in  favor  of  my  brother.'  " 

The  decision  of  the  Committee  of  Safety, 
however,  called  for  the  Czar's  abdication  in 
favor  of  his  son  and  not  his  brother.  For  a 
while  Deputies  Guchkov  and  Shulgin  hesitated. 

"This   proposal   takes   us   unawares,"   said 

Shulgin  to  the  Emperor.    "I  beg  leave  to  speak 

for  a  quarter  of  an  hour  with  Guchkov,  to 

agree  on  an  answer."     The  Czar  agreed,  but 

the  conversation  was  quickly  begun  again. 

9m 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

It  seemed  that  a  slight  expression  of  satis- 
faction showed  in  the  Czar's  face  when  Guchkov 
said  he  had  no  right  to  interfere  in  paternal  feel- 
ings. The  Czar  went  into  the  next  room,  and 
about  a  quarter  past  eleven  came  to  us  in  the 
dining-car  with  several  small  sheets  of  paper  in 
his  hand. 

"There  is  the  act  of  abdication;  read  it,"  said 
Nicholas  Romanov,  now  no  longer  Czar  of  all 
the  Russias. 

The  two  Duma  commissioners  read  the  docu- 
ment, made  several  slight  changes  in  its  word- 
ing, and,  shaking  hands  with  the  ex-Emperor, 
made  their  exit  from  the  car  where  the  mightiest 
autocrat  of  the  civilized  world  signed  away  his 
throne  and  power. 

Two  copies  of  the  abdication  act  were  made, 
and  both  were  signed  by  Nicholas  II.  Because 
of  the  stormy  condition  in  Petrograd  the  com- 
missioners feared  that  one  might  be  lost.  They 
intrusted  one  copy  to  General  Russky,  while 
they  proceeded  with  the  second  to  Petrograd 
to  tell  Russia  and  the  world  of  the  end  of  autoc- 
racy in  the  Slavic  empire. 

Grand-Duke  Michael  Alexandrovitch  there- 
upon became  Czar,  but  he  hastened  to  abdicate 
also  in  view  of  the  high  pressure  of  public 

247 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

opinion.  The  Duma's  desire  for  a  Constitu- 
tional Monarchy  was  universally  opposed  by 
the  masses.  The  revolutionary  army  that  over- 
threw Nicholas  was  determined  to  abolish  the 
monarchy  altogether.  Grand-Duke  Michael, 
therefore,  after  consulting  with  a  deputation 
from  the  Duma,  hastened  to  issue  the  following 
statement  in  regard  to  the  transfer  of  power 
to  him: 

"This  heavy  responsibility  has  come  to  me 
at  the  voluntary  request  of  my  brother,  who  has 
transferred  the  Imperial  throne  to  me  during 
a  period  of  warfare  which  is  accompanied  with 
unprecedented  popular  disturbances. 

"Moved  by  the  thought,  which  is  in  the  minds 
of  the  entire  people,  that  the  good  of  the  country 
is  paramount,  I  have  adopted  the  firm  resolu- 
tion to  accept  the  supreme  power  only  if  this  be 
the  will  of  our  great  people,  who,  by  a  plebis- 
cite organized  by  their  representatives  in  a 
constituent  assembly,  shall  establish  a  form  of 
Government  and  new  fundamental  laws  for  the 
Russian  state. 

"Consequently,  invoking  the  benediction  of 
our  Lord,  I  urge  all  citizens  of  Russia  to  submit 
to  the  Provisional  Government,  established 
upon  the  initiative  of  the  Duma  and  invested 

248 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

with  full  plenary  powers,  until  such  time* 
which  will  follow  with  as  little  delay  as  pos- 
sible, as  the  constituent  assembly,  on  a  basis 
of  universal,  direct,  equal,  and  secret  suf- 
frage, shall,  by  its  decision  as  to  the  new 
form  of  Government,  express  the  will  of  the 
people." 

March  15th,  1917,  Nicholas  II.  was  deposed. 
The  following  day  his  brother  abdicated,  thus 
ending  the  rule  of  the  Romanov  dynasty  in 
Russia.  The  Constituent  Assembly,  referred 
to  in  the  document  of  Michael  Alexandrovitch, 
is  certain  not  to  restore  the  autocratic  regime 
that  oppressed  Russia  for  centuries. 

Nicholas  Romanov,  the  ex-Czar,  left  Pskov 
for  Moghilev,  the  General  Headquarters,  to 
say  good-by  to  his  staff,  as  he  said.  He  went 
there  and  did  nothing.  The  garrison  ignored 
him.  He  lived  in  his  old  quarters,  had  one 
brief  conversation  with  General  Alexeiev,  and 
then  idly  waited. 

His  mother,  the  Dowager  Empress  Marie, 
came  up  from  Kiev  to  bid  her  son  farewell.  In 
the  evening  he  went  to  dine  in  her  train  and 
spent  hours  in  talking  with  her. 

Popular  opinion  grew  indignant  at  the  liberty 
the  ex-Czar  was  allowed  to  enjoy.    There  were 

l6  249 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

rumors  that  he  and  his  wife  were  using  cipher 
in  telegraphic  correspondence.  "Why  is  he 
allowed  to  travel  about  Russia  at  will?"  was 
the  universal  question.  It  was  feared  that  he 
might  use  the  opportunity  to  attempt  to  recover 
the  crown. 

General  Alexeiev  grew  restless,  fearing  the 
populace  might  lose  patience,  and  telegraphed 
to  the  Provisional  Government  to  have  the 
Czar  removed  from  Moghilev. 

The  new  Government  commissioned  four 
Deputies  to  go  to  Moghilev  and  place  the  ex- 
Emperor  under  arrest.  The  commissioners 
were  loudly  cheered  on  the  way  to  Head- 
quarters and  were  enthusiastically  received  by 
the  troops  and  people  of  Moghilev.  General 
Alexeiev  informed  Nicholas  Romanov  of  the 
arrival  of  the  Deputies  and  their  mission. 

Nicholas  went  to  his  mother's  train  to  say 
farewell,  then  crossed  the  platform  to  his  own 
carriage.  He  was  in  the  uniform  of  a  Kuban 
Cossack  officer,  with  dagger  at  side.  Crossing 
the  platform  amid  the  silence  of  the  crowd,  he 
held  his  right  hand  at  the  salute,  and  with  the 
left  nervously  twirled  his  mustache. 

That  gesture  was  characteristic,  wrote  a 
correspondent.     It  was  always  Nicholas's  way, 

250 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

instead  of  deciding,  instead  of  acting,  to  twirl 
his  mustache  and  to  look  in  another  direction. 
His  Ministers  constantly  complained  he  would 
not  say,  "Yes,"  or,  "No,"  and  that  his  in- 
variable reply  to  importunate  requests  was 
either  to  stare  at  them  with  glassy,  uncompre- 
hending eyes  or  to  look  out  of  the  window. 

Twirling  his  mustache,  he  crossed  the  plat- 
form and  entered  his  carriage.  The  Deputies 
took  their  seats  in  another  carriage.  The  few 
remaining  members  of  the  suite,  except  Nicho- 
las's old  boon  companion,  Admiral  Nilov,  who 
was  ordered  to  remain  behind,  strolled  de- 
jectedly into  the  carriage  allotted  to  them,  and 
at  4.50,  March  22d,  an  hour  and  fifty  minutes 
after  the  arrival  of  the  Deputies,  the  train 
steamed  out  of  the  station. 

The  lookers-on  maintained  a  grim  silence. 
The  Dowager  Empress  watched  from  her  win- 
dow the  departure  of  her  son  who  had  gambled 
away  his  throne. 

The  train  arrived  at  Tsarskoye  Selo  at  11.30 
on  Friday  morning.  The  commandant  at 
Tsarskoye  Selo  informed  the  Deputies  he  had 
received  the  necessary  instructions  from  the 
Government. 

Nicholas  was  delivered  over  into  his  charge, 

251 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

and  drove  off  to  the  palace  in  a  motor-car  with 
his  adjutant.  The  troops  of  the  garrison  looked 
on  in  silence. 

In  the  mean  time,  the  ex-Czarina  was  arrested 
at  Tsarskoye  Selo. 

At  eleven  o'clock  on  Thursday  morning 
General  Kornilov,  the  new  Commandant  of 
the  Petrograd  District,  went  to  the  palace  and 
insisted  on  seeing  the  ex-Empress.  After  some 
delay  she  came  out  to  him,  dressed  in  black. 
Then  followed  a  remarkable  scene. 

In  the  great  reception-room  stood  the  little 
Siberian  Cossack  General  with  a  bristling 
mustache,  a  man  who  had  heroically  fought 
with  his  division  against  desperate  odds  in  the 
Carpathians  during  the  great  retreat;  who, 
fighting  to  save  his  men,  had  himself  been 
taken  prisoner;  who  for  months  had  endured 
the  humiliations  and  privations  of  captivity  in 
Austria,  who  with  unfailing  pluck  had  made 
the  great  effort  to  escape  and  succeeded,  walk- 
ing hundreds  of  miles  disguised  as  a  peasant, 
through  manifold  risks  and  dangers  across  the 
Carpathians  into  Rumania,  to  gain  at  last  the 
honor  of  being  first  commandant  of  the  revo- 
lutionary army  in  Petrograd. 

Opposite  him  stood  the  woman  whose  blind 

252 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

obstinacy,  whose  disastrous  folly,  had  been  the 
prime  cause  of  the  terrible  catastrophe  of  the 
Russian  retreat.  Kornilov  had  come  to  arrest 
her. 

She  showed  more  spirit  than  her  husband. 
She  was  cold,  stern,  bitter.  Kornilov  read  the 
order  of  the  Government.  She  listened  with 
bowed  head. 

Half-way  through  she  said,  indignantly, 
"Thank  you,  you  had  better  not  go  on." 
Kornilov  persisted  in  reading  the  order  to  the 
end.  The  ex-Empress  left  the  room,  and 
Kornilov  gave  orders  to  the  new  guard. 

Most  of  the  palace  servants  were  dismissed. 
Derevenko,  the  soldier  who  has  been  with  the 
Czarevitch  over  ten  years,  was  allowed  to 
remain. 

Three  of  the  ex-Czar's  daughters  were  ill 
with  measles,  as  also  that  evil  counselor,  the 
close  ally  of  Rasputin,  Madame  Virubova. 

Two  Court  physicians  remained  at  the  palace 
attending  the  patients.  All  the  doors  of  the 
palace  except  three  were  locked  and  barred. 
One  small  garden  was  left  for  the  captives  to 
walk  in. 

Telephone,  telegraph,  and  wire  connections 
with  the  wireless  station  were  cut  off.    No  one 

253 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

except  a  few  officials  were  allowed  to  enter  or 
leave  the  palace. 

Thus  had  democracy  triumphed  over  autoc- 
racy. Czarism,  that  despotic,  dark,  and  bloody 
institution,  was  abolished.  On  its  ruins  a  new 
order  of  life  was  being  rapidly  erected.  The 
sun  of  liberty  and  true  civilization  had  finally 
arisen  on  martyred  Russia. 


XV 

THE  NEW  RUSSIA 

THE  Provisional  Government,  which  came 
into  power  by  the  authority  of  the  Duma 
and  the  Council  of  Workmen's  and  Soldiers' 
Deputies,  represented  the  flower  of  the  nation's 
genius.  Prince  George  Lvov,  who  became 
Prime  Minister  and  Minister  of  the  Interior, 
indelibly  inscribed  in  Russian  history  his  repu- 
tation as  a  great  organizer  while  in  the  post  of 
President  of  the  All-Russian  Union  of  Zemstvos. 
A  man  of  the  highest  aristocratic  extraction. 
Prince  Lvov  was  a  democrat  to  the  last  fiber  of 
his  being.  With  a  heart  that  went  out  to  all 
humanity,  with  a  spirit  that  breathed  love  and 
noble  emotion,  the  head  of  the  Provisional 
Government  was  at  the  same  time  a  prodigious 
worker.  No  member  of  the  Cabinet  commanded 
such  universal  respect  as  Premier  Lvov. 

Paul  Miliukov,  brilliant  leader  of  the  Con- 
stitutional   Democrats,   became   Minister    for 

^55 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

Foreign  Affairs  in  the  new  Government.  A  man 
of  enormous  erudition  in  international  politics 
and  history,  Miliukov  was  a  fighter  as  well  as  a 
teacher.  He  was  banished  from  Russia  for  his 
liberalism  when  he  was  professor  in  the  Petro- 
grad  University,  toward  the  close  of  the  nine- 
teenth century.  As  the  guiding  spirit  of  the 
Constitutional  Democrats,  as  member  of  the 
Duma,  as  editor  of  the  Petrograd  newspaper, 
Retch,  Miliukov  fixed  his  place  in  the  annals  of 
the  development  of  democracy  in  Russia  like 
no  other  liberal  leader  of  his  time.  He  had 
sharply  defined  views  on  the  functions  and 
methods  of  democracy.  His  attitude  toward 
the  Great  War  was  determined  largely  by  the 
belief  that  Constantinople  and  the  Dardanelles 
should  be  possessed  'jy  Russia,  and  that  the 
non-Teutonic  nationalities  of  Germany  and 
Austria-Hungary  should  be  allowed  to  work 
out  their  own  destinies. 

An  extraordinary  member  in  the  Provisional 
Government,  Andrei  Shingarev,  Minister  of 
Agriculture,  took  charge  of  the  very  compli- 
cated food  problem.  Shingarev  began  life  as  a 
physician  in  the  Voronezh  Zemstvo.  His  work 
upon  the  sanitation  of  the  peasantry  attracted 
wide  attention.     He  edited  a  newspaper,  was 

«56 


Photo  by  I.  F.  S. 

ALEXANDER  FEODOROVITCH  KERENSKY,   FIRST  MINISTER  OF  JUSTICE 
AND  THEN  MINISTER  OF  WAR  IN  THE  PROVISIONAL  GOVERNMENT 

/ 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

elected  to  the  Duma  in  1907,  and  soon  ac- 
quired national  fame  as  an  expert  on  financial 
matters.  A  radical  Cadet,  his  sincere  utterances 
always  appealed  to  the  public.  After  the  out- 
break of  the  Great  War,  Shingarev  took  up,  as 
a  member  of  a  Duma  committee,  part  of  the 
task  of  organizing  the  country's  resources  in 
the  cause  of  national  defense.  His  ability,  ver- 
satility, and  keen  judgment  marked  him  in  the 
eyes  of  the  nation  as  one  of  Russia's  noblest  and 
greatest  sons. 

Alexander  Guchkov,  War  Minister,  repre- 
sented the  conservative  element  in  the  new 
Russia.  He  was  one  of  the  commissioners  who 
deposed  the  Czar.  For  some  time  he  was 
President  of  the  third  Duma,  being  an  Octo- 
brist.  He  was  a  soldier-adventurer  for  many 
years,  participating  in  almost  every  war  waged 
on  earth  since  the  last  quarter  of  the  nineteenth 
century.  He  became  head  of  the  War  Indus- 
tries Committee  after  its  organization  during 
the  Great  War,  and  accomplished  big  results  in 
the  mobilization  of  the  country's  industrial  re- 
sources for  the  prosecution  of  the  gigantic 
conflict. 

The  outstanding  figure  in  the  Provisional 
(lovernnaent  was  that  of  Minister  of  Ji^stice 

^7 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

Kerensky,  a  Socialist.  His  fiery  speeches  during 
and  after  the  revolution,  his  almost  fanatical 
devotion  to  the  masses,  his  unbounded  loyalty 
to  the  cause  of  freedom  and  democracy,  had 
made  him  the  idol  of  the  people.  A  young 
lawyer,  Kerensky 's  passion  for  justice  knew 
no  limitations.  As  Vice-President  of  the  Coun- 
cil of  Workmen's  and  Soldiers'  Deputies,  he 
represented  in  the  Ministry  those  radical  forces 
which  were  responsible  for  the  revolution  and 
were  in  control  of  the  working  masses. 

The  President  of  the  Council  of  Workmen's 
and  Soldiers'  Deputies,  Tcheidze,  was  one  of  the 
dominating  figures  in  the  new  Russia.  The 
Council  which  he  headed  functioned  as  a  sep- 
arate body  along  with  the  Provisional  Govern- 
ment. The  Council  occupied  a  position  equal 
to  that  of  the  fourth  Duma.  The  latter  was 
chosen  under  a  highly  perverted  election  law 
which  gave  the  peasantry  and  the  labor  class 
almost  no  representation.  The  Council  repre- 
sented these  two  elements.  Immediately  after 
the  revolution  in  Petrograd  similar  labor  coun- 
cils were  formed  in  all  the  cities  of  the  empire. 
Both  the  fourth  Duma  and  the  Council  of 
Workmen  and  Soldiers  will  cease  to  exist  after 
the  Constituent  Assembly  meets,  which  will  be 

258 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

elected  on  the  basis  of  universal,  direct,  equal, 
and  secret  suffrage.  Up  to  that  time  the  Coun- 
cil will  continue  to  act  as  the  body  that  ex- 
presses, closer  than  any  other  institution,  the 
wishes,  aims,  and  hopes  of  the  revolutionary 
forces  which  overthrew  Czarism. 

The  first  act  of  the  Provisional  Government 
was  a  decree  of  full  amnesty  to  all  political 
prisoners.  The  arrested  members  of  the  second 
and  fourth  Dumas,  the  tens  of  thousands  of 
victims  of  the  despotic  regime  who  were  smart- 
ing in  jail  and  in  the  tundras  of  Siberia  were 
set  free.  Russia  gave  a  royal  welcome  to  the 
released  martyrs  for  freedom.  The  return  from 
Siberia  of  Catherine  Breshkovskaya,  "the 
grandmother  of  the  revolution,"  was  one  con- 
tinuous triumphal  journey.  Madame  Bresh- 
kovskaya had  spent  thirty -four  of  her  seventy- 
three  years  in  exile.  Her  arrival  in  Petrograd 
was  one  of  the  most  poignant  and  dramatic 
events  in  the  life  of  the  new  Russia.  She  was 
tendered  no  ordinary  welcome.  "It  was  even 
more  than  a  state  affair,"  wrote  a  correspondent. 
"It  was  an  epitome  of  the  fall  of  the  Romanov 
dynasty  and  the  resurrection  of  the  masses. 
Madame  Breshkovskaya  was  received  in  the 
Imperial  chambers  of  the  Nicolas  Station,  re- 

259 


THE   RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

served  under  the  old  regime  for  personages  of 
royal  blood.  A  Government  delegation,  headed 
by  Minister  of  Justice  Kerensky,  was  present 
to  welcome  the  aged  heroine  of  the  long  struggle 
for  liberty.  But  it  was  almost  swallowed  up 
in  a  surging  mass  of  weeping  and  shouting  ex- 
terrorists,  reformed  bomb-throwers  and  un- 
shackled political  convicts  who  packed  the  vast 
drawing-room  where  great  monarchs  met  and 
empresses  had  waited.  The  walls  of  the  room 
were  banked  with  flowers,  big  floral  pieces  and 
baskets  inscribed,  'To  Our  Dear  Grandmother,' 
*To  the  Queen  of  the  People,'  *To  Russia's 
Martyred  Heroine.'  It  seemed  as  though  the 
whole  population  of  Petrograd,  chanting  the 
'Marseillaise'  and  waving  red  flags,  had  turned 
out  to  greet  the  old  revolutionist." 

The  new  Government  proceeded  to  rid 
Russia  of  the  evils  of  the  autocratic  system. 
Grand-Duke  Nicholas,  who  had  been  appointed 
before  the  revolution  Commander-in-Chief,  was 
removed  because  of  his  relation  to  the  Romanov 
dynasty  with  which  Russia  wished  to  have  noth- 
ing further  to  do.  Many  other  chiefs  of  the 
fallen  regime  were  arrested,  including  Baron 
Fredericks,  General  Voyeykov,  and  General 
Mrozovski   of   Moscow.     Investigations   were 

260 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

begun  of  the  activities  of  the  former  bureaucrats, 
preHminary  to  trial  for  their  criminal  deeds. 

The  Winter  Palace,  the  Petrograd  residence 
of  the  Czar,  was  seized  by  the  new  Government. 
A  red  flag  was  hoisted  over  it,  to  symbolize  the 
change  from  Czarism  to  democracy.  In  front 
of  the  palace  and  throughout  the  city  the  in- 
signia of  Czarism  were  publicly  burned.  The 
portrait  of  Nicholas  II.  was  removed  from  the 
Duma.  In  the  Holy  Synod  the  Czar's  gold 
chair  was  cast  out  by  the  new  Procurator  at  the 
first  sitting. 

The  emancipation  of  the  Jews  was  taken  up 
immediately.  First,  all  restrictions  upon  the 
entrance  of  Jews  into  the  universities  and 
schools  were  abolished.  Later  the  "Pale  of 
Settlement,'^  where  the  Jews  had  been  confined, 
was  abrogated,  and  the  Jews  were  granted  full 
equal  rights  with  the  rest  of  the  population. 

A  manifesto  was  issued  by  the  Provisional 
Government  completely  restoring  the  Consti- 
tution of  Finland.  AH  the  edicts  promulgated 
in  the  fifteen  years  preceding  the  revolution, 
which  were  contrary  to  Finnish  law,  were 
annulled.  Finland  thus  became  fully  autono- 
mous, and  from  a  foe  of  Russia  it  became  an 
enthusiastic  friend  of  the  new  order. 

261 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

A  document  that  thrilled  the  suffering  mil- 
lions of  Poland  was  next  addressed  by  the 
Provisional  Government  to  the  Poles.  It  was 
as  follows: 

Poles!  The  old  political  regime  of  Russia,  the  source  of 
our  own  servitude  and  disunion  and  of  yours,  has  now 
been  overthrown  forever.  Liberated  Russia,  personified 
in  its  Provisional  Government,  which  is  invested  with  full 
powers,  hastens  to  send  you  a  fraternal  salutation,  and  to 
call  you  to  new  life  and  to  Uberty.  The  old  regime  gave 
you  hypocritical  promises  which  it  could  but  would  not 
execute.  The  Central  Powers  profited  by  its  shortcomings 
to  occupy  and  devastate  your  country.  .  .  . 

The  Provisional  Government  regards  the  creation  of  an 
independent  Polish  State,  formed  of  all  the  territories  of 
which  the  majority  of  the  population  is  Polish,  as  a  pledge 
of  a  durable  peace  in  the  remodeled  Europe  of  the  future. 
Bound  to  Russia  by  a  free  military  union,  the  Polish  State 
will  be  a  solid  rampart  against  the  pressure  of  the  Central 
Powers  against  the  Slav  nations.  The  Polish  nation, 
liberated  and  unified,  will  settle  for  itself  the  nature  of  its 
own  Government,  expressing  its  will  by  means  of  a  Con- 
stituent Assembly  convoked  on  the  basis  of  universal  suf- 
frage, in  the  capital  of  Poland.  Russia  is  confident  that 
the  peoples  united  with  Poland  for  centuries  past  by  their 
life  in  common  will  thus  receive  a  .substantial  guarantee 
of  their  civic  and  national  existence.  It  will  lie  with  the 
Constituent  Assembly  of  Russia  definitively  to  consolidate 
the  new  fraternal  union,  and  to  give  its  consent  to  the 
modifications  of  Russian  territories  which  will  be  indis- 
pensable for  the  formation  of  a  free  Poland  formed  of  all 
its  three  divisions  at  present  separated. 

Polish  brothers!  Take  in  the  spirit  of  brotherhood  the 
hand  held  out  to  you  by  free  Russia!  Faithful  guardians 
of  the  great  traditions  of  the  past,  make  ready  now  to 

262 


The    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

usher  in  a  new  and  brilliant  era  of  your  history — the  era  of 
Poland's  resurrection!  May  the  union  of  our  feelings  and 
our  hearts  be  an  anticipation  of  the  union  of  our  States, 
and  may  the  ancient  appeal  of  the  glorious  precursors  of 
your  hberation  be  re-echoed  with  new  and  irresistible 
strength!  Forward,  side  by  side,  hand  in  hand,  for  the 
fight! 

The  new  Government  ordered  the  income 
from  the  ex-Czar's  and  his  family's  estates  to 
go  to  the  State  treasury.  The  Grand-Dukes  and 
the  Princes  addressed  a  joint  message  to  the 
Government  in  which  they  turned  over  to  it 
their  holdings  of  crown  lands  and  other  prop- 
erty, and  associated  themselves  with  the  abdi- 
cation of  Grand-Duke  Michael,  expressing  at 
the  same  time  the  firm  resolution  to  support 
in  every  way  the  Provisional  Government. 

The  abolition  of  the  death  penalty  was  the 
next  long  step  of  the  new  Government.  It 
decreed  that  penal  servitude  for  life  or  for  a 
term  of  years  should  be  substituted  in  cases 
where  the  death  penalty  had  been  prescribed 
by  the  penal  code  or  by  military  law. 

On  April  5th  the  funeral  of  the  victims  of  the 
revolution  took  place.  It  was  a  solemn  affair, 
wrote  an  observer,  in  which  every  man,  woman, 
and  child  in  Petrograd,  able  to  walk,  marched. 
The  somber  aspect  of  the  tremendous  funeral 

2C3 


THE   RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

cortege  was  relieved  by  innumerable  red  flags, 
some  of  which  were  bordered  in  black.  Stores 
were  closed,  all  traflSc  ceased,  and  the  entire 
city  appeared  to  be  holding  its  breath  until  the 
last  relics  of  the  great  struggle  had  been  buried. 
Altogether  one  himdred  and  ninety-six  persons 
were  killed  during  the  revolution.  As  the 
coffins,  draped  in  scarlet  bunting,  were  lowered 
into  the  tremendous  grave  which  had  been  dug 
in  a  corner  of  the  historic  field  of  Mars,  a  series 
of  salutes — one  for  each  victim — boomed  across 
the  ice-bound  Neva  from  the  fortress  of  Peter 
and  Paul,  where  the  last  Ministers  of  the  fallen 
regime  were  confined. 

The  Provisional  Government  declared  it- 
self in  favor  of  woman  suffrage.  Women 
played  an  important  part  in  the  revolution. 
They  were  among  the  first  to  participate 
in  the  demonstrations  and  were  often  the 
leaders  in  the  food  riots  which  preceded  the 
revolt. 

The  new  Government  also  indorsed  the  pro- 
posal that  all  the  land  should  be  distributed 
among  the  peasants.  A  considerable  portion 
of  the  country  was  owned  by  the  Romanov 
family.  The  nobility  and  the  Church  owned 
another  portion.    It  was  left  to  the  Constituent 

264 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

Assembly  to  decide  how  the  land  should  be 
expropriated  and  distributed. 

Other  matters  for  the  Constituent  Assembly 
to  decide,  besides  the  form  of  Government  and 
the  fundamental  laws  of  the  new  Russia,  were 
the  abolition  of  classes  and  titles,  questions  of 
rights  of  nationalities  and  international  prob- 
lems as  well  as  agrarian  and  labor  legislation. 

In  the  new  Russia  the  police  were  abolished. 
Every  community,  from  Petrograd  to  the  small- 
est town,  formed  a  citizen  militia  to  keep  order. 

The  Russian  army  under  the  Czar  was  a 
cruel  machine.  The  Provisional  Government 
took  immediate  steps  for  the  democratization 
of  the  military  system.  The  soldiery  was 
granted  complete  religious  freedom,  free  speech, 
uncensored  communication  with  their  homes, 
delivery  of  all  kinds  of  printed  matter,  abolition 
of  servile  terms  in  addressing  officers,  complete 
abolition  of  corporal  punishment,  and  many 
other  reforms  that  infused  a  new  life  into  the 
army. 

The  Constituent  Assembly,  it  was  expected, 
would  have  a  majority  of  Socialists.  The 
Social-Democratic  newspaper  Pravda  advanced 
the  following  program  for  enactment  by  the 

Constituent  Assembly: 

*7  m 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

A  biennial  one-House  parliament. 

Wide  extension  of  the  principle  of  local  gov- 
ernment. 

Inviolability  of  person  and  dwelling. 

Unlimited  freedom  of  the  press,  of  speech,  and 
of  assembly. 

Freedom  of  movement  in  business. 

Equal  rights  for  all,  irrespective  of  sex, 
religion,  and  nationality. 

Abolition  of  class  distinction. 

Education  in  native  language;  native  lan- 
guages everywhere  to  have  equal  rights  with 
official  language. 

Every  nationality  in  the  State  to  have  the 
right  of  self-definition. 

The  right  of  all  persons  to  prosecute  officials 
before  a  jury. 

Election  of  magistrates. 

A  citizen  army  instead  of  ordinary  troops. 

Separation  of  Church  from  State  and  school 
from  Church. 

Free  compulsory  education  for  both  sexes  to 
the  age  of  sixteen. 

State  feeding  of  poor  children. 

Confiscation  of  Church  property,  also  that  of 
the  royal  family. 

Progressive  income  tax. 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

An  eight-hour  day,  with  six  hours  for  all 
under  eighteen. 

Prohibition  of  female  labor  where  such  is 
harmful  to  women. 

A  clear  holiday  once  a  week  to  consist  of 
forty-two  hours  on  end. 

The  new  Russia  thus  began  a  rapid  and  in- 
tensive march  along  the  path  of  progress  and 
democracy.  Should  no  internal  or  external 
mishaps  overtake  her,  Russia  was  in  a  fair  way 
to  emerge  the  freest,  the  most  democratic,  the 
greatest  nation  on  earth — a  true  and  fitting 
leader  of  all  humanity  toward  true  democracy, 
liberty,  justice,  and  international  peace. 


XVI 

THE  FUTURE 

WHAT  will  be  the  future  form  of  the  Rus- 
sian Government?  There  can  be  no 
doubt  that  it  will  be  republican.  This  con- 
clusion is  based  on  the  declaration  of  the  Con- 
stitutional Democratic  Party. 

There  are  in  Russia,  as  in  every  other  coun- 
try, three  divisions  of  political  thought — radical, 
liberal,  and  conservative.  The  conservative 
section  in  Russia  is  composed  of  the  Octobrist, 
the  Nationalist,  and  the  Monarchist  factions. 
All  the  three  combined  constitute  a  small,  al- 
most negligible,  minority  in  the  voting  popula- 
tion of  Russia. 

There  therefore  remain  only  two  elements  to 
be  considered.  The  radical  element  includes 
in  its  ranks  all  kinds  of  Socialists,  beginning 
with  the  Laborites  and  ending  with  the  Social 
Revolutionists.  It  is  very  likely  that  the 
various  Socialists  will  have  a  combined  major- 


THE   RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

ity  in  the  Constituent  Assembly.  And  the 
Socialists  are,  of  course,  all  republicans. 

But  it  is  the  middle  section,  the  liberal,  that 
may  be  regarded  as  the  decisive  factor  in  the 
determination  of  the  new  Russia's  Government. 
This  element  is  almost  exclusively  composed  of 
the  large  and  influential  Constitutional  Demo- 
cratic, or  Cadet,  Party.  Up  to  the  revolution 
this  faction  favored  a  Constitutional  Monarchy. 
But  a  national  congress  of  this  party,  held  in 
Petrograd  in  the  first  half  of  April,  1917,  and 
attended  by  fifteen  hundred  delegates  from  all 
parts  of  Russia,  came  out  unanimously  and  en- 
thusiastically for  a  resolution  declaring  that 
"Russia  should  be  a  Democratic  and  Parlia- 
mentary Republic." 

This  attitude  of  the  Cadets  completely 
sealed  the  fate  of  monarchism  in  Russia.  Still 
there  were  those  who  worried  about  the  views 
of  the  peasantry  on  the  subject.  There  was  a 
general  impression  that  the  muzhik  still  re- 
vered his  "Little  Father."  But  it  turned  out 
to  be  wrong.  Prince  Eugene  Trubetzkoy,  a 
distinguished  publicist,  reported  to  the  Cadet 
congress  his  impressions  of  a  tour  of  rural  com- 
munities he  had  made  after  the  revolution.  He 
said  that  the  peasants  suddenly  lost  all  faith 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

in  the  "Little  Father,"  and  saw  in  him  only  a 
symbol  of  poHce  cruelty,  graft,  and  corruption. 
"We  don't  want  any  Czars.  It's  easy  to  elect 
them,  but  very  hard  to  turn  them  out,"  said 
the  peasants  who  had  breathed  with  relief  at 
the  departure  of  oppression  and  bribery  with 
the  fall  of  Nicholas  11.  Prince  Trubetzkoy 
concluded  with  the  remark  that  the  peasantry 
was  solid  for  a  republic. 

More  important  than  the  question  of  the 
form  of  Government  is  the  paramount  question: 
"Will  the  new  Russia  weather  all  storms  and 
emerge  without  bloodshed  a  strong  and  united 
democratic  nation.^"  The  answer  to  this  ques- 
tion mainly  depends  on  the  solution  of  one 
certain  peril. 

The  peril  that  confronts  Russia  lies  in  the 
duality  of  her  supreme  authority.  The  Pro- 
visional Government,  nominally  ruling  Russia, 
and  the  Council  of  Workmen's  and  Soldiers' 
Deputies,  which  wields  enormous  influence  over 
the  masses,  represent  two  individual  and  con- 
flicting forces  of  public  opinion.  A  mortal 
clash  between  the  two  earlier  or  later  is  hardly 
avoidable. 

The  Provisional  Government  represents  the 
progressive  middle  class.    Its  interests  are  the 

270 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

interests  of  the  Government  of  France,  Great 
Britain,  or  the  United  States.  It  aims  at  the 
destruction  of  Prussianism  in  order  to  safe- 
guard the  poHtical  well-being  of  humanity. 
Its  program  calls  for  the  abolition  of  militarism 
and  the  establishment  of  democracy  throughout 
the  world. 

The  Council  of  Workmen's  Deputies  stands 
for  far  more  radical  changes  in  the  structure  of 
human  life.  It  is  a  socialistic  body.  Composed 
of  delegates  of  the  masses  and  of  representa- 
tives of  the  various  revolutionary  parties,  the 
Council  wants  nothing  less  than  social  revolu- 
tion, to  be  accomplished  after  the  overthrow 
of  autocracy  in  Europe. 

The  gulf  between  the  Provisional  Government 
and  the  Council  of  Deputies  is,  therefore,  as 
wide  as  between  the  United  States  Government 
and  Socialism.  Only  such  an  upheaval  as  the 
revolution  could  have  bridged  this  chasm  be- 
tween the  two  extremes.  The  masses,  who  won 
the  freedom  of  Russia,  knew  that  they  would 
not  be  able  to  preserve  it  without  the  support 
of  the  heads  of  the  army  and  the  moderate  ele- 
ments in  the  nation.  They,  therefore,  turned 
to  the  Duma  to  establish  a  Provisional  Govern- 
ment.   The  Provisional  Government  was  chosen 

271 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

from  among  the  members  of  the  Duma  because 
only  it  could  command  the  immediate  support 
of  all  the  conservative  classes,  thus  saving 
Russia  from  a  reaction. 

But  as  soon  as  the  new  regime  was  estab- 
lished the  masses,  through  their  Council,  began 
to  force  the  Provisional  Government  to  accept 
their  views  and  act  accordingly.  Thus  it  was 
the  Council  of  Deputies  that  compelled  the 
Duma  Government  to  demand  the  abdication 
of  the  Czar.  For  the  Duma  originally  favored 
a  Constitutional  Monarchy  under  Nicholas  II. 
Later  the  masses  again  forced  the  abdication  of 
Grand-Duke  Michael,  whom  the  Duma  was 
willing  to  crown  as  successor  to  Nicholas.  The 
Russian  Republic  was  therefore  entirely  a 
product  of  the  masses,  and  not  of  the  academic 
Duma. 

The  Council  of  Deputies  continued  to  exert 
its  influence  on  the  policies  of  the  Provisional 
Government.  A  majority  of  the  latter  con- 
sider the  capitalistic  development  of  Russia  as 
one  of  the  chief  tasks  confronting  the  new  de- 
mocracy. It  would  invite  foreign  investments 
to  the  country,  straining  all  its  energies  to  build 
up  Russia  industrially  and  commercially.  But 
the  socialistic   Council   thinks   otherwise.     It 

272 


THE    RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

would  not  tolerate  any  schemes  for  economic 
expansion. 

This  gave  rise  to  several  differences  between 
the  two  bodies.  Paul  Miliukov,  the  Foreign 
Minister,  gave  an  interview  about  three  weeks 
after  the  revolution  in  which  he  expressed  the 
desirability  of  the  annexation  of  Constanti- 
nople to  safeguard  an  open  outlet  to  the  sea  for 
Russia — a  need  which  was  of  a  purely  economic 
nature.  This  interview  caused  a  storm  of  ex- 
citement and  agitation  in  the  ranks  of  the 
Socialists,  who  are  opposed  to  any  annexations. 
The  Council  of  Workmen's  Deputies  showed 
a  disposition  to  denounce  the  Government. 
Prince  Lvov,  the  Premier,  hastened  to  explain 
that  Miliukov's  views  were  entirely  personal  and 
did  not  represent  the  opinion  of  the  Provisional 
Government.  The  latter  was  urged  to  issue  a 
declaration  denouncing  all  aims  toward  annexa- 
tions or  war  indemnities,  which  it  did,  thus 
staving  off  a  crisis. 

On  April  16th  a  national  congress  of  the  Coun- 
cils of  Workmen's  and  Soldiers'  Deputies,  held 
in  Petrograd,  adopted  the  following  resolutions: 

First.  The  Provisional  Government,  which  constituted 
itself  during  the  revolution  in  agreement  with  the  Council 
of  Workmen's  and  Soldiers'  Delegates  of  Petrograd,  pub- 

273 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

lished  a  proclamation  announcing  its  program.  This  con- 
gress records  that  tliis  program  contains  in  principle  politi- 
cal demands  for  Russian  democracy  and  recognizes  that 
so  far  the  Provisional  Government  has  faithfully  carried 
out  its  promises. 

Second.  This  congress  appeals  to  the  whole  revolution- 
ary democracy  of  Russia  to  rally  to  the  support  of  the 
Council  of  Workmen's  and  Soldiers'  Delegates,  which  is 
the  center  of  the  organized  democratic  forces  that  are 
capable,  in  unity  with  other  progressive  forces,  of  coun- 
teracting any  counter  revolutionary  attempt  and  of  con- 
solidating conquests  of  the  revolution. 

Third.  The  congress  recognizes  the  necessity  of  per- 
manent political  control,  the  necessity  of  exercising  an 
influence  over  the  Provisional  Government  which  would 
keep  it  up  to  a  more  energetic  struggle  against  anti-revo- 
lutionary forces  and  the  necessity  of  exercising  an  influence 
which  will  insure  its  democratizing  the  whole  Russian  life 
and  paving  the  way  for  a  common  peace  without  annexa- 
tion or  indemnity,  but  on  a  basis  of  free  national  develop- 
ment of  all  of  the  peoples. 

Fourth.  This  congress  appeals  to  democracy,  while 
declining  responsibility  for  any  of  its  acts,  to  support  the 
Provisional  Government  as  long  as  it  continues  to  consoli- 
date and  develop  the  conquest  of  the  revolution  and  as 
long  as  the  basis  of  its  foreign  policy  does  not  rest  upon 
aspirations  for  territorial  expansion. 

Fifth.  The  congress  calls  upon  the  revolutionary  democ- 
racy of  Russia,  rallying  around  the  Council  of  the  Work- 
men's and  Soldiers'  Deputies,  to  be  ready  to  vigorously 
suppress  any  attempt  by  the  government  to  elude  the 
control  of  democracy  or  to  renounce  the  carrying  out  of 
its  pledges. 

The  last  clause  of  the  resolution  was  invoked 
by  the  Council  in  the  following  case:  Minister 
Miliukov  had  sent    the   Provisional    Govern- 

274 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

ment's  declaration  repudiating  all  annexations 
and  war  indemnities  to  the  Entente  Govern- 
ments, accompanying  it  with  an  explanatory 
note  containing  the  words,  "It  is  understood, 
and  the  annexed  document  so  expressly  states, 
that  the  Provisional  Government  in  safeguard- 
ing the  right  acquired  for  our  country  will 
maintain  a  strict  regard  for  its  engagements 
with  the  allies  of  Russia." 

When  this  note  was  published,  a  tempest  of 
criticism  and  protest  broke  out  against  the 
Provisional  Government  for  its  adherence  to 
the  treaties  concluded  by  the  old  Government. 
The  crisis,  which  was  partly  brought  about  by 
agents  of  Germany  and  extreme  SocialistSj  soon 
developed  into  a  serious  menace  to  the  new 
Russia.  The  leader  of  the  extremists  was 
Nikolai  Lenin.  He  returned  to  Russia  from 
Switzerland  via  Germany,  and  his  violent  paci- 
fist agitation  alienated  the  large  following  he 
had  as  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  Russian  Social 
Democracy. 

To  Lenin,  a  capitalist  was  worse  than  a  king. 
An  industrial  magnate  or  leading  banker  was 
to  him  more  perilous  than  a  Czar  or  a  Kaiser. 
The  working  classes,  he  said,  had  nothing  to 
lose  whether  their  rulers  were  German,  French, 

275 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

or  British.  The  imperative  thing  for  them  to 
do  was  to  prepare  for  a  social  revolution.  Mean- 
while, preached  Lenin,  the  Russian  or  any  other 
labor  class  might  as  well  live  under  the  rule  of 
the  Hohenzollerns  as  be  governed  by  a  capi- 
talistic organization. 

The  Council  of  Workmen's  and  Soldiers' 
Deputies,  however,  by  an  overwhelming  ma- 
jority expressed  itself  against  Leninism.  In- 
stead it  appealed  to  the  German  proletariat  to 
rise  and  overthrow  the  Kaiser  as  the  only  means 
to  the  establishment  of  peace  and  the  union  of 
the  European  proletariat  in  a  social  revolution. 

This  is  the  attitude  of  the  Russian  masses 
toward  the  question  of  peace.  They  do  not 
want  a  separate  peace.  Also,  they  do  not  want 
the  overthrow  of  Prussianism  for  the  same  rea- 
sons as  the  Governments  of  the  Entente  wish 
it.  The  ultimate  aim  of  the  Workmen's  Council 
is  social  revolution.  To  achieve  this  revolution 
it  is  necessary  to  dethrone  the  political  auto- 
crats first,  they  say.  Then  the  capitalistic  sys- 
tem must  be  attacked  by  the  working  classes 
of  all  nations  as  their  common  enemy. 

But  while  a  separate  peace  between  the  new 
Russia  and  the  Kaiser's  Prussian  Government 
is  out  of  the  question,  the  possibility  of  a  sep- 

276 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

arate  peace  between  Russia  and  Germany  is 
by  no  means  eliminated.  As  a  matter  of  fact, 
such  a  peace  would  follow  instantaneously  in 
case  the  German  proletariat  overthrew  the  Im- 
perial rulers.  In  that  case  the  Slav  and  Teuton 
worker  would  combine  in  an  effort  to  cause  a 
general  social  revolution. 

"The  entire  efforts  of  the  working  classes  of 
Europe  must  be  directed  to  the  task  of  com" 
palling  their  rulers,"  declared  the  official  organ 
of  the  Council  of  Workmen's  and  Soldiers'  Depu- 
ties, "to  relinquish  their  desires  for  conquest 
and  of  deposing  them,  as  Russia  has  done,  if 
they  refuse  to  yield.  The  ruling  classes,  on  the 
contrary,  will  endeavor  to  carry  the  war  on  to 
the  desired  end.  We  are  ready  to  stretch  out  a 
fraternal  hand  to  the  peoples  of  Germany  and 
Austria  if  they  will  compel  their  rulers  to 
abandon  their  conquests.  But  we  shall  fight 
against  invasion." 

That  the  Russian  masses  stood  for  social 
revolution  was  shown  by  a  further  extract  from 
the  Council's  official  organ.  This  was  a  plain 
challenge  to  the  professed  aims  of  the  Allies. 

"We  are  ready  to  support  with  armed  force 
the  masses  of  England,  France,  and  Italy,"  read 
the  statement^  "if  they  compel  their  rulers  to 
377 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

relinquish  the  poHcy  of  conquest  and  yet  are 
obliged  to  defend  themselves  against  Germany. 
But  we  shall  decidedly  protest  against  a  con- 
tinuance of  the  war  for  the  sake  of  the  interests 
of  capital  whatsoever  national  flag  it  may  hide." 

Russia  has  already  been  forced  by  the  masses 
to  come  out  with  a  repudiation  of  any  policy  of 
conquest.  What  the  Council  of  Deputies  was 
endeavoring  to  do  was  to  have  the  Provisional 
Government  address  a  note  to  the  Allied  Gov- 
ernments requesting  them  openly  to  repudiate 
any  plans  for  annexations  or  indemnities. 
Should  such  a  repudiation  be  made  and  still 
produce  no  effect  in  Germany,  then  only  would 
the  Russian  masses  be  "ready  to  support  with 
armed  force  the  masses  of  England,  France,  and 
Italy." 

Such  is  the  power  of  the  radical  elements  in 
the  new  Russia.  Should  the  Allies  fail  to  com- 
ply with  the  request  of  Russia  for  an  open 
statement  of  their  war  aims,  a  clash  between 
the  Provisional  Government  and  the  masses 
would  be  inevitable.  Should  the  German  and 
Russian  proletariat  unite  in  a  social  revolution, 
again  the  Provisional  Government  would  be 
facing  a  crisis,  as  it  represents  rather  business 
and  commerce  than  Socialism, 

«78 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

What,  then,  is  the  power  of  the  Provisional 
Government,  as  compared  with  that  of  the 
Council  of  Workmen's  and  Soldiers'  Deputies? 
It  is  undoubtedly  much  less  than  the  latter. 
Originally  the  power  of  the  Provisional  Govern- 
ment was  entirely  preventive — i,  e.,  it  averted 
a  reaction  by  commanding  the  confidence  of 
those  who  would  have  opposed  a  Socialist  Gov- 
ernment. Actual  support  of  its  own  it  had 
little,  for  the  masses  and  the  soldiery  were 
evidently  behind  the  Council  of  Deputies,  back- 
ing the  Provisional  Government  at  its  orders. 

In  the  first  six  weeks  of  its  tenure  of  ofiice, 
however,  the  Provisional  Government  had 
managed  to  gather  behind  it  a  considerable 
force  of  followers.  All  those  conservatives  and 
moderates  who  dreaded  a  republican  form  of 
government  are  now  back  of  the  Provisional 
Government.  The  measures  it  promulgated  so 
promptly  in  regard  to  the  Jewish,  Finnish, 
Polish,  and  other  problems  have  won  it  many 
stanch  supporters.  The  reforms  in  the  army  and 
the  promise  to  distribute  the  land  added  many 
more  friends  to  the  Provisional  Government. 

The  situation  in  Russia  was  fraught  with 
extreme  danger  on  May  4th  and  5th.  The 
possibility  of  a  new  revolution  for  a  while 

279 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

loomed  high  on  the  Russian  horizon.  The  popu- 
lace was  extremely  agitated  against  Miliukov. 
Only  the  Council  of  Deputies'  vote  to  uphold 
the  Provisional  Government  for  the  sake  of 
harmony  averted  the  crisis.  Its  vote  of  conr 
fidence  registered  only  a  majority  of  thirty-five 
in  twenty-five  hundred  voters. 

The  Provisional  Government  had  summoned 
the  Duma  soon  after  the  crisis.  The  Duma  will 
counterbalance  the  influence  of  the  Council  of 
Deputies.  The  Duma  represents  that  section 
of  public  opinion  which  supports  the  Provisional 
Government.  The  next  attacks  of  the  Council 
will  therefore  be  directed  against  the  Duma, 
and  any  contest  as  to  the  policy  of  the  Pro- 
visional Government  will  be  fought  out  be- 
tween the  Duma  and  the  Council  of  Workmen's 
and  Soldiers'  Deputies. 

The  new  Russia  has  before  it  a  period  of 
trial  and  constant  peril,  the  months  that  will 
be  required  to  elect  the  Constituent  Assembly. 
When  that  body  meets,  free  Russia  will  have 
started  on  the  safe  road  of  progress  and  civili- 
zation. 


THE  ENP 


University  of  Toronto 
Library 


DO  NOT 

REMOVE 

THE 

CARD 

FROM 

THIS 

POCKET 


Acm«  Library  Card  Pocket 
LOWE-MARTIN  CO.  UMITED 


