THREE  ASPECTS 

OF  THE 

RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 


EMILE  VANDERVELDE 


THE  LIBRARY 

OF 

THE  UNIVERSITY 

OF  CALIFORNIA 

IRVINE 

Gift  of 
THE  HONNOLD  LIBRARY 


THREE  ASPECTS  OF  THE 
RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 


WAR  AND  REVOLUTION 
IN  THE  CAUCASUS 

BY 

M.  PHILIPS  PRICE. 

Demy  Svo.  About  10$.  6d.  net. 

In  this  book  Mr.  M.  Philips  Price,  who  went 
to  the  Near  East  in  1915  as  the  correspondent 
of  the  Manchester  Guardian,  gives  an  account 
of  his  experiences  and  observations  during  his 
journeys  through  Northern  Persia,  Armenia, 
and  the  Caucasus.  The  first  two  chapters  tell 
the  story  of  the  War  on  the  Caucasus  Front 
down  to  the  Fall  of  Erzerum.  Other  chapters 
consist  of  the  journal  of  his  travels  through  the 
territories  occupied  by  the  Russian  Army, 
where  he  spent  many  months  in  organizing 
relief  for  the  destitute  native  population.  The 
last  four  chapters  describe  the  Revolution  in 
the  Caucasus,  and  discuss  the  racial  problems 
and  the  political  future  of  the  countries  he 
visited. 


\ 


EMILE    VANDERVELDE 


XHREE  ASPECTS 
OF  THE  RUSSIAN 
REVOLUTION^ 


BY 


EMILE   VANDERVELDE 


TRANSLATED  BY  JEAN  E.   H.   FINDLAY 


LONDON  :  GEORGE  ALLEN  &  UNWIN  LTD 
RUSKIN  HOUSE  40  MUSEUM  STREET,  W.C.  i 


I/S 


First  published  in  igz8 


(All  rights  reserved) 


CONTENTS 

FOREWORD 


CHAPTER   I 
THE   REVOLUTION   AT  PETROGRAD  II 


CHAPTER   II 

THE    REVOLUTION   IN  THE   FACTORIES  .  .      33 

1.  The  Industrial  Youth  of  Russia 

2.  The  Claims  of  the  Workmen 

3.  The  Question  of  Overseers 

4.  The  Decrease  in  Production 

5.  The  Rise  in  Wages 

6.  The  Parliamentarization  of  the  Factories 

7.  The  Responsibilities  of  Power 

8.  Industrial  Organization 

9.  Co-operative  Organization 
10.  Conclusions 


Content* 

CHAPTER  III 

RMH 

THE   REVOLUTION  IN   THE  ARMIES       .  .  .Ill 

i.  Our  Departure  for  the  Front 
7.  At  the  Stavka. 

3.  Desertions  and  "  Fraternizations  " 

4.  The  German  Propaganda 

5.  With  the  ;th  Army 

6.  A  Land  of  Milk  and  Honey 

7.  The  io8th  Division 

8.  A  Mutinous  Army  Corps 

9.  A  Terrorist  Functionary 

10.  From  Buczacz  to  lezierna 

11.  Our  Visit  to  the  6th  Corps 

12.  The  moral  of  the  Troops 


CHAPTER  IV 

THE   POLITICAL  SITUATION        ....   2OO 

1.  The  Separate  Peace  ? 

2.  Their  Sympathies  for  Belgium 

3.  The  Stockholm  Conference 

(a)  The  Dutch-Scandinavian  Committee 

(b)  The  Petrograd  Soviet 

4.  Summing-up  and  Conclusions 


APPENDIX 

THE  MEMORANDUM  OF  THE  BELGIAN  SOCIALISTS 
SUBMITTED  TO  THE  DUTCH-SCANDINAVIAN 
COMMISSION  .....  343 

6 


FOREWORD 

I  HAVE  endeavoured  in  this  little  book 
to  give  a  description  of  our  mission 
to  Russia,  when  Louis  de  Brouck£re,  Henri 
de  Man  and  myself  went  to  carry  to 
the  Russian  Revolution  the  greeting  of 
the  Belgian  Labour  Party  and  to  discuss 
with  our  comrades  of  Petrograd  the  ques- 
tion of  the  International  Conference  at 
Stockholm. 

Leaving  London  on  the  6th  of  May  1917, 
we  reached  Petrograd  on  the  18th  of  May, 
stopping  three  days  on  our  way  at  Stock- 
holm. We  remained  there  until  the  5th  of 
June,  except  for  a  brief  visit  which  two 
of  us  paid  to  Moscow.  Afterwards,  on 
the  invitation  of  General  Alexeieff,  we  spent 
a  fortnight  at  the  front,  going  thereafter  to 
Roumania,  returning  to  Petrograd  on  the 
24th  of  June,  and  leaving  for  Le  Havre, 
via  Stockholm,  on  the  25th  of  June. 

7 


Foreword 

The  five  weeks  that  the  Belgian  Socialist 
Mission  spent  in  Russia  allowed  of  our 
seeing  much  and  questioning  many  persons. 
We  visited  the  Workmen's  and  Soldiers' 
Committees,  as  well  as  the  Ministers,  Social- 
ists as  well  as  "  Cadets."  We  met  the  represen- 
tatives of  all  the  different  political  opinions 
from  Polish  nationalists  to  the  anarchists 
installed  in  the  Villa  Dournovo.  In  Petro- 
grad,  as  in  Moscow  and  Kieff,  we  saw  the 
Labour  Organizations,  interviewed  members 
of  the  Belgian  colony  and  the  leaders  of 
Employers  Associations.  We  came  into 
contact  with  the  masses — we  must  have 
spoken  to  at  least  a  hundred  thousand 
persons — as  well  as  their  leaders.  We 
listened  to  the  pessimists  as  well  as  to  the 
optimists.  We  had  an  opportunity  of 
observing  the  enormous  difficulties  existing 
in  Russia  to-day.  But  we  never  lost  sight 
of  the  many  reasons  that,  in  spite  of  every- 
thing, justified  young  democratic  Russia's 
belief  in  her  future. 

We  share  this  belief  and  we  give  our 
reasons  hereafter. 

My  thanks  are  due  to  my  two  collabo- 
rators, Louis  de  Brouckere  and  Lieutenant 

8 


Foreword 

de  Man,  who  have  permitted  of  my  giving 
in  this  one  volume  three  aspects  of  the 
Russian  Revolution.  I  thank,  too,  my 
translator,  Miss  J.  E.  H.  Findlay,  whose 
co-operation  permits  of  my  offering  this 
book  to  the  British  public. 

EMILE  VANDERVELDE. 


THREE    ASPECTS    OF    THE 
RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

CHAPTER  I 
THE  REVOLUTION  AT  PETROGRAD 

WE  set  sail  on  the  7th  of  May  1917 
from    a  Scottish    port,    bound    for 
Russia    via    Bergen    and    Stockholm,    and 
immediately  we  seemed  to  come  into  touch 
with   the   Russian   Revolution. 

There  were  on  board  representatives 
from  all  the  great  allied  nations :  six 
Japanese  officers,  .a  British  military  mis- 
sion, French  merchants,  and  a  number  of 
Russians  returning  from  exile.  The  latter 
filled  the  cabins,  crowded  the  smoking- 
room  and  the  dining-room,  overflowing 
even  on  to  the  deck,  where  many  of  them 
throughout  that  cold  and  rainy  night 
of  the  North  passed  the  long  hours,  their 

11 


Three    Aspects    of  the    Russian    Revolution 

lifebelts  round  their  bodies,  smoking  in- 
numerable cigarettes,  and  discussing  peace 
and  war,  L£nin  and  Kerensky. 

The  friends  that  we  found  among  them 
introduced  us  to  two  soldiers  who  were 
coming  from  the  Champagne  front,  sent 
as  delegates  by  their  fellow-soldiers  to 
the  Soviet  at  Petrograd. 

One  of  them  was  a  Socialist,  secre- 
tary to  a  Trade  Union  in  pre-war  days ; 
the  other,  a  book-keeper  of  peasant  origin, 
had  revolutionary  tendencies,  without  being 
attached  to  any  particular  party. 

They  told  us  of  their  different  experi- 
ences. 

When  the  news  of  the  Russian  Revo- 
lution reached  the  western  front,  many 
soldiers  in  the  Russian  brigades  mutinied 
and  tried  to  assault  their  officers,  but  our 
two  delegates  interposed  and  succeeded  in 
directing  the  movement  on  the  right  lines. 
Four  delegates  per  company  were  elected, 
and  together  they  chose  a  deputation  to 
wait  upon  the  Military  Authorities.  When 
the  members  of  this  deputation  presented 
themselves  at  General  Headquarters,  they 
were  threatened  with  arrest.  "  You  would 

12 


The    Revolution    at    Petrograd 

not  find  any  one  to  arrest  us,"  was  their 
answer.  They  were  told  that  if  they  did 
not  obey  instantly  a  French  Army  Division 
was  ready  to  march  against  them.  "  The 
French  are  too  intelligent  to  do  any  such 
thing,"  they  replied.  And  no  doubt  there 
was  little  probability  of  the  experiment 
being  made,  for  ultimately  the  organization 
of  the  soldiers  was  tacitly  recognized. 
When  the  two  delegates  asked  permission 
to  go  to  Petrograd,  the  officer  in  command 
to  whom  they  applied  contented  himself 
with  replying :  "  Can  you  promise  me 
that  if  I  let  you  go  I  shall  not  be  killed 
by  my  men  in  your  absence  ?  " 

Judging  by  the  information  given  us 
by  these  delegates — and  we  have  every 
reason  to  believe  that  in  the  case  of  one 
of  the  two  brigades  at  least  what  they 
said  was  true — discipline  did  not  suffer 
greatly,  and  after  this  incident  the  moral 
of  the  troops  was  even  better  than 
before.  When  the  Russian  Revolution  was 
announced  on  the  Champagne  front,  the 
Russian  soldiers  said  :  "  Now  we  are  really 
going  to  fight  the  Germans."  Or  else : 
"  Now  if  we  are  killed  we  can  be  assured 

18 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

that  our  wives  and  children  will  not  be 
destitute." 

"After  that,"  added  the  delegates,  "is  it 
not  wrong  to  think  in  France  that  the 
Russians  are  planning  a  separate  peace, 
which  would  dishonour  the  Revolution  and 
deliver  them  up  to  the  Central  Empires  ?  " 

That  was  the  keynote  of  much  that 
we  heard  constantly  expressed  later  on, 
even  among  the  Zimmerwaldians,  or  the 
Extremists,  or,  at  least,  among  such 
extremists  as  were  not  secret  agents  of 
Germany. 

Certainly,  among  the  travelling  com- 
panions whom  we  met  several  days  after- 
wards in  the  train  between  Stockholm  and 
Petrograd,  there  were  many  revolutionaries 
who  longed  ardently  for  a  separate  peace 
"  in  order  to  be  able,"  as  Clemenceau  says, 
"  to  give  themselves  up  entirely  to  the  joys 
of  civil  war."  But  however  keen  their 
pacifism,  however  impatient  they  were  to 
conclude  at  any  price  a  general  peace,  they 
were  forced  to  admit  that  if  the  Russian 
Revolution  concluded  a  separate  peace, 
the  Russian  Revolution  was  lost. 

Except  on  this  point,  however,  it  would 
14 


The    Revolution    at    Petrograd 

have  been  difficult  to  find  anything  in 
common  between  these  exiles  who  were 
returning  to  their  country  after  years  of 
absence,  some  from  Switzerland  via  Ger- 
many, others  from  France,  Great  Britain, 
and  the  United  States  :  some  of  the  latter — 
not  all — were  full  of  bitter  resentment  against 
the  police  surveillance  of  which  they  had 
been  victims ;  whilst  many  of  the  former 
were  strongly  imbued  with  lessons  learned 
in  the  school  of  German  Socialism. 

During  the  three  days  that  the  journey 
from  Stockholm  to  Petrograd  lasted — with 
a  break  of  twelve  hours  to  allow  of  the 
passage  of  the  ice  on  the  Tornea,  in  the 
middle  of  May — we  had  occasion  to  ex- 
change views  with  one  of  the  Maximalists, 
who  was  soon  after  to  become,  along  with 
Lenin,  the  leading  spirit  of  the  risings 
of  Cronstadt  and  Petrograd :  citizen 
Trotsky,  to  whom  the  Provisional  Govern- 
ment had  generously  granted  passports 
to  enable  him  to  come  and  combat  it. 

He  was  coming  from  Canada,  with  a 
group  of  supporters,  full  of  rancour  and 
rage  against  the  British  who  had  interned 
him  at  Halifax  during  several  days  ;  against 

15 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

such  Socialists  as  ourselves,  who  believed 
in  the  necessity  of  carrying  on  the  war  ; 
against  Kerensky,  against  the  Minimalists, 
against  all  those  whom  he  accused  of 
compromise  with  the  bourgeoisie  and  of 
concessions  to  militarism  and  imperialism. 

Scarcely  had  we  crossed  the  Finnish 
frontier  than  we  witnessed  the  beginning 
of  his  propaganda. 

In  the  stations,  full  of  soldiers  in  heavy 
khaki  coats  and  their  winter  sheepskin 
caps,  he  improvised  meetings  ;  he  spoke  of 
Stockholm ;  he  lauded  the  Revolution, 
proclaimed  the  duty  of  the  International 
proletariat  to  put  an  end  to  the  horrors  of 
war  at  the  earliest  opportunity. 

But  this  propaganda,  which  was  stopped 
only  by  the  signal  for  the  train  to  start, 
was  counteracted  by  another  propaganda, 
not  less  active  and  not  less  prolix. 

There  were  in  the  train  more  than  three 
hundred  Russian  military  doctors  who 
had  just  been  liberated  after  having  been 
prisoners  in  Germany  since  the  beginning 
of  the  war. 

To  the  soldiers  whom  Trotsky  was 
haranguing  they  told  of  the  sufferings  of 

16 


The    Revolution    at   Petrograd 

their  fellow-countrymen,  the  martyrdom 
of  two  million  men,  a  prey  to  famine  and 
typhus,  abandoned  without  medical  aid, 
flogged,  exposed  to  the  heat  of  the  sun  for 
the  smallest  peccadillo ;  they  had  already 
seen  three  hundred  thousand  of  their  com- 
rades die  since  the  beginning  of  the  war, 
and  to  support  what  they  were  saying 
they  showed  photographs,  they  read 
documents,  and  called  upon  their  comrades 
in  captivity  to  bear  witness  to  the  truth 
of  all  they  said. 

They  were  listened  to  and  applauded, 
as  the  others  had  been  listened  to  and 
applauded.  But  in  these  crowds,  which 
seemed  all  eyes  and  ears,  every  one  remained 
perfectly  calm. 

Even  among  the  opponents — for  often 
the  two  parties  attacked  each  other — there 
was  never  a  coarse  word,  not  an  evil-sounding 
expression,  and  we  witnessed  this  tolerance, 
a  little  apathetic  perhaps,  with  regard  to 
all  theories,  this  sociability  and  aptitude 
for  living  in  a  state  of  anarchy,  that  was 
one  of  the  things  that  amazed  us  most 
during  our  sojourn  in  Russia. 

Our  train  was  due  to  arrive  at  Petrograd 

17  B 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

on  the  third  day  in  the  evening.  But  we 
had  to  take  into  account  the  disorder  of 
the  transport  service,  and  it  was  not  till 
six  o'clock  in  the  morning  that  we  steamed 
into  the  Finland  station.  Some  Belgians,  who 
had  spent  the  night  in  the  station,  were 
waiting  for  us,  carrying  our  national  flag, 
whilst  amidst  a  flourish  of  red  flags,  with 
pacifist  inscriptions  in  white  lettering  on 
gold,  some  hundreds  of  Maximalists  escorted 
Trotsky. 

Immediately  after  we  were  taken  to  the 
H6tel  de  1'Europe,  where  we  were  to  be 
the  guests  of  the  Provisional  Government. 

Renan,  in  speaking  of  the  French 
Revolution,  said :  "It  would  be  absurd 
to  try  to  impose  our  petty  programmes 
of  common-sense  citizens  on  this  extra- 
ordinary movement,  so  completely  beyond 
our  comprehension."  And  those  who 
attempt  already  to  pronounce  judgment 
on  the  Russian  Revolution  would  do  well 
to  reflect  on  this  saying.  Never  was  a 
revolution  more  radical  and  so  rapid.  From 
the  time  of  the  taking  of  La  Bastille  to 
the  downfall  of  Louis  XVI  three  years 
elapsed  ; '  between  the  abdication  of  the 

18 


The    'Revolution    at    Petrograd 

Czar  to  the  creation  of  the  Russian  Republic 
there  were  but  three  days.  And  during 
these  three  days  not  only  Czarism,  but 
the  Douma,  and  the  Zemtvos,  and  all  the 
institutions  more  or  less  Liberal,  which  were 
the  results  of  the  movement  of  1905, 
collapsed. 

Our  first  visit  on  arriving  at  Petrograd 
was  to  the  Tauride  Palace,  where  the 
Soviet  was  sitting. 

I  had  been  there  in  June  1914,  some 
weeks  before  the  war.  Maxim  Kova- 
lewsky,  who  died  six  months  afterwards 
as  a  result  of  his  captivity  in  Austria, 
had  introduced  me  to  President  Rodzianko. 
I  had  signed  the  "  Livre  d'Or "  imme- 
diately after  the  Dowager  Empress,  who 
had  visited  the  Tauride  Palace  for  the 
first  time  some  days  before.  I  had 
been  photographed  in  the  gardens — with 
Tscheidze,  who  is  to-day  President  of 
the  Soviet,  with  Skobeleff,  now  Minister 
of  Labour,  and  with  the  four  Socialist 
members  of  the  Douma,  who,  to  welcome 
me,  had  interrupted  their  discussions. 

Even  then,  any  one  who  visited  Russia 
with  his  eyes  open  was  bound  to  realize 

19 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

that  the  opposition  to  the  existing  regime 
included  all  classes  and  parties,  and  that 
Czarism  had  no  other  support  than  its 
beneficiaries  and  its  parasites.  But  who 
would  have  thought  in  that  beautiful 
month  of  June,  when  all  Europe  seemed 
to  be  entering  upon  its  summer  vacation, 
that  a  world-war  was  imminent,  and  that 
three  years  later  the  Czar  would  be  a 
prisoner  and  the  red  flag  be  flying  over 
the  Winter  Palace  and  Peter  and  Paul, 
and  that  the  Douma  itself  would  be 
overthrown  by  the  triumphant  Revolu- 
tion ? 

In  its  place,  since  those  May  days,  have 
been  installed  the  members  of  the  Workmen 
and  Soldiers'  Committee. 

The  great  hall  is  empty,  or  it  is  only 
filled  on  special  days,  when  the  2,500 
delegates  of  the  Soviet  assemble  to  hold  a 
general  meeting.  In  the  corridors,  in  the 
committee  rooms,  soldiers  are  sleeping, 
drinking  tea,  and  supping  a  kind  of  por- 
ridge. It  smacks  of  the  guard-house  and 
of  the  public  kitchen.  Albert  Thomas,  who 
is  with  us,  says  :  "  I  begin  to  understand 
the  Commune  better."  Sentries  are  every- 

20 


The    Revolution    at    Petrograd 

where  with  fixed  bayonets  and  a  red  rosette 
in  their  buttonholes.  The  Revolution  is 
well  guarded.  But  our  papers  are  in  order, 
and  we  are  taken  in  at  once  to  the  Execu- 
tive Committee. 

Tscheidze  is  presiding,  with  Skobeleff 
beside  him.  We  recognize  some  other 
friends  whom  we  have  met  before  in  this 
same  Tauride  Palace  or  at  the  International 
Congresses.  But  how  many  new  figures  there 
are !  Siberia  has  given  up  her  exiles. 
The  Revolutionary  emigration  has  come 
back  to  its  own.  Amongst  the  members 
of  the  Executive  Committee,  moreover,  all 
are  not  Russians.  Without  mentioning 
the  Jews,  who  are  very  numerous,  Mme. 
Kolontay,  sitting  among  the  Leninists,  is 
Finnish.  And  there  is  Rakowski,  too,  the 
Socialist  leader  of  Roumania :  one  never 
knows  exactly  whether  he  is  Roumanian 
or  Bulgarian.  He  had  been  sent  to  prison 
by  the  Government  at  Jassy,  and  set  free 
by  Russian  soldiers  !  From  this  cosmo- 
politan assembly  we  receive  a  cordial  but 
reserved  welcome.  They  applaud,  however, 
when  Albert  Thomas  announces  that  in 
France  the  Socialists  are  inaugurating  a 

21 


Three    Aspects    of    the    Russian    Revolution 

campaign  for  a  policy  inspired  by  the 
principles  of  the  new  Russia. 

We,  in  our  turn,  offer  them  the  con- 
gratulations of  the  Belgian  workmen  on 
the  Revolution.  We  begin  to  notice  at 
the  same  time  what  we  have  in  common 
and  what  divides  us.  Stockholm  is  dis- 
cussed, and  we  formulate  our  objections 
and  reluctance  ;  we  point  out  the  danger 
and  the  uselessness  of  a  meeting  with  the 
German  Socialists.  But  definite  positions 
seem  to  have  been  taken  on  either  side. 
We  exchange  notes,  however,  and  fix 
further  meetings. 

Meantime,  we  intend  to  get  into  touch 
not  with  the  leaders  this  time,  but  with 
the  masses. 

At  the  Tschinizelli  Circus  the  sailors  from 
the  Black  Sea,  who  from  the  first  day  have 
been  the  fervent  apostles  of  an  armed 
Revolution,  had  organized  a  political  mass 
meeting.  There  were  present,  besides  the 
Belgian  delegates,  who  received  a  formid- 
able ovation,  the  Ambassador  of  the  United 
States,  the  heads  of  the  military  missions 
of  France  and  Great  Britain,  the  Ministers 
of  Roumania  and  Servia.  The  last  named 

22 


The    Revolution    at    Petrograd 

was  concluding  his  speech,  when  there  was 
a  movement  among  these  thousands  of 
men,  and  attention  was  suddenly  fixed  on 
a  figure  that  was  entering.  The  audience 
rose  as  a  man,  and  applause  rang  out  as 
before  the  formerly  imperial  tribune  a  man 
appeared,  dressed  in  the  khaki  uniform 
of  a  simple  soldier  :  it  was  Kerensky. 

The  man  who  three  months  hence  was 
to  say  to  the  Congress  of  Moscow,  "  You 
owe  obedience  to  a  supreme  power  and  to 
me,  who  am  at  its  head,"  is  a  young  man 
about  thirty-four  years  of  age,  of  a  pale, 
delicate  appearance.  He  is  said  to  be 
seriously  ill,  and  in  forcing  himself  to  per- 
form so  great  a  task  to  be  giving  his  life 
to  the  Revolution.  That  is  perhaps  one 
of  the  secrets  of  the  influence  which  he 
wields  over  the  Revolution.  He  could  not 
be  called  eloquent ;  he  has  not  the  fire  of 
a  Jaurds  nor  the  power  of  subtle  argument 
of  a  Victor  Adler.  His  voice  is  rough,  and 
his  delivery  is  without  art.  But  he  has 
in  this  delivery  that  mysterious  magnetism 
which  draws  crowds  and  inspires  martyrs. 

We  met  Kerensky  again  soon  afterwards 
in  the  Ministry  of  War,  where  he  had  just 

28 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Ru&sian    Revolution 

been  installed.  A  Grand  Duke  was  waiting 
in  the  antechamber.  The  staff  of  the 
former  regime  was  employed  still  there 
to  show  in  the  visitors.  But  where  Souk- 
homlinoff,  now  in  Peter  and  Paul,  had 
lived,  we  found  to-day  witli  the  new 
Minister,  Madame  Breschkowska,  the  grand- 
mother of  the  Revolution,  this  wonderful 
old  woman,  who  at  eighty  years  of  age, 
twenty  years  of  which  were  spent  in  Siberia, 
had  still  the  physical  strength  and  moral 
courage  to  traverse  this  immense  Russia, 
preaching  the  Revolution  and  inspiring 
others  with  the  burning  fire  of  her  own 
passion. 

When  she  heard  that  we  were  Belgians, 
and  that  we  came  as  representatives  of 
Belgian  labour,  she  came  towards  us  and 
embraced  us  in  a  maternal  fashion. 

We  went  away,  moved  and  comforted 
by  this  interview.  The  ice  was  broken. 
We  were  really  in  touch  with  each  other. 
We  had  felt  the  heart  of  the  Russian  Revo- 
lution beating  in  unison  with  our  own,  and 
during  the  three  weeks  that  we  spent  in 
Petrograd  this  impression  was  deepened 
daily. 

34 


The    Revolution    at    Petrograd 

* 

One  must  have  lived  through  these  early 
days  of  the  uprising  to  understand  the 
enthusiasm  of  the  first  weeks  of  a  great 
Revolution. 

Every  Sunday,  from  morning  until  night, 
processions  passed  constantly,  bearing 
flowers  and  wreaths  of  everlastings  to  the 
Champs  de  Mars,  where  the  dead  of  the 
Revolution  have  been  buried.  On  the 
Newsky  Perspective  or  on  the  Novoie 
Vremia,  or  even  at  the  Credit  Lyonnais  or 
the  Bank  of  Siberia,  the  red  flag  was  flying, 
and  holiday  crowds  were  gathering  for 
the  sole  pleasure  of  fraternizing,  purchasing 
books  that  even  yesterday  were  forbidden 
them,  and  breathing  the  air  of  liberty.  In 
the  Conservatoire,  in  the  House  of  the 
People,  in  the  Imperial  Theatres,  concerts 
and  lectures  were  always  going  on.  The 
music  was  generally  excellent,  and  thousands 
of  auditors  applauded,  until  late  in  the 
night,  the  leading  orators  of  the  Revolution. 

It  would  have  been  difficult  often  to  tell 
with  whom  the  political  sympathies  of  the 
assembly  lay.  Maximalists  and  Minimalists, 
Bolcheviks  and  Mencheviks,  Leninists  and 
Kerensky's  supporters  or  partisans  of  Pleka- 

25 


Three    Aspects    of    the    Russian    Revolution 

noff,  succeeded  one  another  on  the  plat- 
form without  their  contradictory  statements 
producing  the  slightest  tumult,  the  least 
disorder. 

Anywhere  else,  we  venture  to  say — in 
London,  Paris,  or  Brussels — such  meetings 
would  have  been  absolutely  impossible, 
and  would  have  ended  either  in  the  audience 
coming  to  blows  or  with  their  clamour 
drowning  the  voice  of  the  speakers. 

Here  there  was  nothing  of  the  sort. 
There  was  complete  anarchy  and  absence 
of  all  authority,  but  liberty  of  speech  was 
absolute.  The  Revolution  policed  itself 
with  admirable  impartiality. 

Probably  it  will  be  pointed  out  that  a 
few  weeks  afterwards  these  same  crowds 
came  into  the  streets,  and  that  the  anarch- 
ists of  Petrograd  went  hand  in  hand 
with  the  insurgents  of  Cronstadt,  that 
under  pretext  of  expropriations  evil- 
doers pillaged  the  shops,  sacked  the 
banks,  and  installed  themselves  in  the  villas 
and  palaces  that  had  been  abandoned  by 
the  proprietors.  But  who  can  judge  of  the 
enormous  exaggerations  published  on  this 
subject  in  sensational  newspapers  in  Paris 

26 


The    Revolution    at    Petrograd 

or  London  ?  And  who  can  number  the 
fantastic  false  reports  that  were  being 
circulated  even  in  Petrograd,  when  public 
opinion  was  strung  up  to  concert-pitch 
and  La  Pravda  (Truth),  a  Lenin  newspaper, 
announced  a  manifestation  ? 

One  fine  Sunday,  for  instance,  they  told 
us  that  the  Republic  of  Cronstadt  had 
opened  hostilities,  that  a  Bolchevik  warship 
was  in  the  maritime  canal  about  seven 
versts  from  the  capital,  and  that  shells 
of  large  calibre  were  already  bursting  in 
the  suburbs.  "  I  have  seen  them  explode," 
a  fellow-countryman  told  us.  *'  They  are 
firing  on  a  munition  depot."  Informa- 
tion from  a  sounder  source  revealed  the 
fact  that  there  was  no  warship  in  the  canal ; 
that  all  was  quiet  at  Cronstadt,  but  that 
a  purely  accidental  fire  had  broken  out  in 
a  hayloft. 

Some  days  afterwards  there  was  a  fresh 
alarm. 

The  Leninists  had  decided  that  their 
revolution,  or  at  least  an  armed  manifesta- 
tion, should  take  place  the  next  day  at  one 
o'clock.  The  procession  was  to  start  from 
the  Finland  station.  Anarchists  installed 

27 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

in  the  Villa  Dournovo  had  promised  their 
support.  There  were  more  than  ten  thou- 
sand of  them,  and  they  had  twelve  heavy 
guns  ! 

At  the  appointed  hour  we  went  to  see 
what  was  taking  place.  Everything  was 
calm  in  the  Finland  suburb.  Peaceful 
citizens  were  walking  about,  reading  the 
manifesto  of  the  Provisional  Government 
inviting  all  loyal  citizens  to  remain  at 
home.  We  then  went  to  the  Villa  Dour- 
novo, the  headquarters  of  the  anarchists. 
There  were  no  guns.  There  were  not  ten 
thousand  men,  there  were  only  about 
thirty-five  people  at  the  most,  and  the  wild 
anarchists  invited  us  most  cordially  to 
come  in  and  have  a  cup  of  tea. 

In  short,  during  the  three  months  that 
followed  the  Revolution,  and  during  which 
there  was  not  one  policeman,  not  one 
gendarme,  not  even  a  Cossack,  at  Petrograd, 
nothing  but  a  volunteer  militia,  without 
weapons  or  authority,  we  do  not  think 
it  is  an  exaggeration  to  say  that  in  that 
city  of  over  two  million  men,  where  crowds 
were  standing  in  long  queues  waiting  to 
obtain  a  morsel  of  black  bread,  there  was 

28 


The    Revolution    at    Petrograd 

not  more  crime,  more  wrongdoing,  more 
disorder  than  in  the  well-guarded  capitals 
of  Western  Europe. 

To  whom  or  to  what  is  the  credit  due 
for  this  calm,  for  this  relative  tranquillity, 
this  almost  peaceful  development  of  the 
most  subversive  revolution  that  the  world 
has  ever  known  ? 

Surely,  in  the  first  instance,  to  the 
character  of  the  Russian  people.  In 
Russia  the  man  of  the  people,  when  he  is 
sober,  is  infinitely  more  peaceful,  more 
docile,  more  sociable  in  a  word,  than  the 
workman  or  peasant  of  our  own  countries. 

But  he  must  be  sober. 

In  1905,  when  vodka  was  to  be  had  at 
every  street-corner,  when  the  rebels  began 
by  pillaging  the  alcohol  stores  in  many 
towns,  frightful  scenes  of  bestiality  took 
place,  such  as,  for  instance,  the  butcheries  of 
Kischineff  and  the  massacres  of  Odessa 
and  the  industrial  centres  of  the  Caspian 
Sea.  If  it  has  been  otherwise  this  time, 
it  is  because  the  Revolution  of  1917  has 
been  a  dry  Revolution. 

Assuredly,  while  prohibition  is  general, 
it  is  not  absolute.  Though  one  cannot 

29 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

buy  alcohol,  it  is  not  forbidden  to  have 
it  in  one's  possession,  and  when  one  is 
willing  to  pay  the  price,  in  certain  res- 
taurants, contraband  champagne  may  be 
purchased  at  sixty  roubles  per  bottle. 

A  moujik,  who  has  procured  some  raw 
spirit  somewhere,  may  be  seen  occasionally 
in  the  streets  abominably  drunk.  But  that 
is  the  inevitable  leakage  of  a  system  that  is 
otherwise  most  strictly  observed.  Indeed, 
it  is  literally  a  fact  that  it  is  almost  im- 
possible to  obtain  in  the  cafes  or  restaurants 
not  only  whisky,  but  wine  or  beer.  Only 
water  is  to  be  seen  on  the  tables,  or  kwass 
— white,  red,  or  black  kwass — which  is 
made  by  fermenting  bread,  and  in  which 
the  degree  of  alcohol  does  not  exceed  1  per 
cent.,  or  at  most  2  per  cent.  Total 
abstinence,  consequently,  is  almost  obliga- 
tory, and  perhaps  the  leaders  of  the  old 
regime,  who  have  at  least  the  merit  of  this 
radical  reform,  owe  their  lives  to  that  fact. 

We  have  so  far  noted  some  of  the  most 
obvious  aspects,  but  also  the  most  super- 
ficial, of  the  Revolution  at  Petrograd.  It 
may  be  said  that  these  impressions  have 
nothing  sensational  in  them. 

80 


The  Revolution    at    Petrograd 

Among  the  publicists  of  every  nationality 
who  were  in  Russia  when  we  were  there, 
many  indeed  did  not  seek  to  hide  their 
disappointment ;  they  had  hoped  to  find 
in  the  Revolution  a  unique  opportunity 
for  obtaining  good  copy,  and  instead  they 
were  asking  themselves  every  evening  how 
to  put  together  a  hundred  lines  to  send 
to  their  paper. 

In  short,  the  streets,  apart  from  the  red 
flags,  the  excessive  dirt,  and  the  trams 
laden  with  soldiers,  had  their  usual  aspect. 
Ministerial  crises  were  neither  more  nor 
less  frequent  than  in  Paris.  The  very 
number  of  public  meetings  made  them 
insipid  in  the  end.  On  the  surface  Russian 
life  seemed  much  the  same  as  it  had  been 
before  the  Revolution :  the  staffs  in  the 
ministries  were  still  at  their  posts,  and 
in  this  country,  free  henceforward  in  a 
sense  that  no  other  country  in  the  world 
has  ever  been,  we  were  reminded  by  the 
doorkeepers  when  we  visited  the  Hermitage 
Museum  that  we  must  remove  our  hats. 

To  understand  really  the  immense  and 
chaotic  transformation  that  was  taking 
place  in  the  minds  of  the  people  and  in 

81 


the  very  conditions  of  life,  it  was  not  enough 
to  look  at  the  scenes  in  the  streets  ;  one 
had  to  talk  with  the  people,  to  come  into 
contact  with  the  different  groups,  to  go 
elsewhere  than  Petrograd,  to  visit  the 
Russian  armies  and  the  factories. 

We  had  only  two  months  to  do  all  that 
in.  We  made  the  attempt,  however,  by 
dividing  up  our  party.  Accompanied  by 
Lieutenant  de  Man,  I  started  for  Moscow, 
where  we  arrived  in  the  midst  of  the  general 
strike  of  the  dvorniks  (janitors)  and  of 
the  hotel  staffs.  M.  de  Brouckere  devoted 
himself  especially  to  visiting  the  factories. 
Together,  on  the  invitation  of  General 
Alexeieff,  we  spent  a  fortnight  with  the 
armies  of  the  South  and  the  South- West, 
while  during  the  whole  of  our  sojourn  we 
never  ceased  to  carry  on  an  active  propa- 
ganda for  Belgium  and  to  hold  meetings 
with  the  Soviet. 

In  the  following  chapters  will  be  found 
some  of  the  observations  that  we  made 
from  this  triple  point  of  view  :  industrial, 
military, r  and  political. 


82 


CHAPTER   II 
THE  REVOLUTION  IN  THE  FACTORIES 

^  •  ^HE  general  impression  received  from 
JL  a  round  of  visits  to  the  factories 
of  Petrograd — the  only  ones  that  we  had 
the  opportunity  of  seeing — cannot  but  be 
somewhat  vague  and  uncertain. 

Innumerable  conflicting  forces  are  at 
work ;  probably  their  efforts  will  blend 
some  day,  but  at  present  they  are  contra- 
dicting and  counteracting  each  other.  The 
action  of  some  will  only  be  momentary, 
while  that  of '  others  will  probably  be 
durable.  But  how  can  we  distinguish  which 
are  lasting  and  which  transitory  ?  What 
appears  to  be  lasting  to-day,  to-morrow 
may  be  neutralized  or  completely  annihil- 
ated by  some  other  influence.  Or  else 
it  may  adapt  itself  to  new  laws  and  become 
fecund  when  we  had  thought  it  destructive. 
Some  other  force,  the  influence  of  which 

38  c 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

may  be  scarcely  apparent  at  the  time, 
may  develop  powerfully  in  the  near  future, 
and  favourable  or  fatal  consequences  be 
the  result.  How  can  we  attempt  to  deliver 
judgment  in  this  formidable  chaos  from 
which  a  world  will  emerge  ?  What  do  we 
know  ?  What  can  we  affirm  ? 

We  must  wait  and  think,  and  compare 
events  as  they  develop  with  our  first 
impressions.  .  .  . 

But  since  necessity  compels  us  to  deal 
with  this  matter  in  these  early  days,  we 
have  but  one  resource,  and  that  is  to  speak 
conditionally,  always  with  a  reservation, 
warning  our  readers  that  our  statements 
are  necessarily  precarious  and  our  conclu- 
sions uncertain. 


1.  THE  INDUSTRIAL  YOUTH  OF  RUSSIA. 

Russia  will  always  be  an  essentially 
agricultural  country.  Nearly  85  per  cent, 
of  its  inhabitants  live  by  the  cultivation 
of  the  soil  or  of  the  forests.  But  we  must 
not  conclude  from  that  that  the  country 
is  in  its  commercial  infancy.  Nor  must 
we  picture  the  typical  Russian  workman 

84 


The    Revolution    in    the    Factories 

as  a  kind  of  village  blacksmith  or  a  shoe- 
maker in  a  little  town.  He  is,  on  the 
contrary,  a  workman  in  great,  even  ultra- 
modern, factories.  The  giant  factory  pre- 
dominates, and  its  plant  is  often  up  to 
date.  Factories  employing  more  than 
one  thousand  workmen  represent  a  larger 
proportion  in  Russia  than  even  in  the 
United  States.  This  is  easily  explained 
by  the  youth  and  the  rapid  economical 
growth  of  the  ancient  Empire  of  the  Czars. 
The  needs  of  national  manufacture  date 
only  from  yesterday,  but  they  are  develop- 
ing with  surprising  force  and  rapidity.  The 
factories,  being  of  recent  date,  are  planned 
on  the  latest  technical  designs,  and  as 
they  are  justified  in  anticipating  an  immense 
and  rapid  development  of  their  business, 
these  plans  are  conceived  on  a  very  large 
scale.  That  is  the  case  in  all  parts  of  the 
country  where  industries  already  exist, 
in  the  Donetz  as  in  the  petroleum  district 
of  the  Caucasus,  and  even  near  Moscow, 
where  the  textile  industry  is  relatively  old. 
But  it  is  in  Petrograd  especially  that  the 
phenomenon  is  the  most  striking.  We 
might  find  in  other  parts  of  the  world, 

85 


Three    Aspects    of    the    Russian    Revolution 

perhaps,  more  gigantic  factories  than  the 
Poutiloff  works,  but  nowhere,  at  least 
in  the  outskirts  of  any  large  capital, 
are  there  so  imposing  a  number  of  enor- 
mous establishments,  nor  does  there  exist 
anywhere  such  a  mass  of  workmen  work- 
ing in  the  interests  of  a  mere  handful  of 
employers. 

Were  this  statement  but  of  technical 
interest,  we  should  not  insist  on  it,  but  we 
cannot  blind  ourselves  to  the  gravity  of 
its  social  influence.  In  the  large  Russian 
cities  the  classic  conditions  which  accentuate 
the  conflict  of  the  classes  and  tend  to 
aggravate  it  are  present  in  their  most  acute 
form :  vast  agglomerations  where  revolu- 
tionary ideas  foment ;  overcrowding  of 
the  population  in  the  great  works  where 
physical  contact,  and  still  more,  the  com- 
munity of  work  and  suffering,  make  them 
conscious  of  their  grievances  and  of  their 
own  strength ;  the  contrast  between  the 
large  numbers  of  those  who  obey  and  the 
small  number  of  those  who  command. 

Nor  is  that  all.  The  population  'of  the 
Petrograd  factories  is  not  a  population  of 
habitual  town-dwellers,  adapted  to  this 

86 


The    Revolution    in    the    Factories 

city  life  that  they  are  leading.  They  are 
peasants  who  have  only  recently  left  the 
country.  This  situation  has  been  still 
further  aggravated  by  the  war,  contrary 
to  what  has  taken  place  elsewhere ;  indeed, 
most  of  the  skilled  workmen  of  long  standing 
have  been  taken  away  from  their  usual 
work  and  requisitioned  for  artillery  regi- 
ments or  other  special  army  work,  of  which 
they  form  the  elite,  as  remarkable  for  their 
technical  ability  as  for  their  splendid  moral. 
But  their  place  has  been  filled  in  the 
works  by  fresh  contingents  of  peasants, 
who  are  now  in  an  overwhelming  majority. 
They  arrive  from  all  parts  of  the  country, 
and  especially  from  the  villages  near  the 
big  towns.  They  are  of  all  races  and  of 
all  civilizations.  Next  to  a  Finn  we  find  a 
Tartar.  They  have  been  taken  out  of  their 
proper  environment,  and  there  we  see 
them  uprooted,  with  no  common  traditions, 
without  that  restraint  that  custom  brings. 
They  have  no  sense  of  political  liberty, 
since  absolutism  has  prevented  their  ac- 
quiring it.  They  have  but  a  rudimentary 
knowledge  of  political  organization,  their 
Trades  Unions  having  before  the  war 

87 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

enjoyed  a  very  precarious  liberty,  powerless 
to  establish  themselves  on  a  solid  basis. 

That  will  give  the  reader  some  idea  of 
the  truly  extraordinary  quantity  of  explo- 
sive material  thus  massed  together. 


Does  that  mean  that  Russia  is  on  the 
eve  of  this  "  social  revolution "  foretold 
by  the  theorists  of  Socialism  ?  That 
would  mean  that  we  take  a  singularly 
superficial  view  of  the  case.  A  "  labour  " 
revolution  would  necessitate  positive, 
constructive  conditions ;  it  would  require 
a  political  and  industrial  capacity  of  which 
the  urban  proletariat  of  Russia  has  not 
given  any  proof  so  far,  and  which  cannot 
be  acquired  in  a  day.  The  future  of  the 
country  seems,  moreover,  likely  to  be 
determined  rather  by  its  agricultural 
situation,  which  directly  interests  the  im- 
mense majority  of  its  inhabitants,  than  by 
the  state  of  its  industry.  It  is,  after  all, 
the  peasant  who  remains  the  real  master 
of  the  situation. 

Do  we  mean  to  say,  then,  on  the .  other 
hand,  that  the  material  accumulated  must 

88 


The    Revolution    in    the    Factories 

inevitably  explode,  and  that  we  are  on 
the  eve  of  a  formidable  conflagration,  one 
of  those  social  upheavals  that  convulse 
and  devastate  a  country  ?  We  must  cer- 
tainly be  possessed  of  singular  optimism 
if  we  can  cast  such  a  hypothesis  disdainfully 
aside.  But  it  would  be  equally  rash  to 
decide  that  the  explosion  is  inevitable. 
Russia  is  manifestly  exposed  to  a  very 
grave  industrial  crisis,  but  it  appears  far 
from  impossible  to  deal  with  it. 

We  wished  to  see  the  Petrograd  workmen 
in  their  factories,  where  they  spend  the 
greater  part  of  their  laborious  existence. 
We  talked  long  with  them,  and  conversed 
also  with  their  leaders  and  organizers  ;  we 
were  present  at  their  meetings  and  took 
part  in  their  discussions,  and  the  result 
of  our  inquiries,  which  were  as  comprehen- 
sive as  circumstances  and  the  lack  of  time 
at  our  disposal  would  permit,  has  been 
that  we  have  carried  away  a  very  distinct 
impression  of  the  extreme  good-will  on 
the  part  of  the  most  intelligent  and  the 
most  technically  skilled  members  of  the 
working  classes.  As  far  as  the  masses  are 
concerned,  they  show  a  very  deep  "  social 

89 


Three    Aspects    of    the    Russian    Revolution 

sense,"  which  only  needs  fuller  develop- 
ment. If  the  employers  on  their  side  are 
able,  as  one  hopes  they  will  be,  to  rise  to  a 
sense  of  their  responsibilities,  if  the  Govern- 
ment, that  we  may  confidently  expect  to 
introduce  many  new  measures,  acts  with 
wise  and  far-sighted  energy,  Russia  will 
come  victoriously  through  her  present  trials 
and  set  a  great  and  beneficial  example 
to  the  world. 


2.  THE  CLAIMS  OF  THE  WORKMEN. 

It  was  neither  his  rate  of  pay  nor  the 
conditions  under  which  he  works  that  led 
the  Russian  workman  to  engage  in  the 
present  revolutionary  movement.  The 
Revolution  was  from  the  first  political,  in 
the  strictest  sense  of  the  word.  It  was 
directed  against  Czarism.  Its  aim  was  to 
win  liberty.  If  any  material  consideration 
was  mixed  in  it,  it  was  at  most  a  protest 
against  famine  that  resulted  from  the  bad 
organization  of  transport.  We  know, 
indeed,  that  the  protests  of  women  obliged 
to  wait  in  queues  during  whole  nights 
before  the  doors  of  the  bakers,  and  the 

40 


The    Revolution    in    the    Factories 

manifestations  organized  in  the  factories 
to  support  their  claims  were  the  immediate 
cause  of  the  events  that  followed. 

During  the  first  days  of  the  new  era, 
in  the  intoxication  of  victory,  the  putting 
forward  of  economic  claims  was  scarcely 
thought  of.  A  Belgian  employer  told  us 
that  he  had  at  once  assembled  his  numerous 
staff  to  propose  to  them  that  a  common 
agreement  on  certain  points  should  be 
drawn  up,  on  the  basis  of  which  they  would 
eventually  proceed  to  a  revision  of  the 
scale  of  wages  which  the  high  cost  of  living 
had  rendered  necessary.  But  his  staff  had 
stopped  him  before  he  had  well  begun 
his  speech,  protesting  that  there  could  be 
no  question  of  discussing  such  a  matter, 
that  since  the  Revolution  all  were  brothers, 
and  they  only  asked  leave  to  do  for  their 
brother  what  they  had  heretofore  done 
for  their  employer. 

Nevertheless,  Russian  workmen  were  not 
long  in  arriving  at  a  somewhat  less  idyllic 
conception  of  the  social  question.  During 
the  early  days  after  the  Revolution  the 
workman  was  still  in  the  streets,  or  if  he 
happened  by  chance  to  go  to  his  factory 

41 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

it  was  to  take  part  in  some  meeting  or 
to  celebrate  the  triumph  of  the  people's 
cause.  Only  when  calm  was  in  a  sense 
re-established  did  he  think  seriously  of 
resuming  his  regular  work.  But  with  the 
drudgery  of  daily  toil  he  became  conscious 
once  more  of  his  sufferings,  of  the  weariness 
and  the  monotony  of  the  long  hours  of 
work,  the  disgust  for  a  life  characterized 
both  by  the  meagre  pay  and  the  constant 
irritation  caused  by  the  overseers  and  fore- 
men, and  with  the  renewed  consciousness 
of  his  grievances  there  inevitably  arose 
the  will  to  end  them. 

Now  one  must  not  forget  that  the  work- 
men in  the  factories  were  at  that  moment 
the  masters  of  Russia ;  they  were  so  in 
the  full  force  of  the  term.  The  Soviet, 
which  represented  them  as  well  as  the 
soldiers,  constituted  the  only  political 
power  capable  of  making  itself  felt  in  the 
country,  for  they  alone  had  power  at  their 
disposal.  They  had  their  militia ;  they 
were  closely  associated  with  the  soldiers; 
and  especially  they  had  cohesion  and 
capacity  for  co-ordination.  There  were 
neither  police  nor  armed  guard  of  any  kind ; 

42 


The    Revolution    in    the    Factories 

there  was  not  even  any  regular  authority 
or  recognized  moral  authority,  not  even 
an  existing  traditional  authority  to  oppose 
their  will.  Everything,  in  short,  was  in 
their  hands.  Can  we  be  surprised  that 
they  sometimes  abused  their  momentary 
power  ?  If  we  will  but  reflect  and  take 
into  consideration  all  the  circumstances, 
we  shall  be  astonished  that  they  did  not 
abuse  it  more  often. 

For  taken  all  in  all,  the  exaggerated 
claims,  the  acts  of  violence  against  em- 
ployers and  overseers,  have  been  less 
numerous  and  much  less  serious  than  scared 
newspaper  reporters  would  lead  the  public 
to  believe.  They  have  in  any  case  been 
much  less  numerous  than  they  would  have 
probably  been  in  any  other  country  under 
the  same  circumstances. 

***** 

From  the  first  there  was  keen  discussion 
among  the  theorists  of  the  movement  as  to 
the  category  in  which  the  Revolution  then 
just  commencing  should  be  placed.  Was  it 
a  democratic  or  a  social  revolution  ?  They 
argued  the  point  warmly,  as  if  it  were 
more  important  to  baptize  the  movement 

43 


Three    Aspects    of    the    Russian    Revolution 

than  to  carry  it  on.  Were  the  Revolution 
purely  democratic,  its  domain  was  political, 
and  it  only  indirectly  affected  the  govern- 
ment of  the  factories.  If  it  were  social, 
on  the  other  hand,  it  would  have  to  settle 
the  question  of  ownership,  and  it  was 
the  workmen's  obvious  duty  to  seize  the 
factories.  No  one  will  be  astonished, 
moreover,  if  we  add  that  the  workmen 
have  never  paid  very  much  attention  to 
such  distinctions.  They  have  certainly  not 
limited  themselves  to  making  it  purely 
political,  but  neither  have  they  made 
themselves  masters  of  the  factories  by 
appropriating  them.  They  have  simply 
exercised  a  practical  authority.  They  have 
made  their  will  predominate,  a  will  which 
circumstances  rendered  irresistible. 

The  history  of  the  labour  hegemony  in 
the  workshops  is  full  of  curious  incidents, 
some  of  them  amusing,  some  tragic.  We 
give  one  or  two  of  the  most  characteristic, 
but  as  we  fully  realize  the  gravity  and 
importance  of  the  event  with  which  we  are 
dealing,  after  having  described  one  or  two 
picturesque  incidents  we  shall  pass  on  to 
a  study  of  the  deeper  side  of  the  question. 


The    Revolution    in    the    Factories 

3.  THE  QUESTION  OF  OVERSEERS. 

It  was  against  the  overseers  and  the 
foremen  that  the  workman  first  made  use 
of  his  newly  acquired  power.  The  duties 
of  an  overseer  are  as  thankless  as  those 
of  a  non-commissioned  officer.  The  rigid 
discipline  of  the  workshop,  the  inexorable 
punctuality,  may  be  necessary  for  the  carry- 
ing on  of  the  work,  but  the  enforcing  of  it 
is  hardly  pleasant,  and  the  position  of 
the  man  who  must  constantly  remind  the 
workmen  of  their  duties  is  not  to  be  envied. 
The  overseer  is  rarely  popular,  even  when 
he  is  just,  and  is  heartily  disliked  when 
he  is  unjust,  brutal,  or  when  he  abuses 
his  power,  which  is  very  great,  to  benefit 
those  who  curry  favour  and  make  life 
impossible  for  such  as  refuse  to  sacrifice 
their  manly  dignity.  Now  this  happens 
more  frequently  than  one  would  think  in 
every  country,  and  no  one  will  be  surprised 
when  we  say  that  in  Russia  it  was  more 
frequent  than  in  any  other  country,  first 
because  political  and  police  tyranny  favoured 
it,  even  invited  it  in  a  sense,  for  abuses 
of  power  in  all  forms  were  prevalent ; 

45 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

secondly,  because  in  these  more  primi- 
tive surroundings,  where  highly  technical 
capacity  was  rare  among  the  workmen, 
the  expert  skilled  overseer  dominated  the 
men  under  him  more  completely  than  in 
the  factories  of  the  West ;  and, "  finally, 
because  a  considerable  proportion  of  over- 
seers and  foremen  were  foreigners — English, 
French,  or  Belgians — too  often  tempted  in 
the  naivete  of  their  national  pride  to  look 
upon  the  Russian  workmen  as  the  repre- 
sentatives of  an  inferior  humanity  and 
to  conduct  themselves  like  the  "  civilizers  " 
in  the  colonies. 

There  were  therefore  many  "  accounts 
to  settle."  Now  the  justice  of  the  people 
is  prompt.  It  is  also  liable  to  err.  In 
many  cases  the  innocent  suffered  with  the 
guilty ;  many  instances  of  private  vengeance 
were  settled  on  the  pretext  of  public  ven- 
geance. Among  those  whose  dead  bodies 
were  found  hanged  from  some  lamp-post 
or  washed  ashore  by  the  waves  of  the  Neva 
there  were  more  than  one  assuredly  who 
had  in  no  sense  merited  the  hate  of  which 
they  were  the  victims. 

But  let  us  add  that  the  cases  of  death, 

46 


The    Revolution    in    the    Factories 

or  even  serious  injuries,  were  fairly  rare. 
If  we  believed  the  tales  of  some  scared 
fugitives  from  the  factories,  we  would 
imagine  there  must  have  been  throughout 
Russia  a  veritable  St.  Bartholomew  of  over- 
seers and  managers,  but  we  have  already 
pointed  out  how  rumour  exaggerated  to 
the  point  of  ridicule  even  the  smallest 
street  brawls.  We  were  told,  for  instance, 
that  in  a  certain  part  of  the  Donetz  thousands 
of  victims  had  been  slain.  On  making 
inquiry  we  learned  that  nearly  all  these 
supposed  dead  were  still  alive,  and  the 
real  number  of  those  murdered  was  some- 
thing like  eight  or  ten.  It  is  difficult, 
even  to-day,  to  give  any  accurate  figure 
of  the  number  of  victims  in  Petrograd. 
There  are  many  persons  who  have  disap- 
peared, but  there  is  every  reason  to  believe 
that  most  of  these  will  turn  up  again  when 
the  present  unrest  has  calmed  down  and 
they  dare  come  out  from  their  hiding- 
places. 

It  would  prove  our  ignorance  of  the 
Russian  workman  did  we  represent  him 
as  thirsting  for  the  blood  of  his  employers. 
On  the  contrary,  he  has  limited  himself 

47 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

generally  to  giving  those  of  whom  he 
wished  to  get  rid  of  the  concilium  dbeundi, 
without  other  penalty  for  those^  who  did 
not  execute  it  with  a  good  grace  than  that 
of  being  thrown  out  of  the  principal  en- 
trance, followed  by  a  cheering  crowd.  A 
warning  is  added  not  to  return,  under 
penalty  of  more  drastic  measures. 

In  a  number  of  cases  the  workshop 
staffs  had  recourse  to  the  authority  of 
the  "  Soviets "  of  workmen  and  soldiers 
to  carry  out  their  sentences  of  expulsion. 
The  Soviet  would  pronounce  sentence  of 
banishment  from  the  neighbourhood,  or 
from  the  Government,  and  their  militia 
saw  that  the  sentence  was  carried  out. 
This  application  of  administrative  exile, 
following  on  the  workmen's  claims,  is  not 
one  of  the  least  strange  facts  of  the  para- 
doxical situation  created  by  the  Revolution. 

Let  us  hasten  to  add,  moreover,  that 
apart  from  these  overseers  exiled  or  driven 
away,  or  who  had  taken  to  flight,  there 
is  a  considerable  proportion — certainly  much 
more  than  half — who  have  quietly  continued 
carrying  on  their  work.  Those  have,  as  a 
rule,  been  kept  at  their  posts  by  the  votes 

48 


The    Revolution    in    the    Factories 

of  the  workshop,  and  this  popular  investi- 
ture has  generally  increased  their  authority. 
In  some  cases  the  workmen  had  begun 
by  appointing  a  new  overseer,  chosen  from 
among  their  ranks,  but  after  having  made 
the  experiment  they  have  put  back  in  his 
post  the  original  official,  and  these  rein- 
stated overseers,  because  they  have  proved 
conclusively  and  practically  their  suitability 
for  the  post,  are  among  those  whose  authority 
is  now  held  in  the  greatest  respect  and 
the  best  obeyed. 

The  idea  of  the  rotation  of  employment 
seems  to  be  one  of  those  which  appeared 
especially  attractive  during  the  early  days  of 
the  Revolution  to  the  less  intelligent  portion 
of  the  working  class.  It  seemed  natural 
and  just  to  them  that  each  one  should  take 
his  turn  in  performing  the  hard,  disagree- 
able tasks,  and  that  each  also  should  take 
his  turn  at  directing.  Skilled  engineers 
were  obliged  to  spend  long  weeks  at  manual 
labour.  In  some  of  the  Donetz  mines  all 
the  office  staffs,  the  managing  director 
included,  had  to  go  down  into  the  shafts 
and  taste  the  joys  of  swinging  a  pick,  while 
the  miners,  many  of  whom  were  quite 

49  D 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

illiterate,  sat  gravely  in  the  offices,  occu- 
pied the  directorial  chairs,  perched  them- 
selves on  the  high  stools  at  the  book- 
keeping desks  or  even  grouped  around  the 
table  of  the  Administrative  Council.  But 
here  again  experience  soon  taught  these 
would-be  reformers  that  to  undertake  the 
direction  of  the  production  it  was  not  enough 
for  a  workman  to  sit  in  the  director's  chair. 
When  the  pay-sheets  had  to  be  drawn  up, 
orders  for  material  placed,  or  the  output 
regulated,  they  realized  that  technical 
knowledge  was  not  altogether  useless,  and 
very  soon  installed  the  former  officials  in 
their  places. 

4.  THE  DECREASE  IN  PRODUCTION. 

Apart  from  these  temporary  victims,  a 
great  number  of  managers  had,  as  we  have 
seen,  been  driven  away  by  the  staff.  They 
left  without  hope  of  return,  or  at  least 
of  an  early  return.  And  thus  Russian 
industry  was  deprived  of  much  competency, 
a  loss  all  the  greater  since  technical  capacity 
was  already  more  rare  than  in  old  industrial 
countries.  Moreover,  the  mobilization  for 

50 


The    Revolution    in    the    Factories 

special  army  services  of  a  large  number  of 
skilled  workmen  had  still  further  reduced 
the  supply  of  skilled  labour.  The  quality 
and  quantity  of  the  output  could  not  but 
suffer.  That  is  undoubtedly  one  of  the 
causes  of  the  decrease  in  industrial  pro- 
duction of  which  the  public  has  been  so 
often  informed  in  the  Press.  There  are 
other  causes,  such  as  the  ever-increasing 
lack  of  raw  material,  the  transport  difficulty, 
the  impossibility  of  renewing  or  repairing 
worn-out  machinery.  But  for  the  moment 
we  shall  only  deal  with  the  decrease  in 
production  resulting  from  the  shortage  of 
labour,  which  is  supposed  erroneously  to 
be  the  chief  cause. 

Was  there  any  real  evidence  of  ill-will 
on  the  part  of  the  work-hands  ?  We  have 
questioned  many  people  on  this  subject, 
to  obtain  as  accurate  information  as  possible 
— industrials,  engineers,  officials,  workmen. 
The  replies,  as  one  might  expect,  varied 
greatly.  They  were,  however,  much  more 
favourable  to  the  workmen  than  the 
rumours  current  in  Petrograd  would  lead 
one  to  think,  rumours  emanating  from 
persons  who  came  into  no  actual  contact 

51 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

with  the  factories  and  who  got  their  infor- 
mation from  journalists  who  were  spreading 
such  information  throughout  the  world's 
Press. 

Cases  of  real  downright,  evident  ill-will 
rarely  occurred.  We  mean  by  that,  that 
there  were  few  cases  of  factories  producing 
less  because  the  workmen  deliberately 
limited  the  output.  Large  employers  of 
labour  have  told  us,  on  the  contrary,  that 
in  the  main  the  workmen  are  better  dis- 
posed to-day  than  they  were  before  the 
Revolution  to  help  in  the  national  defence 
by  making  every  effort  to  increase  their 
output. 

But  good-will  on  the  part  of  the  workmen 
does  not  count  for  much  in  a  question  of 
industrial  production  unless  it  is  combined 
with  perseverance,  and  whatever  may  be 
the  good  qualities  of  the  Russian,  perse- 
verance has  never  been  among  the  most 
striking.  The  spirit  is  willing,  but  the  flesh 
is  weak.  The  needs  of  the  army  and  of 
the  nation  have  been  made  plain  to  them, 
they  understand  the  necessity  for  increased 
production  if  they  would  save  their  country, 
and  they  set  to  work  with  unaccustomed 

52 


The    Revolution    in    the    Factories 

zeal,  but  one  or  two  hours  afterwards  the 
opportunity  for  a  discussion  with  some 
comrades  arises,  or  for  a  manifestation  in 
favour  of  the  Revolution;  in  a  word,  the 
opportunity  to  waste  time  agreeably. 
Perhaps  the  first  time  the  temptation  is 
successfully  resisted,  perhaps  even  the 
second  time,  but  it  is  not  easy  to  go 
on  resisting  all  the  time,  the  more  so  as 
the  authority  of  the  overseer  is  no  lonj  er 
there  to  call  them  to  order,  and  because 
recent  events  have  created  a  disturbing 
atmosphere  of  general  excitement  and 
opportunities  for  distraction  have  become 
greatly  multiplied. 

What  most  strikes  the  foreigner,  who 
has  an  opportunity  of  observing  what  is 
taking  place  in  Russian  factories,  is  the 
enormous  amount  of  time  that  is  consecrated 
to  or  wasted  in  discussions.  On  the  slightest 
pretext  two  workmen  will  lay  down  their 
tools  to  exchange  views  on  the  subject  of 
Lenin's  policy  or  the  latest  decision  of  the 
Soviet.  Soon  other  workmen  will  stop  to 
listen,  or  to  put  in  a  word,  and  one  need 
not  be  surprised,  on  returning  an  hour 
later,  to  find  the  whole  workshop  engaged 

58 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

in  the  controversy,  with  all  the  machinery 
stopped.  It  is  not  unusual,  moreover,  for 
the  audience  to  be  increased  by  men  from 
other  factories  in  the  neighbourhood.  It 
has  been  said  that  Russia  has  become  the 
Kingdom  of  Speech,  and  nowhere  assuredly 
is  speech  more  honoured  than  in  the 
factories. 

Strange  as  it  may  seem,  Russian  em- 
ployers make  very  little  attempt  to  prevent 
this  happening,  much  less  than  would  be 
made  in  the  same  circumstances  by  their 
colleagues  in  the  West.  They  seem  to 
think  the  conduct  of  their  employees  quite 
natural  in  a  way,  and  though  they  may 
not  approve  of  it,  they  show,  as  a  rule, 
less  annoyance  than  one  would  expect.  One 
of  our  party  had  occasion  to  remark  this 
under  rather  amusing  circumstances. 

He  had  been  asked  to  address  the  work- 
men of  a  large  ironworks  with  a  view  to 
bringing  home  to  them  how  important  it 
was  for  Russia  and  the  Revolution  to 
maintain  or,  better  still,  increase  its  pro- 
duction, indispensable  to  the  army.  It  had 
been  arranged  that  the  speech  would  be 
delivered  at  three  o'clock,  and  that  the 

54 


The    Revolution    in    the    Factories 

day  shift,  which  would  be  replaced  at  that 
hour  by  the  night  shift,  would  be  invited 
to  attend.  What  was  the  speaker's  sur- 
prise on  arriving  at  the  meeting-place  at 
about  a  quarter  to  three  to  see  the  men 
of  the  day  shift  already  waiting.  The 
employer  explained,  without  the  slightest 
outward  sign  of  annoyance,  that  to  be 
quite  sure  not  to  miss  the  speaker's  opening 
sentences  the  workmen  had  knocked  off 
at  2.30. 

The  address  was  nearly  ended,  when 
towards  3.30  there  was  a  commotion,  and 
the  men  of  the  night  shift,  who,  after  having 
waited  for  the  late-comers  in  the  workshop, 
arrived  to  take  part  in  the  discussion. 
The  employer,  in  the  most  unconcerned 
way,  explained  to  the  speaker  what  had 
taken  place,  and  asked  him  to  begin  over 
again  for  the  benefit  of  the  new-comers. 

Towards  four  o'clock  the  speech  was 
concluded  for  the  second  time,  but  the 
audience  did  not  disperse,  and  naturally 
the  night  shift  did  not  return  to  work. 
This  was  because  the  most  interesting  part 
of  the  programme  had  just  been  reached, 
the  speaker's  replies  to  questions  from  the 

55 


Three    Aspect*    of    the    Russian    Revolution 

audience.  The  questions  were  numerous 
and  often  very  shrewd.  In  replying,  the 
speaker  insisted  on  the  necessity  for  regular 
and  sustained  labour.  The  audience  ap- 
proved loudly  and  sincerely,  but  still  did 
not  go  back  to  work.  Towards  five  o'clock 
however,  the  speaker  could  not  help  re- 
marking that  it  would  be  a  good  thing  to 
give  practical  effect  to  the  resolutions 
that  had  been  passed  by  returning  to  work 
without  further  delay.  Once  more  the 
audience  acquiesced  with  enthusiasm,  but 
asked  the  speaker  to  reply  first  to  two  or 
three  more  questions.  That  was  done,  and 
then  followed  another  exhortation  on  the 
part  of  the  speaker  and  another  enthusi- 
astic acquiescence  by  the  audience,  but  on 
condition  that  he  should  reply  to  two  or 
three  more  questions.  It  was  getting  on 
for  six  o'clock,  and  in  the  end  the  speaker 
firmly  declared  that  he  would  reply  to  no 
more  questions,  that  he  would  not  take 
upon  himself  the  responsibility  for  such  a 
loss  of  time.  "  Why,"  said  the  employer 
in  a  tone  of  surprise,  "  another  half-hour 
will  not  make  much  difference." 


The    Revolution    in    the    Factories 

Naturally  it  was  during  the  early  days 
of  the  Revolution  that  the  loss  of  time  in 
discussions,  speeches,  and  workshop  meet- 
ings was  most  considerable.  As  the  enthu- 
siasm died,  more  methodical  work  became 
possible,  and  the  output  increased.  Regard- 
ing all  those  factories  of  Petrograd  which 
we  visited — and  these  were  chosen  among 
the  largest — and  in  which  we  made  the 
closest  inquiries,  we  made  the  same  observa- 
tion ;  the  output,  which  had  diminished 
amazingly  during  the  month  of  April,  had 
increased  during  the  month  of  May,  often 
reaching  a  pre-Revolution  level,  and  in  many 
cases  even  exceeding  it.  The  increase  was 
general  except  in  some  rare  cases,  where 
causes,  quite  apart  from  the  good-will  of 
the  workmen,  such  as  the  lack  of  raw  material, 
prevented  it.  It  is  very  striking  to  note 
that  this  increase  took  place  especially  in 
factories  of  skilled  workmen.  It  was  the 
technically  skilled  workmen  who  seemed  to 
possess  in  the  most  eminent  degree  the 
moral  qualities  of  the  producer.  Thus,  in 
gun  factories  the  skilled  workers  and 
polishers  everywhere  exceeded  their  pre- 
Revolution  production  in  such  a  degree 

57 


Three    Aspects    of    the    Russian    Revolution 

that   it  became   necessary  to  proceed  to  a 
redistribution  of  work. 

It  would  be  very  interesting  to  give 
statistics  in  support  of  these  general  state- 
ments, but  we  must  limit  ourselves  to 
stating  that  the  facts  were  laid  before  us  : 
statistics  that  could  be  of  interest  with 
regard  to  military  operations  are  naturally 

not  destined  for  public  use. 

*  *  *  *  * 

The  "  fatal  result  "  of  the  eight-hour  day, 
even  of  the  six-hour  day,  on  the  Russian 
production  has  been  strongly  denounced. 
The  six-hour  day  is  nothing  more  nor  less 
than  an  effort  o"  the  journalistic  imagi- 
nation. Nowhere  has  it  been  seriously  put 
into  practice,  and  in  no  important  district, 
in  no  large  industry,  has  it  even  been 
seriously  considered.  As  for  the  eight-hour 
day  its  effect  has  not  been  in  any  way 
disastrous.  Before  the  war,  work  was 
carried  on  generally  in  two  shifts  of  ten 
hours  each,  and  in  many  places  two  hours' 
overtime  was  added.  To-day  they  are 
working  three  shifts  of  eight  hcurs  wherever 
they  can  procure  sufficient  hands  and  the  raw 
material  necessary  for  continuous  production. 

58 


The    Revolution    in    the    Factories 

Where  these  conditions  exist,  it  is  obvious 
that  three  workmen  working  successively 
for  eight  hours  each  produce  more  han 
two  workmen  each  working  twelve  hours. 
On  the  other  hand,  when  the  output  is 
limited  by  the  scarcity  of  raw  material, 
the  question  of  working  hours  loses  its 
importance  from  the  point  of  view  of  the 
intensification  of  industrial  production. 
There  remain  the  cases  where  labour  is 
insufficient.  These  are  more  rare  than  one 
would  imagine  in  this  country,  that  has 
not  mobilized,  as  those  of  the  West  have 
done,  its  whole  valid  population,  and  where 
there  certainly  remain  great  reserves  of 
unemployed  labour,  notably  female  labour. 
But  it  is  undoubtedly  true  that  in  certain 
cases  skilled  labour  is  difficult  to  obtain 
in  sufficient  supplies  to  permit  of  a  third 
shift.  Very  often,  therefore,  in  such  cases 
they  go  back  to  the  pre-war  system  of 
overtime.  In  two  factories  at  least  we 
were  assured  that  even  now,  in  spite  of 
special  technical  difficulties,  the  workmen 
were  producing  as  much  in  eight  hours 
as  they  formerly  did  in  ten. 

But    we    must  admit  that    this   instance 

59 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

was  exceptional.  And  if,  apart  from  those 
cases  where  skilled  labour  is  rare,  the  system 
of  the  eight-hour  day  does  not  tend  to 
diminish  the  total  output  of  the  country, 
it  does  dimmish  the  output  per  man.  It 
thus  increases  the  net  cost ;  and  this  brings 
us  to  the  question  of  wages. 


5.  THE  RISE  IN  WAGES. 

Wages  have  risen  considerably  since  the 
Revolution,  and  no  one  would  dare  state 
that  they  will  not  rise  yet  more.  Before 
the  downfall  of  the  Empire  the  best 
machinists  in  Petrograd  often  earned  only 
four  roubles ;  to-day  they  earn  generally 
fifteen  or  sixteen. 

But  to  appreciate  this  enormous  increase 
we  must  not  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that 
there  had  been  no  important  rise  since 
the  beginning  of  the  war,  with  the  result 
that  the  increase  in  the  cost  of  labour, 
which  in  other  countries  has  been  spread 
over  three  years,  has  taken  place  within 
three  weeks  in  Russia. 

In  Russia,  as  in  the  West,  this  is  due 
principally  to  the  increase  in  the  cost  of 

60 


The    Revolution    in    the    Factories 

living,  which  in  the  large  cities  and  indus- 
trial centres  has  become  incredibly  high. 
It  would  be  difficult  to  reckon  it  with  the 
accuracy  that  the  statistics  of  the  Board 
of  Trade  permit  us  to  obtain  with  regard 
to  Great  Britain.  We  do  not  know  of 
the  existence  of  any  such  document  in  the 
country  we  are  discussing  at  present,  but 
certain  facts  gleaned  here  and  there  allow 
us  to  give  some  idea  of  the  enormous 
increase  in  the  cost  of  living. 

A  Belgian  workman  who  had  lived  in 
Russia  for  several  years,  who  spoke  the 
language  perfectly,  understood  the  customs, 
and  was  consequently  not  liable  to  be 
charged  the  fantastic  prices  that  foreigners 
are  sometimes  made  to  pay,  told  us  that  he 
had  paid  two  hundred  roubles  for  a  suit 
of  very  indifferent  cloth  to  wear  when  off 
duty. 

The  price  of  coal  has  increased  at  least 
tenfold,  thus  making  rents  higher;  for 
houses  are  generally  let  with  heating  in- 
cluded. When  we  consider  the  length  and 
the  severity  of  the  Russian  winter,  we  can 
easily  understand  the  importance  of  this 
item. 

61 


Three    Aspects    of    the    Russian    Revolution 

Comfortably-off  clerks  in  Petrograd,  who 
before  the  war  lived  at  the  rate  of  two 
hundred  roubles  per  month,  have  been 
obliged  to  practise  many  economies  so 
as  to  manage  to  make  ends  meet  with 
the  six  hundred  and  fifty  roubles  which 
they  are  spending  to-day.  We  must 
remember  that  in  all  times  of  national 
crisis  the  cost  of  living  increases  much 
more  in  proportion  as  the  mode  of  living 
is  simpler. 

In  such  conditions  we  can  well  believe 
that  the  workmen  profited  very  naturally 
by  the  liberty  they  had  achieved  to  demand 
an  important  rise  in  their  wages.  Unfortu- 
nately their  claims  in  this  respect,  as  one 
must  expect  on  the  part  of  a  proletariat 
unaccustomed  to  economic  negotiations, 
lacked  co-ordination  and  therefore  measure. 
The  facility  with  which  their  first  requests 
were  granted  incited  them  generally  to  ask 
more  and  more,  and  as  employers,  either 
from  fear  or  weakness,  or  from  some  deeper 
motive,  made  but  little  objection  to  these 
demands,  nor  even  troubled  as  a  rule  to 
discuss  them  seriously,  it  happened  that 
certain  categories  of  workmen  increased 

62 


The    Revolution    in    the    Factories 

their  demands  until  in  the  end  they  assumed 
fantastic  proportions. 

Certain  characteristic  instances  were  men- 
tioned to  us.  Day  labourers,  for  instance, 
employed  in  peat- cutting  in  a  certain  dis- 
trict in  the  centre  of  Russia  claimed  a 
fixed  rate  of  pay  of  one  thousand  roubles 
per  month  ;  and  again,  the  workmen  in  a 
large  factory  in  Petrograd  having  in  a  few 
weeks  trebled  their  wages,  further  exacted 
that  the  measure  should  have  a  retrospective 
effect,  and  date  from  the  outbreak  of  the  war. 

The  method  employed  by  these  work- 
men to  induce  their  employers  to  accede 
to  their  requests  is  worth  describing.  One 
fine  morning  a  delegation  composed  of 
thirteen  members  of  workmen  appeared 
before  the  administrative  council,  who  had 
been  summoned  by  means  of  a  special  and 
urgent  letter  written  at  the  request  of  the 
staff,  and  who  had  hastened  to  attend. 
The  delegation  were  the  bearers  of  thirteen 
sacks.  One  man,  speaking  in  the  name  of 
his  comrades,  pointed  out  that  they  were 
earning  on  an  average  eight  roubles  more 
than  they  did  before  the  Revolution,  and 
that  consequently  they  had  been  daily 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

done  out  of  such  a  sum  in  the  past.  There 
were  five  thousand  workmen  employed  in 
the  factory,  so  that  meant  that  forty 
thousand  roubles  per  day  had  been  kept 
from  them,  in  all  twelve  millions  per  year 
of  three  hundred  working  days,  altogether 
thirty-six  million  roubles.  The  staff  there- 
fore asked  the  administrators  to  pay  that 
sum  into  the  treasury  of  the  workmen's 
association,  and  they  would  undertake  to 
distribute  it.  To  facilitate  the  payment 
they  left  the  thirteen  sacks  with  the  ad- 
ministrators, stating  that  the  sacks  were 
large  enough  to  hold  the  amount  either 
in  gold  or  in  banknotes,  and  they  would 
come  back  for  them  the  following  day. 
Until  then  armed  men  would  be  on  guard 
at  the  door,  and  would  guarantee  to  the 
administrators  that  peacefulness  and  quiet 
which  cannot  fail  to  result  from  complete 
seclusion  without  interruption  or  communi- 
cation from  without.  If,  unfortunately, 
the  sum  should  not  be  in  the  sacks  at  the 
appointed  hour,  the  administrators  would 
be  placed  in  them  themselves  and  the 
bags  flung  into  the  Neva,  which  flows 
conveniently  near  at  hand. 

64 


The    Revolution    in    the    Factories 

One  can  easily  imagine  the  consternation 
of  the  unfortunate  administrative  council 
at  these  simple  words.  They  tried  in  vain 
to  remonstrate,  pointing  out  that  the  capital 
of  the  company  was  far  below  the  sum  re- 
quired; that,  in  any  case,  they  could  not 
procure  in  twenty-four  hours  such  an 
enormous  ransom;  and,  finally,  that  if  they 
were  locked  up  they  could  not  even  take 
the  preliminary  steps  necessary  to  obtain 
the  sum.  The  reply  was  that  the  Company's 
safe  was  in  the  very  room  where  they  were 
sitting,  that  the  directors  had  the  key  of 
it,  and  that,  moreover,  it  was  their  business 
to  deal  with  all  financial  matters.  Then 
they  were  left  to  their  own  thoughts.  For- 
tunately, however,  they  were  able  to  inform 
the  Ministry  of  Labour  of  their  predicament. 
The  Ministry  had  no  material  force  at 
its  disposal,  and  had  the  workmen  persisted 
in  their  intention  it  is  difficult  to  see  how 
the  Government  could  have  prevented 
them  from  carrying  out  their  plan.  The 
Minister,  however,  assembled  the  delegates, 
and  a  few  minutes'  conversation  sufficed 
to  make  them  realize  the  absurdity  of 
their  demand  and  the  impropriety  of  the 

65  £ 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

methods  by  which  they  intended  to  ensure 
its  success.  Promptly  abandoning  their 
project  with  as  good  will  as  they  had  worked 
for  its  realization,  they  went  off  to  release 
their  prisoners,  explained  the  mistake  that 
had  occurred,  offered  them  their  excuses, 
and  all  went  well  from  that  moment,  the 
cordial  relationship  existing  between  the 
management  and  the  workmen  not  having 
suffered  in  the  least  by  the  incident. 

The  story  of  the  thirteen  administrators 
and  the  thirteen  sacks  is  one  that  we  heard 
repeated  most  frequently.  It  is  made  use 
of  to  point  out  the  ferocity  of  the  workmen 
and  the  insatiability  of  their  demands. 
Does  it  not,  on  the  contrary,  show  the  simple, 
childish  good-humour  that  the  Russian 
workman  keeps  even  in  his  excesses  ?  A 
word  was  enough  to  make  these  terrible 
rebels  give  up  all  idea  of  the  thirteen  execu- 
tions they  had  meditated.  Moreover,  had 
they  contemplated  it  seriously  ?  At  the 
same  time  they  gave  up  as  readily  their 
thirty-six  million  roubles,  exacting  no 
fraction  of  it  even.  Is  that  not  a  proof 
that  by  reasoning  with  them  and  exercising 
a  little  patience,  without  much  difficulty 

66 


The    Revolution    in    the   Factories 

most  of  the  foolish  actions  that  are  the 
accompaniment  in  Russia,  as  anywhere 
else,  of  the  apprenticeship  of  liberty  could 
be  prevented  ?  And  since  these  same 
incidents  are  recounted  over  and  over 
again,  does  it  not  show  that  they  are 
much  less  numerous  than  pessimists  would 
pretend  ? 

In  short,  taking  everything  into  account, 
it  would  be  unfair  to  say  that  wages  in 
Russia,  at  the  level  to  which  the  Revolution 
has  brought  them,  are  too  high.  It  is 
not  true  to  say  that  they  have  determined 
the  excessive  cost  of  living.  That  had 
begun  long  before  labour  became  dear,  and 
has  since  become  aggravated  for  reasons 
in  many  cases  independent  of  this  phe- 
nomenon. We  did  not  find  that  anywhere 
in  Russia  the  real  wages  paid  were 
higher  than  in  Great  Britain;  they  were 
certainly  lower  than  in  America.  The 
industry  of  the  country,  therefore,  can  bear 
them  without  suffering,  on  the  condition 
that  it  is  as  productive  as,  for  example, 
American  industry.  And  as  it  disposes, 
as  a  rule,  of  very  modern  equipment,  and 
as  its  concentration  allows  of  the  application 

67 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

of  the  latest  methods,  there  is  no  reason 
why  an  intensive  output  should  not  be 
achieved  if  Russian  workmen  are  technically 
and  morally  educated  up  to  it.  It  is 
therefore  rather  in  the  question  of  industrial 
education  than  in  that  of  the  reduction 
of  wages  that  the  economic  future  of  the 
country  seems  to  lie. 


6.  THE  PARLIAMENTARY ATION  OF  THE 
FACTORIES. 

* 

Russian  workmen  had  early  to  look  to 
the  question  of  regulating  and  organizing 
the  new  power  that  they  had  just  acquired. 
Their  first  claims  were  out  of  all  proportions. 
They  were  thereafter  discussed  by  deliber- 
ative assemblies,  and  presented  by  chosen 
delegates.  These  were  delegates  elected 
by  the  workmen,  and  who  were  charged 
to  supervise  the  carrying  out  or  help  in 
starting  these  reforms. 

The  result  is  a  series  of  representative 
institutions,  or  small  industrial  parliaments. 
We  know,  moreover,  that  though  Russia 
will  be  without  a  Central  Parliament  until 
the  Constituent  Assembly  meets,  she 

68 


The    Revolution    in    the    Factories 

presents,  nevertheless,  the  most  varied 
and  wonderful  collection  of  elective  bodies, 
deliberating  night  and  day,  in  all  conceiv- 
able places  and  on  all  possible  questions. 
There  is  a  "  Soviet  "  of  officers  and  soldiers 
in  each  barracks,  and  in  each  unit  at  the 
front  from  a  company  to  the  group  of 
armies.  There  is  in  every  town  a  "  Soviet  " 
of  workmen  and  soldiers.  There  is  at 
least  one  congress  of  peasants  representing 
in  its  turn  thousands  of  local  assemblies. 
There  are  Doumas  in  the  towns  and  suburbs, 
not  to  mention  the  party  congresses  or 
the  congresses  of  nationalities  or  professions. 
In  short,  the  political  life  is,  as  it  were, 
broken  up,  scattered  in  a  veritable  "  dust 
of  parliaments."  How  then  could  the 
factories  stand  aloof  from  the  general  move- 
ment ?  They  also  have  their  deliberative 
assemblies.  They  have  even  more  than  one 
kind.  It  would  be  very  difficult  to  enumerate 
all  the  various  committees  that  have  seen 
the  day  and  to  indicate  in  what  way  each 
one  came  into  existence,  its  method  of 
election,  its  composition,  and  its  precise 
functions.  We  must  keep  on  general  lines. 
In  most  of  the  factories,  then,  there  are  : 

69 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

(a)  A  FACTORY  COMMITTEE. — It  is  elected 
by  the  universal  suffrage  of  the  workers 
of  both  sexes,  without  distinction  of  age 
or  technical  skill,  and  on  the  lines  of 
the  most  absolute  equality.  It  is  elected 
either  directly  or  indirectly ;  that  is  to  say, 
by  the  intermediary  of  workshop  com- 
mittees, of  which  we  shall  speak  presently. 
Its  members  may  vary  in  number  from 
a  dozen  in  the  small  factories  to  fifty 
in  the  large  ones.  It  meets  generally  during 
working  hours.  Its  functions  are  complex; 
often  it  controls  the  whole  activity  of  the 
establishment,  but  it  does  not  pretend  to 
direct  it.  It  is  not  a  council  of  adminis- 
tration ;  its  role  is  rather  like  that  of 
the  Shareholders'  Committee  in  a  Limited 
Company :  it  supervises  operations  and 
states  its  views,  not  in  the  interest  of  the 
shareholders,  but  in  that  of  the  workmen. 
It  is  less  interested  in  the  financial  results 
of  production  than  in  the  conditions  of 
work  that  it  creates.  The  principal  differ- 
ence lies  in  the  fact  that  the  "recommenda- 
tions "  of  the  workmen  are,  under  present 
conditions,  much  more  imperious  than  those 
of  the  shareholders  and  that  it  is  more 

70 


The    Revolution    in    the    Factories 

difficult  to  evade  them.  Moreover,  the 
factory  council  is  in  a  sense  a  court  of  appeal 
for  questions  of  discipline,  which  are  in 
the  first  instance  the  department  of  the 
workshop's  committees.  Often  it  "  con- 
firms "  the  nominations  of  the  director, 
or  even  elects  him.  In  most  big  works 
connected  with  the  army  or  'the  navy  its 
rights  in  this  respect  are  fixed  by  definite 
ruling.  Moreover,  it  exercises  practical 
power,  for  should  the  council  refuse  to 
recognize  a  manager,  life  would  become 
impossible  for  him  in  the  factory. 

The  functions  of  the  factory  council  are 
often  absorbing.  In  many  cases  a  consider- 
able proportion  of  the  working  day  is  taken 
up  by  its  meetings;  sometimes  even  these 
meetings  absorb  the  entire  day.  We  know 
of  a  building  yard  in  Petrograd,  employing 
eight  thousand  hands,  where  the  council, 
composed  of  forty-three  workmen,  naturally 
all  skilled  men  and  earning  sixteen  roubles 
per  day,  sits  exactly  eight  hours  per  day, 
with  the  result  that  its  members  are  never 
at  their  machines  or  their  bench. 

(b)  WORKSHOP  COMMITTEES.— These  are 
to  be  found  in  all  important  workshops. 

71 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

The  members  are  elected,  as  in  the  case 
of  the  factory  committee,  by  universal 
suffrage.  They  exercise  disciplinary  power 
in  place  of  the  foreman.  They  have  in 
general  the  exclusive  right  to  hire,  dismiss, 
admonish,  and  punish.  The  foreman 
exercises  only  a  technical  authority;  more- 
over, he  is  often  subject  to  the  approval 
of  the  committee,  or  has  even  been  elected 
by  it. 

(c)  In  many  factories  another  committee 
is   charged   with   classing  the   workmen   as 
regards    the    wages — maximum,    minimum, 
or  average — to  be  paid  them.     Like  all  the 
others,  this  committee  is  elected  by  universal 
suffrage    of    the    workmen,    the    employer 
being  in  no  way  specially  represented  in  it. 

(d)  And    lastly — and    that    is    perhaps    a 
farther    departure    from    accepted    customs 
— there    exists    in    many    places    a    factory 
committee  of  arbitration,  to  which  disputes, 
individual  or  collective,  between  employers 
and  workmen  are  finally  submitted,    which 
is  composed  solely  of  delegates  elected  by  the 
workmen. 

How  does  such  a  system  work  ? 
It    would    be   ridiculous   to   say    that    it 
72 


The    Revolution    in    the    Factories 

works  well.  But  unquestionably  it  works 
better — or  less  badly — than  it  would  under 
the  same  conditions  in  no  matter  what 
part  of  the  old  industrial  world.  That 
most  certainly  is  owing  to  the  complete 
absence  of  ill-will,  to  that  instinctive  kindness, 
that  astonishing  aptitude  for  maintaining 
elementary  order,  that  sense  of  sponta- 
neous sociability,  which  are  inborn  in  the 
Russian  people. 

These  workshop  committees,  charged  with 
keeping  order,  certainly  do  not  take  the 
employer's  point  of  view — we  do  not  even 
say  that  they  take  a  reasonable  point  of  view ; 
but  those  who  have  seen  them  at  work 
admit  that  they  bring  to  the  accomplish- 
ment of  their  task  genuine  good  faith. 
Workmen  guilty  of  some  piece  of  careless- 
ness are  really  summoned  to  appear  before 
their  committee.  Punishments  are  inflicted 
on  them  to  which  they  are  astonishingly 
sensitive,  and  which  often  produce  more 
effect  than  the  fines  formerly  levied  by 
the  overseers.  If,  moreover,  the  delinquent 
is  recalcitrant  and  does  not  mend  his  be- 
haviour he  is  eventually  dismissed  from 
the  workshop.  Rarely  is  he  sent  away 

73 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

brutally,  but  he  is  given  to  understand 
that  he  is  a  source  of  trouble  to  the  com- 
mittee, and  employment  is  found  for  him 
outside  the  factory.  In  a  machine  factory 
employing  upwards  of  two  thousand  work- 
men, the  manager  explained  to  us  that 
workshop  committees  had  thus  led  to  the 
departure  of  about  sixty  undesirables, 
greatly  for  the  good  of  the  establishment, 
where  now  there  reigns  an  atmosphere  of 
peace  and  good-will.  Even  now  the  em- 
ployers in  general  state  that  it  is  much 
easier  to  deal  with  the  committees  elected 
by  the  workmen  than  directly  with  the 
workmen,  individually  or  in  groups.  The 
claims  presented  by  the  committees  are 
generally  less  exacting  than  those  of  the 
delegation  who  have  first  submitted  them, 
and  when  they  are  exaggerated  it  is  generally 
easier  to  make  them  admit  it. 

It  often  happens  that  the  committee 
is  disavowed  by  the  workmen,  its  resignation 
exacted,  and  thereafter  they  proceed  to 
new  elections.  There  is  one  such  factory 
where,  during  the  first  weeks  of  the  appli- 
cation of  this  system,  the  committee  was 
renewed  four  times,  but  at  each  renewal 

74 


The    Revolution   in    the    Factories 

the  newly  elected  committee,  faced  with 
the  same  problems,  acquiring  the  same 
experience,  came  to  the  same  conclusions, 
and  agreed  to  the  same  concessions,  until 
finally  the  workmen,  realizing  that  a  further 
change  would  be  useless,  agreed  to  leave 
the  last  committee  in  office  and  to  follow 
their  advice.  They  had  no  doubt  come  to  see 
themselves  that  the  committee  were  right. 

7.  THE  RESPONSIBILITIES  OF  POWER. 

In  short,  after  a  relatively  short  lapse 
of  time  business  habits  tend  to  develop 
in  the  most  intelligent  of  the  working  class 
a  more  real  sense  of  their  responsibilities, 
and  there  is  good  reason  to  hope  that  with 
reciprocal  good-will  between  employers  and 
workmen  Russia  may  escape  the  industrial 
chaos  which  threatened  her,  and  that  the 
necessary  development  of  her  economic 
system  will  be  accomplished  without 
catastrophe.  Though  in  the  early  days  of 
the  new  government  we  had  reason  to  fear 
formidable  strikes  and  monster  lock-outs, 
which  would  indeed  have  thrown  out  of 
gear  the  whole  social  machine,  it  is  rather 

70 


Three    Aspects    of    the    Russian    Revolution 

characteristic  of  the  Russian  that  the  wilful 
stopping  of  work  in  the  factories  has  been 
very  rare.  There  has  been  found  nearly 
always  at  the  eleventh  hour  some  way  of 
coming  to  an  agreement  and  avoiding  the 
cataclysm  that  seemed  imminent,  while 
every  day  that  passes,  every  agreement  that 
is  concluded  renders  future  agreements 
easier  to  accomplish.  And  it  is  not  merely 
luck  that  has  brought  this  about. 

From  agreement  to  agreement  the 
present  system  will  end  undoubtedly  by 
becoming  organized  and  adapting  itself  to 
circumstances.  Will  it  retain  its  chief 
characteristics,  or  will  it  altogether  change 
its  nature  ?  In  other  words,  will  Russia 
achieve  the  parliamentarization  of  industry 
on  a  solid  foundation  ?  Will  it  be  hers  to 
herald  the  coming  of  this  "  workshop 
republic "  dreamt  of  by  certain  social 
reformers  ? 

Perhaps  !  We  do  not  wish  to  bring 
to  the  examination  of  this  question  any 
Western  prejudices  which  will  not  admit  that 
things  can  ever  be  other  than  they  have 
always  been,  and  we  are  bound  to  notice 
certain  analogies  between  the  creation  of 

76 


The    Revolution    in    the    Factories 

the  committees  arising  out  of  the  Russian 
Revolution  and  those  whose  creation  is 
recommended  by  the  British  committee 
charged  to  study  the  problem  of  industrial 
reorganization  after  the  war,  and  which 
consists  of  the  most  experienced  employers 
and  workmen.  At  the  same  time  we  must 
remember  that  there  are  certain  funda- 
mental principles  that  one  can  never 
transgress  with  impunity,  either  in  the 
economic  domain  or  in  the  political,  one 
of  the  principal  being  expressed  in  the 
following  words  :  "  No  authority  without 
responsibility." 

Now,  though  the  responsibility  of  the 
factory  or  workshop  committee  to  the 
workmen  who  elect  them  is  genuine,  it  is 
null  with  regard  to  the  other  interested 
parties.  It  is  difficult,  therefore,  to  conceive 
that  they  can  exercise  full  power,  the  more 
so  since  the  workmen  thus  represented  do 
not  accept  themselves  the  responsibility  for 
the  production,  as  they  would  do,  for  in- 
stance, in  a  co-operative  organization.  What 
would  happen  did  it  organize  the  produc- 
tion so  as  to  diminish  the  output,  or  to 
alter  the  quality,  or  even  increase  the 

77 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

cost  of  manufacture  ?  We  do  not  urge 
that  the  employers  and  the  shareholders 
would  suffer,  though  that  consideration  has 
its  importance  as  long  as  the  capitalist 
rule  subsists  and  the  owners  of  money 
play  in  national  economics  a  part  which, 
willing  or  unwilling,  we  must  take  into 
account.  But  we  do  urge  that  the  consumer 
would  suffer.  Now  the  consumer  is  Mr. 
Everyone,  and  we  can  picture  no  system 
less  democratic  than  that  which  would  hand 
him  over,  bound  hand  and  foot,  to  the 
sovereign  will  of  the  staff  of  each  factory. 
Moreover,  though  one  may  profess  to  disdain 
this  ethical  consideration,  we  would  soon 
find  ourselves  compelled  to  bow  to  economic 
fatality,  this  sanction  of  the  rights  of  the 
consumer  in  the  world  of  facts.  Any  indus- 
trial exploitation  which  did  not  supervise 
either  the  quality  or  the  quantity,  or  the 
price  of  its  production,  would  soon  give 
way  before  the  competition  of  better  organ- 
ized industry  from  without,  and  should 
any  attempt  be  made  to  lessen  the  conse- 
quences of  this  by  fiscal  measures  or  by 
other  Protectionist  proceedings,  it  would 
lead  to  the  paralysis  of  national  production. 

78 


The    Revolution   in    the   Factories 

Who,  then,  would  be  foolish  enough  to 
think  that  one  can  bring  about  the  emanci- 
pation of  labour  by  a  system  which  would 
stop  the  economic  development  of  the 
country  ? 

We  should  indeed  have  expressed  our- 
selves badly  if  we  have  led  the  reader 
to  conclude  from  the  foregoing  remarks 
that  we  considered  impossible,  or  even 
undesirable,  the  intervention  of  the  workmen 
in  the  domain  reserved  up  to  the  present 
to  employers.  We  can  make  no  more 
unfortunate  mistake  than  to  consider  em- 
ployers' functions  as  immovable  and  eternal. 
We  should  not  dare  to  call  ourselves  Socialists 
did  we  not  see  in  the  total  organization  of 
labour  by  the  workers  themselves,  for  their 
profit,  the  aim  in  view.  We  are  discussing 
just  now  only  the  question  of  what  method 
to  employ,  and  it  must  be  admitted  that 
the  method  which  we  have  been  criticizing 
at  the  moment  has  many  grave  objections. 
The  working  class,  as  a  collective  whole, 
can  intervene  in  the  industrial  domain 
simply  as  organized  consumers.  Perhaps 
we  shall  have  occasion  to  deal  with  this 
point  later  in  connection  with  the  co-oper- 

79 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

ative  movement.  Even  professionally,  in 
its  own  industries,  Western  experience 
shows  many  examples  of  analogous  inter- 
vention, but  they  have  rarely  achieved 
success  unless  they  have  taken  into  account 
the  great  principle  of  responsibility. 

We  could  invoke,  apart  from  co-opera- 
tive production — properly  speaking,  where 
the  employer  disappears — the  commandite 
ouvriere,  where  the  workmen  themselves 
assume  the  responsibility  for  the  whole 
carrying  out  of  the  work,  arranging  its 
distribution  among  themselves,  supervising 
and  directing  it,  receiving  from  the  em- 
ployer the  machinery  and  the  raw  material, 
and  handing  over  to  him  the  finished 
article,  of  which  he  limits  himself  to  con- 
trolling the  quality  and  the  quantity. 
But  in  this  commandite  ouvriere  the 
total  cost  of  labour,  the  minimum  out- 
put, the  quality,  the  percentage  of  waste, 
and  all  the  other  important  conditions  are 
fixed  by  contract.  The  working  collec- 
tivity is  responsible  for  the  carrying  out 
of  the  contract,  and  if  they  wish  to  go  in 
for  speculation,  they  do  so  at  their  own 
risks. 

80 


The    Revolution    in    the    Factories 

We  could  still  mention  many  industries 
where,  under  very  diverse  forms  and  in 
a  varied  degree,  the  workmen  have  obtained 
the  right  to  choose  their  colleagues,  but 
we  must  admit  that  the  experience  has, 
to  a  certain  extent,  been  successful  only 
when  this  right  was  given  to  a  trade  union  ; 
for  in  this  case  it  is  exercised,  not  under  the 
control  of  the  workmen  of  a  single  factory, 
but  under  the  direction  of  the  whole  pro- 
fession, represented  by  a  powerful  associa- 
tion, which  has  its  traditions  and  its  prestige 
to  safeguard,  and  which  would  compromise 
the  future  of  the  work  did  it  force  the  em- 
ployment of  incapable  or  lazy  workmen. 
Here  we  would  only  draw  attention  to  the 
great  difference  with  regard  to  responsi- 
bility between  the  intervention  of  a  trade 
union  and  the  intervention  of  the  working 
staff  of  the  factory.  We  shall  have  occasion 
to  refer  to  this  again  in  the  following  pages. 

8.  INDUSTRIAL  ORGANIZATION. 

Russian  workmen  have  tried  for  a  long 
time  to  organize  themselves  industrially. 
They  have  had  before  them  the  example 

81  F 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

of  their  comrades  in  all  industrial  countries. 
If  it  had  not  been  for  the  constant  persecu- 
tion of  the  advocates  of  trade  unionism 
by  the  former  government,  doubtless  the 
Unions  of  Petrograd,  of  Moscow,  and  Donetz 
would  have  had  a  greater  development,  and 
would  have  formed  a  policy  very  similar  to 
the  Trade  Unions  in  England,  Germany,  or 
the  United  States. 

This  is  important.  If  it  be  true  indeed 
that  only  the  arbitrary  intervention  of  the 
police  of  Tsardom  prevented  the  develop- 
ment of  the  Trade  Unions,  and  that 
the  working  classes  acting  freely  might 
have  created  here,  as  well  as  elsewhere 
these  great  organs  for  the  regulation  of 
economic  conflicts,  that  it  might  have 
followed  in  this  matter,  as  it  has  done  in 
the  matter  of  co-operation,  the  tradition 
of  the  modern  proletariat,  we  can  hope  now 
that  having  acquired  their  liberty  of  action 
the  Russian  working  classes  will  again  follow 
the  path  from  which  they  were  drastically 
and  artificially  turned  aside  and  will  proceed 
rapidly.  There  is  no  serious  student  of 
labour  problems,  no  matter  to  what  school 
he  may  belong,  who  does  not  rejoice  because 

82 


The    Revolution    in    the    Factories 

the  Trade  Union  favours  the  progress  of  the 
working  class,  while  avoiding  useless  agita- 
tions. It  does  not  certainly  prevent  the 
struggle  between  the  classes  in  question, 
but  it  carries  it  along  new  lines,  more 
orderly  and  decisive.  We  have  no  intention 
of  writing  the  history  of  Russian  Trade 
Unions.  It  has  been  dealt  with  very  com- 
pletely by  several  authors — as  early  as  1907 
by  Sbiatlevskie.  Unfortunately  it  is  im- 
possible to-day  to  procure  most  of  the 
publications  concerning  the  heroic  age 
of  professional  associations.  On  the  other 
hand,  no  one  seems  to  think  (outside  of 
the  working  classes  occupied  to-day  with 
other  work)  of  re- editing  them,  or  at  least 
selecting  the  important  facts  and  pub- 
lishing them  in  a  new  volume.  We  could 
wish  all  the  same  that  the  educated  classes 
took  more  interest  in  a  question  which 
vitally  concerns  the  country. 

We  shall  only  remind  the  reader  that 
these  professional  Unions  have  had  a  former 
secret  history  that  goes  back  a  good  way, 
and  thereafter  a  public  or  semi-public 
history  that  begins  with  the  Manifesto  of 
October  17,  1905  (Old  Style).  From  that 

88 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

time  they  have  no  longer  been  legally 
forbidden,  and  we  find  them  springing  up 
like  mushrooms  after  a  night  of  rain,  in 
all  industrial  centres.  Soon  persecution 
followed,  with  the  counter-revolutionary 
reaction.  In  the  course  of  the  last  twelve 
years  the  Trade  Unions  have  been  dissolved 
in  large  numbers  every  time  that  Russia 
has  traversed  a  reactionary  crisis,  and  we 
know  that  these  have  been  sufficiently 
numerous.  In  the  intervals  they  have  been 
submitted  to  a  system  of  police  interference 
that  rendered  their  activity  practically 
nominal.  Such  an  association,  duly  "  author- 
ized," for  instance,  found  itself  forbidden 
for  whole  years  to  hold  a  general  assembly. 
On  the  other  hand,  one  that  numbered 
ten  thousand  members  would  be  granted 
permission  to  hold  an  assembly  on  condition 
that  all  the  members  were  convoked  indi- 
vidually, thus  creating  almost  unsurmount- 
able  practical  difficulties.  They  were  not 
authorized  to  elect  a  body  of  delegates  for 
the  administration  of  common  interests. 

The  metallurgists'  Trade  Union  at  Petro- 
grad  had  during  the  last  decade  ten  presi- 
dents and  ten  committees,  its  leaders  being 

84 


The    Revolution    in    the    Factories 

constantly  imprisoned  or  exiled  to  Siberia. 
It  has  been  dissolved  five  or  six  times. 
But  in  spite  of  that  it  has  maintained  its 
existence,  and  its  members  have  kept  in 
touch  with  each  other  even  when  the 
police  suppressed  the  association.  It  has 
had  a  chequered  career,  dormant  at  times 
but  never  actually  dead ;  it  seemed  im- 
possible to  destroy  it  because  it  answered 
a  deep,  elementary  necessity,  over  which 
all  the  power  of  the  Czar  could  not  prevail. 
From  the  very  beginning  of  the  Revolution 
the  organization  has  developed  marvellously 
in  the  atmosphere  of  liberty.  On  May  1, 
1917,  it  already  numbered  eighty  thou- 
sand members ;  in  the  last  phase  of  its 
legal  existence  in  1915,  under  the  govern- 
ment of  the  Czars,  it  had  only  eight 
thousand. 

The  history  of  the  metallurgists'  Trade 
Union  is  that  of  all  the  others.  All  have 
experienced  the  same  trials,  and  now  have 
reached  comparative  prosperity.  On  May  1, 
1917,  round  Petrograd  alone  there  were 
sixty-one  Trade  Unions,  of  which  more 
than  half  had  been  entirely  reorganized 
and  affiliated  to  a  general  Trade  Union 

85 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

federation,  their  total  membership  reaching 
more  than  180,000. 


Thus,  side  by  side  with  the  factory  com- 
mittees, with  which  we  have  dealt  in  the 
foregoing  pages,  organizations  of  older 
date,  founded  on  a  different  principle, 
owing  their  existence  to  the  experience 
of  the  working  classes  of  the  world,  and 
answering  such  a  need  that  even  the 
Czar's  rule  could  not  prevent  their 
formation,  are  rapidly  developing.  They 
leal  with  the  same  questions,  solve  the 
iame  problems,  intervene  in  the  same 
conflicts  as  the  committees.  We  shall 
study  presently  the  connection  between 
these  two  series  of  organisms,  but  before 
going  any  farther  we  would  like  to  point 
out  to  the  reader  that  they  are  really 
two  different  organizations,  not  only  with 
regard  to  their  outward  form,  but  in  their 
very  essence. 

A  man  obtains  a  right  to  vote  for  a  work- 
shop committee  by  the  sole  fact  of  being  a 
worker  in  the  factory,  without  having  to  make 
any  choice,  without  engaging  himself  to  any 

86 


The    Revolution    in    the    Factories 

\ 

adhesion,  without  any  voluntary  action.  On 
the  contrary,  a  worker  is  only  admitted  to 
membership  of  a  Trade  Union  on  his  making 
the  request  and  being  elected,  and  on  his 
agreeing  to  a  determined  course  of  action 
governed  by  fixed  rules,  the  observing  of 
a  particular  discipline ;  by  consenting,  in 
short,  to  the  many  responsibilities  which  this 
discipline  entails,  and  of  which  the  finan- 
cial burdens  are  assuredly  the  least  heavy. 
In  a  word,  the  member  of  a  committee 
is  simply  in  possession  of  a  right ;  the 
member  of  a  Trade  Union  pursues  a  definite 
aim,  by  constant,  regular  action,  binding 
him  to  perform  certain  duties.  The  com- 
mittee represents  only  the  workmen  of  one 
factory,  to  the  exclusion  of  all  others.  Who- 
ever leaves  one  factory  to  go  into  another 
passes  from  the  jurisdiction  of  one  committee 
to  that  of  a  neighbouring  committee.  Even 
when  the  committees  are  federated  they 
have  none  the  less  each  a  separate  existence, 
and  all  their  activities  remain  conditional 
to  the  particular  factory  for  which  they 
act.  The  Trade  Union,  on  the  contrary, 
groups,  or  endeavours  to  group,  all  the 
workmen  of  a  collection  of  professions  or 

87 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

industries .  without  any  distinction  between 
those  who  work  for  different  employers  or  in 
different  parts  of  the  country.  One  of  the 
most  striking  points  of  the  Trade  Unions  in 
all  countries  is  that  tendency  which  leads  them 
towards  centralization.  The  organizations  of 
specialists  which  were  formed  at  the  begin- 
ning of  the  Revolution  have  been  replaced  by 
organizations  open  to  extremely  wide  cate- 
gories of  workmen  in  machinery  shops — 
metal  workers,  wood  workers,  labourers, 
transport  workers,  for  instance ;  in  short, 
local  associations  are  replaced  by  national 
organizations.  Matters  had  progressed  so 
far  that  before  the  war,  in  a  country  as  large 
as  Germany,  more  than  two  million  workmen 
were  grouped  into  only  fifty-three  Unions,  and 
of  these  more  than  two-thirds  belonged  to 
the  six  largest  organizations.  The  Trade 
Union  has  thus  the  tendency  to  represent 
the  general  interests  of  the  working  classes, 
or  at  least  the  many  common  interests  of 
large  bodies  of  these  classes. 

For  the  same  reason  it  avoids  excessive 
claims,  extravagances  to  which  the  com- 
mittees are  much  more  exposed.  What  the 
Trade  Union  demands  from  one  employer 

88 


The    Revolution    in    the    Factories 

it  should  be  in  a  position  to  obtain  from 
all  the  others.  Experience  teaches  him 
that  any  amelioration  of  working  conditions 
is  not  stable,  and  only  merits  being  put 
into  execution  on  condition  that  it  can 
be  generalized,  and  thus  maintain  the 
equality  of  employers  in  competition. 
4  Undertake  nothing  that  cannot  become 
a  universal  rule  of  action  "  is  the  essential 
principle  of  practical  Trade  Unionism,  the 
basis  of  the  whole  moral.  The  obligation  to 
conform  to  the  dictates  of  common  sense, 
as  shown  by  the  complete  and  rapid  down- 
fall of  associations  that  ignore  this  principle, 
is  that  not  a  form,  and  one  of  the  most 
efficacious,  of  responsibility  ? 


Since  Trade  Unions  and  committees  differ 
from  each  other  most  profoundly,  even 
to  the  pitch  of  representing  two  forms 
of  organization  opposed,  indeed  almost 
contradictory,  must  we  conclude  that 
these  two  institutions  are  bound  to  clash, 
and  that  eventually  one  will  overpower 
the  other  ?  It  seems  much  more  probable 
that  one  will  end  by  absorbing  the  other 

89 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

in  the  course  of  an  evolution  which,  while 
in  a  sense  a  conflict,  will  not  necessarily 
have  the  character  of  an  open  combat. 

Already  we  can  notice  clearly  denned 
differences  of  opinion  between  their  leaders. 
In  the  factories  the  members  of  the  com- 
mittees often  belong  to  the  Bolchevik 
party  (Extremists) ;  the  Trade  Union  leaders 
in  general  hold  more  moderate  views.  And 
although  the  claims  of  the  committees 
themselves  may  be  generally  less  extreme 
than  would  be  the  claims  of  the  workers 
in  the  factories  did  they  act  without  inter- 
mediary, the  Trade  Unions,  as  they  gain 
power,  intervene  constantly  to  advise  the 
committees  to  act  with  prudence  and 
moderation.  One  can  note  in  this  respect 
an  essential  difference  between  the  attitude 
of  the  Labour  Section  of  the  Committee 
of  Workmen  and  Soldiers,  which  can  be 
considered  to  a  certain  extent  like  a  federa- 
tion of  factory  committees  (although  its 
members  are  elected  by  workmen  directly) 
and  that  of  the  Federation  of  Trade 
Unions.  It  is  very  interesting  to  note 
that  while  the  former  continues  to  deal 
almost  exclusively  with  the  solution  of 

90 


The    Revolution    in    the    Factories 

political  problems  in  connection  with 
the  working  classes,  it  is  the  latter 
that  more  and  more  deals  with  the 
purely  economic  problems.  It  is  the  latter, 
notably,  that  now  organizes  the  repre- 
sentation of  workmen  on  the  com- 
mittees of  arbitration  where  employers 
are  represented  by  the  general  associa- 
tion of  the  factory  owners.  The  Labour 
section  of  the  Soviet  was  to  intervene  in 
this  matter  according  to  the  original  plan, 
and  as  the  council  of  arbitration  seems 
destined  to  become  one  of  the  principal 
organs  of  the  working  class  in  the  capital 
of  Russia,  we  can  see  the  importance  of 
this  change  of  function. 

It  is  the  same  thing  in  the  factories ; 
there  is  already  a  marked  tendency  to 
subordinate  the  committee  to  the  Trade 
Union.  In  some  parts  the  members  of 
the  committees  are  chosen  from  among  the 
members  of  the  Trade  Unions.  In  most 
of  the  factories  the  Trade  Union  members 
are  in  the  majority.  It  is  becoming  more 
and  more  the  rule  that  before  acting 
they  should  consult  the  Trade  Unionist 
authority.  We  can  foresee  that  soon 

91 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

they  will  be  reduced  to  the  role  of  the 
shop  stewards  in  our  Western  work- 
shops. It  is  true  that  even  when  the 
organization  is  powerful  and  well  estab- 
lished it  is  not  always  easy  to  make 
these  representatives  of  Trade  Union 
authority  in  a  particular  establishment 
carry  out  the  policy  adopted  by  the 
association.  The  history  of  their  rebellions 
and  of  the  inconsidered  and  violent 
strikes  which  arose  out  of  them  form 
in  all  countries  one  of  the  most  thrilling 
and,  alas!  one  of  the  longest  chapters 
of  the  history  of  labour.  But  in  the 
end  the  general,  moderating  Trade 
Unionist  idea  prevails.  In  Russia,  doubt- 
less for  a  long  time  yet,  the  spirit  of 
independence  in  the  workshops  will  remain 
very  marked,  and  Trade  Union  authority 
will  be  most  precarious,  but  there  is  every 
reason  to  believe  that  in  the  end  the 
latter  will  become  stronger,  and  that 
matters  will  develop  and  finally  be  con- 
ducted pretty  much  as  in  the  West. 


92 


The    Revolution    in    the    Factories 

9.  CO-OPERATIVE  ORGANIZATION. 

Co-operative  organizations  have  not  had 
to  suffer  in  the  same  degree  as  the  Trade 
Unions  from  administrative  and  police 
interference.  Thus  their  development  has 
been  more  rapid  and  more  intense.  From 
1896  associations  of  this  sort  were  suffi- 
ciently numerous  for  the  "general  assembly 
of  commerce  and  industry  "  of  all  Russia, 
which  was  held  at  Nijni-Novgorod,  to  be 
charged  especially  with  examining  the 
questions  raised  by  their  existence.  After 
the  Revolution  of  1905  their  growth  was 
prodigious.  They  have  to-day  acquired  a 
development  which  equals  in  many  respects 
their  development  in  some  Western  coun- 
tries. The  latest  statistics  that  we  have 
been  able  to  obtain,  that  of  January  1, 
1913,  said  : 

"  About  7,500  co-operative  stores  are 
scattered  throughout  the  Empire,  forming 
a  certain  number  of  federations,  dealing 
principally  with  the  organization  of  whole- 
sale purchase.  The  most  important  of 
these  federations  is  that  of  Moscow,  which 
has  about  six  hundred  societies. 

93 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

"  2,700  associations  of  butter-  makers 
(co-operative  dairies)  are  also  grouped  in 
federations  (that  of  Siberia  alone  numbering 
close  to  three  hundred  associations). 

"  4,510  other  rural  co-operative  associa- 
tions, 

"  8,938  co-operative  loan  societies, 

"  3,287  savings  associations, 

"148  provincial  societies  for  petty  loans, 
whose  mission  seems  principally  to  be  to 
organize  credit  for  the  different  classes  of 
co-operative  societies.  They  have  a  semi- 
official character,  their  management  being 
chosen  by  provincial  assemblies,  and  they 
are  placed  under  the  financial  control  of 
the  Government. 

"Finally,  the  People's  Bank  of  Moscow, 
of  which  nearly  all  the  shares  are  held 
either  by  big  co-operative  associations  or 
by  federations  of  associations  which  assure 
co-operative  establishments  of  the  most 
diverse  kind  either  the  necessary  credit 
or  the  organization  of  their  purchases, 
either  the  sale  of  their  produce  or  the  pro- 
duce of  their  members'  labour,  notably 
home  manufacture." 


94 


The    Revolution    in    the    Factories 

During  our  visit  to  Moscow  the  greater 
part  of  our  time  was  spent  in  visits  to 
local  co-operative  associations,  their  feder- 
ation, their  wholesale  department,  magnifi- 
cently installed  in  new  buildings,  their 
Co-operative  Bank,  and  finally,  their 
Co-operative  Congress,  which  is  soon  to 
sit  in  a  vast  palace  in  the  centre  of  the 
city. 

We  received  a  most  reassuring  impression. 
In  the  city  there  was  a  strike.  The  dvorniks 
(hotel  doorkeepers)  were  marching  through 
the  city  in  procession.  In  the  hotels  all 
work  was  suspended,  even  in  the  kitchens  ; 
travellers  had  to  make  their  beds  them- 
selves, and  had  to  be  satisfied  with  sand- 
wiches at  five  roubles  a  dish  (fr.  12.50) ; 
while  the  strike  of  public  services  was 
announced  for  the  next  day.  Fortunately 
that  did  not  take  place. 

In  the  co-operative  hives,  on  the  con- 
trary, all  the  bees  were  busy  working. 
They  ceased  work  for  a  moment  to  welcome 
with  brotherly  cordiality  their  co-operative 
comrades  from  distant  Belgium.  It  was 
with  indescribable  emotion  that  we  saw 
on  the  walls  photographs  of  the  "  Vooruit  " 

95 


Three    Aspects    of    the    Russian    Revolution 

and  the  "  Maison  du  Peuple  "  of  Brussels, 
positive  proofs  of  the  influence  exercised 
by  our  own  movement  on  the  co-operative 
movement  in  Russia. 

As  far  as  we  could  learn  from  what  we 
heard,  Moscow  seems  to  be  essentially  the 
capital  of  co-operation.  The  social  influ- 
ence that  it  exerts  there  is  considerable. 
The  co-operators  sit  side  by  side  with 
delegates  of  the  Soviet,  of  the  municipality, 
and  the  other  organizations  in  the  assembly, 
which  since  the  Revolution  has  taken  over 
the  direction  of  affairs. 

There  exists,  moreover,  in  Russia  a 
large  number  of  co-operative  groceries, 
which  have  sprung  up  under  Muscovite 
influence,  and  which  are  developing  rapidly 
even  in  the  most  distant  parts.  In  the 
agricultural  districts  they  are  often  in  close 
touch  with  the  co-operative  dairies,  the 
peasants  exchanging  their  milk  for  the 
various  goods  of  which  they  stand  in  need. 

Co-operative  butter-making  has  produced 
in  Russia  a  veritable  agricultural  revolution, 
like  that  which  in  Denmark,  for  instance, 
has  resulted  from  its  great  development. 
According  to  the  founders  of  the  co-oper- 

96 


The    Revolution    in    the    Factories 

ative  Bank  of  Moscow,  they  are  in  a  fair 
way  to  suppress  private  enterprises.  This 
is  what  they  say  of  the  movement  in 
Western  Siberia  : 

"  In  Western  Siberia,  and  especially 
within  the  radius  where  at  present  the 
butter-making  is  greatly  developed,  for 
a  long  time  many  factors  favourable  to 
the  development  of  the  co-operative  move- 
ment and  for  its  prosperity  in  the  future 
have  been  in  existence. 

44  This  country,  populated  by  enterprising 
peasants  and  owners  of  vast  lands  of  superb 
natural  pasturages,  belongs  to  the  finest 
cultivated  part  of  Western  Siberia ;  it  is 
there  that  already  existing  associations 
should  be  utilized  in  order  to  favour  their 
development,  to  ensure  their  future  pros- 
perity, and  to  deal  with  long-standing 
questions  raised  by  the  necessities  of  life. 

"  Co-operation  in  Siberia,  founded  on 
solid  bases,  has  assumed  a  very  special 
character.  It  came  into  being  at  a  time 
when  the  economic  organization  of  the 
people  was  about  to  collapse  as  a  logical 
consequence  of  certain  economic  causes. 
It  seemed  like  a  reaction  after  the  specula- 

97  o 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Rwsian    Revolution 

tive  gambling  which  had  taken  place  in 
Siberia,  and  having  arisen  in  the  lower 
classes,  among  populations  enjoying  relative 
comfort,  it  showed  from  the  very  beginning 
an  extraordinary  force  and  power. 

"  The  industrial  butter-making  has  de- 
veloped rapidly  in  Siberia,  and  even  in 
1894  butter-making  establishments  were 
increasing  with  astonishing  rapidity.  At 
first  they  were  all  in  the  hands  of  private 
owners,  but  the  greed  of  the  merchants 
and  their  speculations  led  to  the  production 
of  an  inferior  quality  of  butter.  The 
reputation  of  Siberian  butter  was  greatly 
endangered,  and  this  state  of  things,  full  of 
far-reaching  consequences  from  an  economic 
point  of  view,  threatened  to  cause  an 
irretrievable  loss  to  the  country.  The  co- 
operative system,  which  until  that  day 
had  been  merely  desirable,  then  became 
a  necessity  for  the  population,  and  the 
butter-making  works  promptly  passed  from 
private  persons  to  the  artels. 

"  Let  us  note  here  the  characteristic  fact 
that  the  buyers  were  not  as  grasping  as 
are  most  private  buyers  in  similar  circum- 
stances. Without  trying  to  exploit  the 

98 


The    Revolution    in    the   Factories 

difficult  situation  in  which  the  proprietors 
of  the  factories  were,  they  paid  for  these 
factories  according  to  their  proper  value. 

"  To  show  the  intensity  of  the  co-oper- 
ative movement,  let  us  note  that  in  1903 
there  were  in  Siberia  three  co-operative 
associations  of  butter-makers,  and  that  four 
years  after,  in  1907,  more  than  two  hundred 
co-operatives  were  in  full  swing.  The 
substitution  of  co-operative  companies  for 
private  owners  in  the  ownership  and  in 
the  management  of  the  factories  is  not 
yet  complete,  but  it  will  soon  be. 

"  At  present  the  Union  of  the  artels  of 
Siberia  includes  220  associations  of  butter 
factories  and  forty-nine  stores.  It  has  its 
administrative  centre  at  Kourgan,  in  the 
province  of  Tobolsk,  and  its  branches  at 
Pietropavlosk,  Tcheliabinsk,  Biysk,  Barnoul, 
Kamiegne,  and  Omsk.  The  work  is  not 
yet  finished  in  this  district,  but  every  year 
new  factories  come  into  the  combination, 
and  the  artels  open  new  stores.  They  hope, 
moreover,  to  open  this  year  (1912)  branches 
of  the  Union  in  the  cities  of  Valoutorosk 
and  of  Ichime,  and  in  the  village  of 
Taterskoye." 

99 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

Side  by  side  with  these  positive  results 
of  Russian  agricultural  co-operation  let 
us  mention  here  the  projects  of  certain 
reformers.  Now  that  the  Revolution  is 
going  apparently  to  take  up  the  distribution 
of  land — or  a  large  portion  of  the  land — 
among  the  peasants,  the  problem  of  culti- 
vation on  a  large  scale  comes  before  us 
in  an  entirely  new  aspect.  It  had  yielded 
up  to  the  present  decisive  results :  the 
large  properties  unquestionably  produced 
more  than  the  peasant  holdings,  and  it 
is  due  to  them  especially  that  the  expor- 
tation of  cereals  had  such  a  real  de- 
velopment. Will  it  be  necessary  to  give 
this  up,  to  the  great  detriment  of  agricul- 
tural output,  or  else  limit  it  to  the  large 
properties  exempt  from  expropriation,  or 
on  the  contrary  give  peasant  ownership  up 
altogether,  for  the  sake  of  efficiency  in 
the  agricultural  output  ?  It  would  seem 
that  there  is  no  democratic  and  satis- 
factory solution  of  this  difficulty  other 
than  that  of  co-operative  cultivation, 
extensive  cultivation  passing  from  private 
hands  to  those  of  the  associations,  as  was 
the  case  with  the  butter  factories.  But 

100 


The    Revolution    in    the    Factories 

all  practical  business  men  affirm  that  in 
the  case  of  Russian  land  the  difficulties  are 
far  more  considerable.  However,  the  experi- 
ments attempted  on  a  large  enough  scale 
in  Italy,  and  especially  in  Roumania,  are 
on  the  whole  encouraging,  and  with  the  help 
of  the  semi-communist  habits  of  the  Russian 
peasant  perhaps  the  more  vast  experiment 
to  which  the  young  democracy  seem  to  be 
heading  may  constitute  one  of  its  most 
interesting  and  original  developments. 

The  savings  and  loans  associations  are, 
as  we  have  stated,  very  numerous.  Most 
of  them  help  farmers  to  procure  the  funds 
necessary  for  the  perfecting  of  their  working 
of  the  land.  They  also  obtain  the  credit 
necessary  to  allow  them  to  hold  over  until 
spring — that  is  to  say,  until  the  moment 
when  the  prices  are  at  their  best — the  sale  of 
their  wheat.  That  is  a  very  important  ques- 
tion in  the  agrarian  industry  of  the  country. 
To  quote  again  from  the  report  from  which 
we  have  already  given  a  long  extract : 

"  It  has  long  been  known  that  in  the 
autumn  the  peasants  are  always  forced 
to  sell  in  the  market  a  great  quantity  of 
grain  at  a  very  low  price,  because,  the 

101 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

supply  exceeding  the  demand,  the  price  of 
wheat  goes  down  considerably.  As  every 
one  knows,  the  sale  of  wheat  in  the  spring 
is  much  more  advantageous.  But  we  shall 
not  dwell  at  length  on  this  fact  here. 
We  are  not  dealing,  either,  with  the  causes 
of  this  state  of  things.  Let  us  note,  how- 
ever, that  in  Western  Siberia  there  is, 
as  a  result  of  the  great  distances,  of  the 
fact  that  most  of  the  places  are  very 
far  distant  from  marketing  centres,  great 
difficulties  in  the  transportation  of  the 
wheat  to  the  latter.  Groups  of  agents  and 
corn- dealers  have  spread  a  network  over 
this  out-of-the-way  part  of  the  country. 
There  they  live  and  grow  rich,  thanks 
to  the  ignorance  of  grain-marketing  condi- 
tions of  the  peasants  in  these  distant  parts 
of  Siberia.  It  frequently  happens  that 
some  corn-dealers  will  band  together  to 
create  an  artificial  drop  in  the  price  of 
wheat,  and  thus  force  the  peasant  coming 
to  the  market  from  a  distance  to  sell  his 
wheat  at  a  price  already  agreed  on.  More- 
over, it  is  well  known  that  the  practice 
of  fraud  in  the  matter  of  weights  and 
measures  is  carried  on  to  a  great  extent 

102 


The    Revolution    in    the    Factories 

to  the  detriment  of  the  peasant-merchants. 
The  evil  has  acquired  a  sort  of  right  of 
naturalization  impossible  to  deal  with. 
There  has  even  grown  out  of  it  a  special 
type  of  commercial  traveller,  whose  patrons 
think  highly  of  him,  and  who  is  very  well 
paid  by  them.  These  specialists  manipu- 
late so  cleverly  that  the  peasants  can  only 
raise  their  arms  in  astonishment  when 
they  learn  that  in  a  waggon  of  twenty 
pouds  of  wheat  there  are  only  eighteen  or 
nineteen,  and  that  when  the  price  of  wheat  is 
fixed  at  one  rouble  per  poud  there  is  a  differ- 
ence of  five  to  ten  kopeks  for  each  poud." 

The  remedy  consists  in  assuring  to  the 
grower  a  credit  gauged  on  his  corn  harvest. 
But  that  only  solves  one  part  of  the  diffi- 
culty. At  the  actual  sale  the  peasant 
runs  the  further  risk  of  falling  into  the 
hands  of  the  middleman,  unless  the  asso- 
ciation comes  again  to  his  aid.  Loan 
societies  are  therefore  coming  quite  naturally 
to  take  up  the  question  of  the  wholesale 
purchase  of  produce,  and  it  is  there  un- 
doubtedly that  their  activities  can  have 
the  most  important  social  consequences. 

Let  us  note  still  further  that  these  loan 
103 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

and  savings  societies  are  generally  encouraged 
by  the  local  authorities,  and  that  the 
State  comes  to  their  aid  by  subsidies  of 
important  sums  of  money.  We  cannot 
close  this  rapid  survey  without  mentioning 
the  existence  of  numerous  Societies  of 
Arts  and  Crafts  and  industries  carried  on 
at  home.  The  oldest  of  these  are  the 
associations  of  silversmiths,  which  exist 
mostly  in  Moscow. 

10.  CONCLUSIONS. 

We  would  like  to  point  out  to  the  reader 
that  we  are  not  attempting  to  deal 
exhaustively  with  the  social  conditions  in 
Russia.  These  are  only  notes  taken  in 
the  course  of  the  few  weeks  that  we  were 
able  to  spend  in  the  land  of  the  Revolution, 
and  they  are  intended  to  give  simply  the 
impressions  of  bona  fide  observers  who  may 
claim  some  little  experience  in  labour  matters. 
It  is  only  as  such  that  these  notes  can 
have  any  value,  and  it  would  be  rash  indeed 
to  try  to  draw  many  conclusions  from 
them,  so  at  least  we  shall  have  the  prudence 
to  reduce  these  conclusions  to  a  minimum. 

104 


The    Revolution    in    the    Factories 

Those  who  only  see  in  the  present  events 
in  Russia  the  triumph  of  irretrievable 
anarchy  are  making  a  great  mistake. 
Constructive  forces  are  already  at  work, 
and  if  we  look  closely  we  can  already  see 
their  results.  What  we  have  said  of  the 
Trade  Union  and  co-operative  movements 
prove  the  capacity  of  the  Russian  for 
organization.  It  is  remarkable,  but  it  has 
limitations.  The  peasant  has  inherited  it 
from  long  series  of  ancestors,  accustomed 
to  rule  in  common  all  the  affairs  of  their 
village  life ;  the  working-man  brings  it 
fresh  from  the  country  that  he  has  just 
left.  When  it  is  necessary  to  form  a  queue 
before  the  door  of  the  baker's  shop,  hundreds 
of  women  place  themselves  in  the  most 
convenient  position  without  any  police 
supervision.  Crowds  gather  in  some  public 
place  for  a  manifestation  or  a  meeting 
without  disorder,  without  shouting,  as  if 
they  were  imbued  with  some  collective 
intelligence.  The  masses  seem  to  under- 
stand responsibility,  seem  to  conduct 
themselves,  govern  and  rule  their  actions 
better  in  Russia  than  anywhere  else. 

But  the  capacity  for  organization  of  the 
105 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

Russian  is  for  the  moment  limited ;  his 
experience  does  not  go  as  far  as  the  free 
practice  of  modern  life,  and  the  compli- 
cated circumstances  of  that  are  as  yet 
not  within  his  grasp.  Though  the  peasant 
is  fully  aware  of  the  solidarity  that  binds 
him  to  his  village,  he  understands  less  the 
connection  between  his  individual  activity 
and  the  national  life.  He  will  share  in 
a  brotherly  spirit  his  corn  with  a  poor 
neighbour,  and  he  will  not  even  be  aware 
that  in  refusing  to  sell  his  harvest  he  may 
reduce  the  neighbouring  town  to  famine. 
The  worker  will  give  his  life  for  his  comrade, 
but  it  will  never  occur  to  him  that  he  owes 
his  work  to  the  community,  and  that  by 
refusing  it  or  in  reducing  it  in  such  a  crisis 
as  this  he  is  exposing  the  whole  country 
to  a  mortal  danger.  The  vast  republic 
is  like  a  great  body  whose  organs  are 
vigorous  and  healthy  but  without  sufficient 
co-ordination  to  assure  the  life  of  the 
whole. 

Co-ordination  may  come.  If  we  are  not 
mistaken,  it  is  already  developing  rapidly. 
Nations  mature  quickly  in  the  trials  of 
great  revolutions.  If  it  is  only  experience 

106 


The    Revolution   in    the    Factories 

that  Russia  lacks,  then  present  events  are 
allowing  the  Russians  to  accomplish  in  a 
few  weeks  the  progress  which  in  ordinary 
times  takes  years.  Certainly  the  future 
would  be  more  sure  had  the  leaders  gained 
experience  in  the  school  of  realities,  had 
they  lived  in  immediate  contact  with 
social  facts ;  but  their  ideas  have  been 
formed  in  exile  or  in  prison,  and  the  former 
government  has  kept  entirely  out  of  public 
affairs — of  all  affairs — those  who  have 
neither  been  exiled  nor  incarcerated.  They 
had  to  meditate;  their  existence  has  been 
spent  in  the  world  of  ideas,  and  not  in  that 
of  action.  Need  we  be  surprised,  under 
such  conditions,  if  abstract  principles 
often  dominate  them,  determine  their  atti- 
tude, and  sometimes  prevent  them  from 
seeing  facts. 

Now  that  they  find  themselves  in  new 
conditions  the  realistic  spirit  is  developing 
rapidly.  We  may  even  say  that  it  is 
developing  with  astonishing  rapidity. 
During  our  short  visit  we  were  able  to 
note  an  evolution  in  the  way  in  which  the 
best  of  the  leaders  viewed  the  Revolution. 
This  applies  both  to  those  who  are 

107 


Three    Aspects    of    the    Russian    Revolution 

ruling  the  country,  and  to  the  more 
modest  who  in  the  factories  are  acting 
as  counsellors  to  their  comrades.  We 
have  already  reported  on  the  extreme 
good- will  of  every  one,  and  their  deep 
and  sincere  desire  to  do  right.  There  is 
in  the  Slavonic  soul  a  kind  of  nobleness 
that  leads  ft  to  seek  for  the  truth  simply, 
without  obstinately  holding  to  some  pre- 
conceived idea.  These  are  the  really 
solid  grounds  for  hope.  There  are  some 
for  fear.  Already,  no  doubt,  the  reader 
has  noted  several,  and  we  are  going  to 
call  attention  to  one  here.  Russia  can 
be  rescued  from  its  present  chaos  only 
by  the  efforts  of  every  class.  She  must 
have  the  entire,  unreserved  co-ordination 
of  all.  Has  this  been  acquired  ?  In  this 
respect  there  are  some  disquieting  symp- 
toms. It  seems  that  in  the  commercial 
world  and  in  certain  political  circles  a 
policy  of  sulking  the  Revolution,  of  refusing 
it  any  help,  has  been  adopted.  It  would 
seem  that  certain  classes  are  inclined  to 
leave  it  severely  alone  in  the  midst  of  its 
difficulties,  in  the  hope  that  it  will  succumb 
to  them,  and  that  by  favour  of  an  early 

108 


The  Revolution  in  the  Factories 

reaction  the  party  that  is  lying  low  at 
present  will  come  back  to  power.  They 
are  practising  the  policy  of  letting  things 
get  worse.  There  are  employers  who,  instead 
of  combating  disorder  in  their  workshops, 
leave  it  alone,  as  if  they  hoped  that 
extreme  disorder  in  the  production  would 
achieve  their  purpose  and  obtain  for 
them  again  the  power  which  they  have 
lost.  The  same  attitude  can  be  noticed 
in  a  minority,  fortunately  not  considerable, 
in  all  the  domains  of  activity.  We  can 
say,  in  short,  that  we  are  witnessing  a 
kind  of  strike  of  the  citizens.  It  is,  not 
to  use  a  stronger  expression,  singularly 
imprudent,  for  it  could  lead  to  worse 
even  than  to  a  reaction  of  which  it 
would  be  difficult  to  limit  the  result. 
It  could  bring  in  its  train  all  Russia 
to  a  common  and  possibly  irretrievable 
ruin. 

But  the  Revolution  is  more  vigorous 
than  it  appears  to  the  superficial  observer. 
Its  necessity  imposes  itself  more  and  more 
on  those  who  at  first  were  inclined  to 
doubt  its  viability.  It  is  carrying  with 
it  even  those  who  were  recalcitrant,  and, 

109 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

taken  all  in  all,  events  confirm  so  far  the 
prophecy  of  those  who  see  in  the  Russian 
Revolution  the  first  act  in  a  new  and 
fecund  era  in  the  history  of  mankind. 


110 


CHAPTER  III 

THE  REVOLUTION  IN  THE  ARMIES 
1.  OUR  DEPARTURE  FOR  THE  FRONT. 

ON  leaving  Petrograd  for  the  front  we 
were  conscious  of  a  certain  appre- 
hension and  as  great  a  curiosity  as  we 
had  felt  when  we  first  set  foot  in  revolu- 
tionary Russia.  Petrograd  had  given  us 
the  impression  that  although  it  was  there 
in  the  capital  that  the  problems  of  the 
Russian  Revolution  were  put,  since  May 
1917  it  had  ceased  to  be  the  place  where 
these  problems  were  solved.  The  capital 
had  become  merely  the  echo  of  all  that 
was  happening  throughout  the  country, 
and  especially  on  the  front.  Thus  it  was 
on  the  armies  at  the  front,  and  on  the 
material  and  especially  the  moral  possi- 
bility of  an  offensive  that  depended  the 
maintenance  of  the  Provisional  Govern- 
ill 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

ment,  as  well  as  the  cure  of  the  attack  of 
anarchy  and  political  neurasthenia  from 
which  the  country  had  suffered  since  the 
Revolution. 

George  Bernard  Shaw  has  said,  in  that 
paradoxical  style  of  his  in  which  there 
is  often  so  much  truth  :  "  If  it  be  true 
that  to  win  a  war  you  must  have  a 
united  omnipotent  Government,  it  is  no 
less  true  under  present  circumstances 
that  if  you  want  a  united  omnipotent 
Government  you  must  have  a  war  .  .  . 
if  the  Russian  Revolution  is  to  be  saved 
from  reaction,  and  the  Russian  Republic 
from  disruption  by  the  discontent  of  the 
working  class  and  the  diversity  of  the 
ideals  of  its  own  reformers,  the  revolu- 
tionary Government  must  fortify  itself  by 
a  war,  precisely  as  the  French  revolu- 
tionary Government  had  to  do.  If  there 
were  no  war,  it  would  have  to  make 
one. 

"  By  a  stroke  of  luck  so  fortunate  that 
few  good  Churchmen  will  hesitate  to 
describe  it  as  providential,  the  Russian 
leaders  are  spared  the  necessity  of  cynically 
making  war  to  save  their  country.  The 

112 


The    Revolution    in    the    Armies 

war  is  ready  made  for  them,  largely  by 
the  folly  of  their  discarded  rulers,  and 
the  Revolution  has  transformed  it  from 
a  dynastic  pan-Slav  war  to  a  crusade 
for  liberty  and  equality  throughout  the 
world.  Yesterday  the  kings  of  the  earth 
rose  up  and  their  rulers  took  counsel 
together  against  the  Lord  and  His  anointed. 
To-day  the  democrats  of  the  earth  rise  up 
and  their  leaders  take  counsel  together 
against  the  kings;  and  in  this  holy  war 
lies  the  salvation  of  Russia  from  anarchy." 
It  was  as  the  apostles  of  that  Holy  War 
that  we  were  going  to  the  front.  Our 
visit  was  to  be  neither  an  amateur  excur- 
sion nor  simply  a  means  of  satisfying  our 
own  curiosity.  The  generalissimo  who  had 
invited  us — it  was  General  Alexeieff  at  that 
time — gave  us  to  understand  that  he  ex- 
pected it  to  be  a  veritable  mission  of 
propaganda.  He  wished  our  efforts  to  be 
joined  to  those  that  had  been  made  a 
little  while  before  by  the  delegations  from 
the  Black  Sea  sailors,  by  Kerensky,  and 
Albert  Thomas,  in  order  to  perfect  what 
he  called  the  moral  preparation  for  the 
offensive. 

118  H 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

Needless  to  say,  a  visit  to  the  front  in 
such  conditions  would  give  us  an  oppor- 
tunity of  making  more  interesting  obser- 
vations than  are  generally  possible  on  an 
official  mission,  or  to  journalists  on  specially 
conducted  tours.  We  were  to  have  a 
unique  opportunity  of  contact  and  free 
discussion  with  the  representatives  of  the 
different  conflicting  opinions  in  existence 
in  the  Russian  armies.  Moreover,  experi- 
ence had  already  taught  us  that  the 
Russian  organizers  of  our  trip  would  not 
try  to  hide  from  us  any  of  the  weaknesses 
of  the  situation.  On  the  contrary,  they 
carried  frankness  to  such  a  pitch  that  one 
day  they  went  so  far  as  to  ask  us  to  address 
the  mutinous  troops  of  an  army  corps 
which  had  refused  to  return  to  the  trenches 
and  were  encamped  near  Buczacz  and 
threatening  to  march  on  Tarnopol.  Though 
in  the  end  that  visit  did  not  take  place, 
it  was  only  because  in  the  meantime  the 
Russian  Government  had  put  an  end  to 
all  negotiations  with  the  rebels  and  an- 
nounced that  they  would  be  made  to  obey, 
by  force  if  need  be. 

Moreover,    we    found    in    every    one    of 

114 


The    Revolution   in    the    Armies 

the  military  authorities  whom  we  met  in 
Russia  a  disposition,  surprising  to  those 
of  us  who  were  accustomed  to  the  systematic 
reticence  of  our  general  staffs  in  the  West, 
to  hide  nothing  from  us  that  they  knew 
themselves  regarding  the  military  situation. 
Three  weeks  before  the  offensive  in  Galicia, 
for  instance,  we  had  been  shown  all  the 
plans  and  given  the  date.  Everywhere 
that  we  went  we  found  similar  proofs  of 
this  communicative  disposition.  Certainly 
its  adoption  might  be  open  to  criticism 
as  a  general  rule  of  conduct  in  the  direction 
of  military  operations,  but  it  merely  appeared 
to  us  in  this  instance  as  another  proof 
of  the  touching  and  cordial  hospitality  of 
the  Russian,  for  whom  the  stranger  is 
indeed  a  brother,  and  with  whom  he  is 
ready  to  share  even  his  secrets. 

2.  AT  THE  STAVKA. 

It  was  such  hospitality  as  this  that 
we  found  awaiting  us  on  our  arrival  at 
the  Stavka,  the  great  Russian  General 
Headquarters,  which  is  eighteen  hours' 
railway  journey  south-west  of  Petrograd. 

115 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

We  arrived  there  on  the  6th  of  June.  The 
spacious  and  comfortable  railway  waggon 
in  which  we  had  travelled,  and  which  we 
were  to  have  at  our  disposal  during  our 
whole  trip,  was  formerly  used  by  General 
Rousski ;  it  had  during  the  early  days  of 
the  Revolution  been  used  by  the  delegates 
of  the  Provisional  Committee  to  go  and 
meet  the  Czar  and  obtain  his  signature 
to  his  act  of  abdication  in  the  station  at 
Pskov. 

Generalissimo  Alexeieff,  who  received  us 
at  the  Stavka,  was  about  to  surrender 
his  post  to  General  Broussiloff.  Thus  we 
had  the  good  fortune  to  meet  the  two 
great  leaders  of  the  revolutionary  army, 
one  at  the  close  and  the  other  at  the  begin- 
ning of  his  office.  Both,  in  their  different 
ways,  made  a  great  impression  on  us. 

We  knew  General  Alexeieff  from  his  photo- 
graphs, that  show  him  possessed  of  the 
typical  physiognomy  of  the  moujik — large 
mouth,  large  nose,  with  small  and  baggy 
eyes  under  bushy  eyebrows.  What  a 
surprise  it  was  to  find  beneath  this  rough- 
hewn  plebeian  mask  a  fine  and  expressive 
physiognomy.  Alexeieff  truly  is  more  like 

lie 


The    Revolution   in   the    Armies 

a  professor  than  a  soldier.  His  eyes,  be- 
hind his  short-sighted  glasses,  look  you 
through  and  through,  but  with  a  smiling 
glance.  He  speaks  slowly,  gently,  and 
kindly.  Only  the  gestures  of  his  hands, 
with  their  long,  thin  fingers,  betrayed  a 
slight  nervousness,  caused,  no  doubt,  by 
the  strain  of  the  gigantic  task  that  this 
energetic  worker  has  been  carrying  on 
during  the  past  three  years,  and  perhaps 
also  expressing  the  grief  that  he  must 
have  felt  at  a  career  cut  short  so  soon. 
But  in  speaking  Alexeieff  showed  neither 
regret  nor  bitterness.  He  seemed  full  of 
a  quiet  confidence,  praising  his  successor 
unreservedly.  With  not  one  word  of 
criticism  for  a  Government  that  had  just 
relieved  him  of  his  command  because  of  a 
word  of  possibly  intentional  imprudence 
which  he  had  uttered  during  a  little  address 
to  his  officers,  when  he  treated  as  Utopian 
the  device  *'  without  annexations  or  con- 
tributions." And  indeed  there  is  not  on 
his  part  any  diplomatic  reserve.  His 
friends,  and  even  his  enemies,  agree  in 
saying,  the  latter  in  reproach,  the  former 
in  his  praise,  that  he  has  never  been  able 

117 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

to  say  anything  that  he  did  not  think. 
His  sincerity  and  his  kindness  are  evident 
with  every  gesture,  with  every  word.  He 
is  the  incarnation  of  the  ancient  military 
Russian  hierarchy  in  its  patriarchal  aspect, 
and  one  can  easily  imagine  the  soldiers 
addressing  him  as  "  father  "  when  he  speaks 
to  them  as  "  my  children."  We  could  not 
help  remarking  when  we  left  his  presence 
that  it  was  such  men  as  he  who  could 
best  make  us  realize  what  is  meant  by 
the  "  Slavonic  charm." 

Slavonic  also  to  his  fingers'  tips,  but 
of  an  entirely  different  type,  is  Broussiloff. 
We  saw  him  when  he  arrived  the  next 
morning  from  the  armies  of  the  south- 
west, whose  command  he  had  just  resigned. 
His  very  first  gestures — a  few  salutes,  a 
review,  a  parade  of  the  guard  of  honour 
waiting  for  him  at  the  station — indicated 
the  energy,  the  self-confidence,  the  natural 
air  of  ease  and  command  that  make  a 
leader  of  men.  But  though  commanding, 
he  has  no  brutality,  no  roughness,  either 
of  expression  or  of  gesture.  That  is  the 
most  striking  difference  from  the  Germans, 
even  from  Germanized  Austro-Slavs,  the 

118 


The    Revolution    in    the    Armies 

inborn  refinement  of  the  Russian.  His 
small,  blinking  eyes  are  less  kind  but  more 
sharp  than  those  of  Alexeieff.  His  glance 
is  proud  and  keen ;  only  the  redness  of 
the  eyelids  displayed  traces  of  fatigue.  The 
forehead  is  high  and  narrow,  the  nose 
aquiline,  the  thin  lips,  surmounted  by  a 
small  grey  moustache,  are  compressed ; 
all  that  denotes  energy.  He  is  of  slender, 
muscular  build,  his  athletic  form  well 
displayed  in  his  close-fitting  uniform.  He 
is  one  of  those  men  of  steel  who  seem 
to  be  born  to  command. 

Broussiloff  received  us  immediately  after 
his  arrival  at  the  chief  General  Head- 
quarters, his  knowledge  of  French  en- 
abling us  to  dispense  with  an  interpreter. 
With  regard  to  the  great  Galician  offensive 
of  1916,  on  which  we  complimented  him, 
he  did  not  hide  that  he  believed  he  had 
been  the  victim  of  treason  on  the  part 
of  the  Government.  Without  that,  he 
told  us,  the  offensive,  which  had  cost  the 
enemy  408,000  prisoners  and  800,000 
killed  and  wounded,  would  never  have 
been  stopped.  But  the  Government,  at 
the  decisive  moment,  uneasy,  doubtless, 

119 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

at  the  prospect  of  a  complete  Austrian 
defeat,  cut  short  the  supplies  and  sent 
forward  no  more  munitions.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  inertia  of  the  armies  of  Evert 
and  of  Kuropatkin,  on  his  right,  left  him 
at  the  mercy  of  a  German  outflanking 
attack  from  the  north.  From  that  day 
he  became  convinced  that  the  Government 
was  in  the  hands  of  the  pro-German  clique, 
the  centre  of  which  was  at  Tsarskoie  Selo, 
and  from  which  a  democratic  revolution 
alone  could  save  Russia. 

Broussiloff  did  not  hide  from  us  either 
that  this  Revolution,  while  saving  the 
country  from  the  shame  of  irretrievable 
defeat,  had  created  new  difficulties  for  the 
armies.  His  account  of  the  present  situ- 
ation in  the  army  showed  no  pessimism, 
but  on  the  other  hand  no  great  optimism. 
The  material  conditions  were  more  favour- 
able than  they  ever  were  for  an  offensive, 
he  told  us ;  there  was  abundance  of  war 
material,  munitions,  forage.  But  the  dis- 
cipline had  been  shaken ;  whole  armies 
had  been  undermined  by  the  Leninist 
propaganda,  demoralized  by  "  fraterniza- 
tions." However,  the  group  of  armies  of 

120 


The    Revolution    in    the    Armies 

the  south-west  and  of  the  south,  which 
were  the  most  important  in  the  coming 
offensive,  had  been  the  least  attacked. 
Their  discipline  and  their  confidence  in 
their  leaders  were  being  re-established  little 
by  little.  The  offensive  would  show  us, 
concluded  Broussiloff,  if  the  moral  that  we 
are  trying  to  raise  just  now  by  an  intense 
propaganda  was  sufficiently  good  to  allow 
of  our  obtaining  great  strategical  results. 
"As  for  myself,"  he  added,  "I  shall  do 
all  that  I  can  with  the  means  at  my 
disposal  and  hope  for  the  best" 

Broussiloff  summed  up  the  material  situa- 
tion at  the  front  thus :  The  long  period 
of  inactivity  that  the  Russian  army  had 
just  passed  through  had  allowed  of  the 
accumulation  of  a  great  quantity  of  war 
material  and  munitions.  It  is  not  the 
production  that  regulates  the  supply  of 
it  at  the  front ;  that  depends  upon  the 
transport  by  rail  and  river  navigation, 
for  the  means  of  transport  that  Russia 
has  at  its  disposal  does  not  allow  of  all 
the  material  produced  or  imported  being 
delivered  at  the  front  within  a  fixed  time. 
It  is  because  of  this  that  the  temporary 

121 


Three    Aspects    of    the    Russian    Revolution 

suspension  of  production  in  the  interior 
has  scarcely  any  immediate  importance  ;  for 
supplies  continue  to  arrive  from  the  reserve 
stores,  including  munitions  made  before  the 
beginning  of  the  war,  and  that  the  care- 
lessness of  the  former  Government  had 
left  lying  at  the  depots.  The  artillery  is 
much  stronger  to-day  than  it  was  a  year 
ago.  The  Russian  army  has  a  bigger  field 
artillery  than  the  enemy,  while  with  regard 
to  heavy  artillery,  they  are  about  equal. 
Trench  artillery  is  still  in  its  embryonic 
stage  on  either  side.  The  munitions  are 
in  sufficient  quantity  to  permit  of  our 
carrying  on  an  offensive  over  a  large  front 
during  several  weeks ;  the  light  artillery 
alone  has  in  reserve  more  than  twenty 
million  rounds.  A  very  critical  situation 
had  been  created  towards  the  end  of  the 
winter  by  the  shortage  of  forage.  That 
crisis  was  now  over,  and  the  horses, 
the  importance  of  which  is  enormous, 
owing  to  the  lack  of  railways  and  good 
roadways  for  heavy  automobiles,  were  now 
once  more  in  good  condition. 

We   asked   Broussiloff   what   he   thought 
of  the   desertions   which   had   taken   place 

122 


The    Revolution    in    the    Armies 

en  masse  after  the  Revolution.  They 
have  had  no  real  importance,  he  stated, 
except  in  the  rear ;  there  are  probably 
not  more  than  ten  thousand  deserters 
from  the  front. 

3.  DESERTIONS  AND  FRATERNIZATIONS. 

This  statement,  surprising  as  it  may 
seem  at  first  sight,  can  readily  be  believed 
by  any  one  who  has  seen  the  Russian 
army,  or  rather  the  two  Russian  armies, 
that  of  the  front  and  that  of  the  rear. 
There  are,  indeed,  rather  more  than  two 
million  soldiers  on  the  front,  and  a  much 
more  considerable  number  of  men,  nearly 
all  without  arms,  in  the  rear,  notably 
at  the  depots.  Their  number  is  reckoned 
at  various  figures — roughly  at  between 
eight  and  twelve  millions.  Nothing  more 
curious  can  be  seen,  for  instance,  than 
these  reserve  battalions  of  regiments  which, 
like  that  of  Preobrajensky,  of  Volhynia, 
or  of  Finland,  have  their  depot  at  Petro- 
grad.  Among  these  there  are  battalions 
which  number  more  than  ten  thousand 
men,  of  whom  the  largest  part  have  never 

123 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

been  near  the  front,  many  who  have  never 
handled  a  rifle. 

What  have  they  been  doing  during  the 
past  three  years  ?  Very  little  assuredly. 
Their  drill  takes  them  only  a  few  hours 
per  week.  There  are  very  few  arms  or 
material  available  for  instruction  ;  very 
few  officers,  and  most  of  the  officers  loafing 
about  in  the  depots  have  never  made  war 
and  know  only  the  routine  of  garrison 
life.  In  general,  the  discipline  is  not  suffi- 
ciently strict  to  enable  the  officers  to  exact 
from  their  troops  a  really  serious  effort 
of  instruction  or  training.  Such  drill  as 
one  sees  among  the  troops  in  Petrograd 
is  generally  most  primitive,  and  as  a  rule 
they  content  themselves  with  continuing 
the  ordinary  garrison  routine  of  peace 
times.  They  teach  the  soldiers  to  salute 
and  to  reply  to  their  officers  according 
to  the  rules  of  the  former  Government — 
which,  however,  are  scarcely  applicable, 
in  Petrograd  at  least,  since  the  Revolution. 
If  they  have  a  certain  number  of  rifles 
at  their  disposal,  they  execute  a  few  move- 
ments in  close  formation  with  their  arms 
shouldered,  and  that  is  all.  Little  or  no 

124 


The    Revolution   in    the    Armies 

target  practice,  no  route  marches,  no 
grenade  throwing  or  trench  construction 
and  manoeuvres.  Such  a  condition  existed 
before  the  Revolution,  with  this  differ- 
ence, that  then  there  were  rather  more 
parade  drills  and  outward  show  of  dis- 
cipline. But  for  three  years  now  there 
has  been  simply  inactivity — the  monotony 
and  the  ennui  of  garrison  life  in  peace- 
time, only  lazier  and  less  disciplined.  The 
Russian  soldier,  easy-going  (flemmard) 
by  nature,  adapts  himself  to  it  easily, 
and  greatly  appreciates  the  good  soup 
and  the  abundant  rations  of  bread  (three 
pounds  per  day)  and  the  kascha  (boiled 
porridge  of  sarazin)  allowed  him. 

We  can  easily  imagine  what  took  place 
at  the  time  of  the  Revolution.  For  the 
soldier  it  stood  for  the  complete  suppression 
of  all  hierarchy  and  discipline.  Henceforth 
he  had  no  more  masters,  and  could  do 
what  he  pleased.  What  more  natural, 
then,  than  to  see  him  profit  by  his  new 
liberty  to  take  the  train  and  go  and  see 
how  things  were  going  at  home.  That 
was  done  all  the  more  easily  because  soldiers 
travelled  henceforth  without  tickets  or 

125 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

any  travelling  permit  whatever.  The 
general  anarchy  that  reigned  permitted 
them,  moreover,  to  turn  out  from  the  com- 
partments, if  need  be,  civilians  and  officers, 
and  take  their  place.  During  the  first 
months  of  the  era  of  liberty  soldiers  filled 
the  stations  and  the  trains  in  such  numbers 
that  not  only  did  travelling  become  im- 
possible for  civilians,  but  the  transport 
crisis  was  seriously  aggravated.  Even  in 
the  month  of  June,  when  the  situation 
was-  considerably  ameliorated,  we  still  saw 
them  jumping  on  all  the  trains,  climb- 
ing on  the  footboards,  the  buffers,  and  even 
on  the  roofs  of  the  waggons,  which  became 
like  human  bunches  of  grapes. 

In  spite  of  the  discomfort  and  the  danger 
of  this  method  of  travelling,  it  must  have 
appeared  very  desirable  to  a  large  number 
of  soldiers,  for  they  left  their  garrisons 
simply  to  travel  a  certain  distance  by 
train,  even  when  they  had  not  at  the  end 
of  the  journey  the  prospect  of  a  large  city 
with  its  attractions  and  opportunities  for 
spending  money.  We  were  told  that 
enormous  numbers  of  soldiers  travelled 
thus  during  weeks  over  a  great  part  of 

126 


The    Revolution    in    the    Armies 

the  railway  system,  sleeping  in  the  stations 
or  in  the  waggons,  feeding  on  hard-boiled 
eggs,  black  sausages  flavoured  with  garlic, 
or  buckwheat  biscuits,  which  were  sold  by 
the  peasants  on  all  station  platforms  with 
glasses  of  tea. 

What  attraction  could  -such  a  method 
of  travelling  have  for  them  ?  Certainly 
neither  that  of  comfort  nor  the  beauty 
of  the  country,  for  scenery  is  something 
that  this  class  of  travellers  care  little  for. 
Simply  the  delight  of  feeling  themselves 
free,  of  being  able  to  go  alone  where  they 
wished  to,  and  to  do  what  they  pleased. 
It  is  not,  after  all,  so  very  different  from 
the  mentality  of  the  Belgian  or  French 
soldier,  who,  released  during  his  leave 
from  the  long  constraint  and  the  promis- 
cuity of  the  front  and  the  depots,  finds 
pleasure  in  feeling  himself  alone  and  free, 
and  prefers,  for  instance,  spending  the 
whole  night  walking  in  the  street  or  sleeping 
on  the  floor  of  some  waiting-room  rather 
than  sharing  some  common  dormitory 
which,  even  if  it  is  comfortable,  smacks 
too  much  of  the  atmosphere  of  barracks 
or  billets. 

127 


Three    Aspects    of    the    Russian    Revolution 

As  a  general  rule,  moreover,  pleasures 
of  this  kind,  even  in  the  case  of  soldiers 
who  had,  more  wisely,  returned  to  their 
own  villages  and  houses,  soon  became 
monotonous.  And  so  after  a  few  days 
or  weeks  the  deserters  of  this  category 
began  to  long  for  the  fleshpots  of  their 
regiment,  and  placidly  returned  to  their 
barracks. 

But  can  we  honestly  treat  as  deserters 
these  poor  wretches  who  simply  profited 
by  their  new  liberty  to  celebrate  the  event  ? 
Was  it  not  rather  a  question  of  an  irregular 
leave  of  absence  that  those  soldiers  granted 
themselves  for  a  space  of  time  limited 
by  their  money  or  their  choice  ?  Indeed, 
that  was  exactly  what  did  limit  it  in  the 
immense  majority  of  cases  of  desertions, 
the  number  of  which  has  been  variously 
reckoned  at  one,  two,  three,  and  even 
four  millions,  but  the  only  effect  of  which 
on  the  Russian  army  has  been  to  diminish 
for  a  certain  time  by  a  corresponding 
figure  the  number  of  rations  that  were 
distributed  to  these  idle  men  lounging  in 
the  depots  and  the  barracks  at  the  rear. 


128 


The    Revolution   in    the    Armies 

By  that  we  do  not  mean  that  the  sudden 
relaxation  of  discipline  produced  by  the 
Revolution  has  not  been  felt  by  the  troops 
at  the  front. 

No  one  would  dream  of  suggesting  such 
a  thing.  But  we  must  not  forget  that 
by  the  very  nature  of  things  this  relaxation 
of  discipline  was  never  as  marked  among 
the  troops  at  the  front,  better  organized, 
more  fully  occupied,  nearer  the  enemy, 
and  farther  from  the  enervating  atmosphere 
and  the  thousand  temptations  that  were 
at  work  on  the  soldiers  in  the  big  towns. 
And  then  there  were  the  material  diffi- 
culties which  made  desertions  or  these  long 
train  trips  much  more  difficult  to  accomplish 
for  the  men  at  the  front  than  for  the  soldiers 
in  the  rear.  In  the  first  place,  the  great 
distances,  hundreds  of  kilometres  in  some 
instances,  that  the  soldier  had  to  traverse 
from  the  trenches  or  from  his  billet  to 
the  nearest  station,  without  the  welcome 
assistance  of  an  obliging  automobile,  and 
then,  after  several  days'  tramp,  the  prospect 
of  having  to  wait  a  few  more  to  procure  a 
place  on  the  roof  of  a  railway  compartment, 
made  the  project  one  not  to  be  undertaken 

129  I 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

too  readily.  One  can  understand,  more- 
over, that  the  number  of  desertions  on 
the  front  was  very  small,  since  for  the 
soldiers  at  the  front  "  fraternization  "  played 
the  same  part  for  them  as  desertion  for 
those  in  the  rear. 

We  have  had  no  direct  information  on 
the  character  and  the  extent  of  this 
fraternization.  In  the  sectors  of  the  front 
that  we  visited  there  had  never  been,  or 
else  there  had  long  ceased  to  be,  any  frater- 
nizations. But  all  the  members  of  the 
Government,  or  the  military  leaders  whom 
we  questioned,  agreed  in  saying  that  during 
the  first  weeks  of  the  Revolution  frater- 
nization with  the  enemy,  under  various 
forms,  was  a  general  rule  on  the  northern 
part  of  the  front ;  it  had  been  fairly  frequent 
on  the  southern  and  rather  less  so  on  the 
south-western  front. 

It  was  limited  for  the  most  part  to  a 
practical  armistice,  with  here  and  there 
an  attempt  to  establish  what  the  military 
penal  code  calls  intelligence  with  the 
enemy — messages  thrown  from  one  trench 
to  another,  communications  by  signalling, 
etc.  Often,  however,  they  went  farther, 

130 


The    Revolution    in    the    Armies 

either  the  Russians  or  the  Germans — the 
latter  apparently  acting  on  the  orders  of 
their  officers — leaving  their  trenches  to 
come  to  the  trenches  of  the  enemy,  and 
even  to  their  billets,  and  mixing  with  the 
enemy  troops  and  really  fraternizing 
with  them.  We  were  told  that  in  certain 
sectors  of  the  northern  front  the  Germans 
went  so  far  as  to  organize  behind  their 
first  line  of  trenches  concerts  with  their 
military  bands,  to  which  the  Russian 
soldiers  were  invited  and  eventually  came 
in  large  numbers,  ready  to  return  the 
compliment  the  next  day. 

There  is  no  doubt  that  incidentally  these 
reciprocal  visits  have  allowed  the  Germans 
and  the  Austrians  to  glean  valuable  infor- 
mation about  the  positions  and  numbers 
of  the  Russian  troops.  They  did  not  limit 
themselves  to  that,  however ;  all  the 
information  that  we  have  received  on  the 
subject  showed  that  the  Austrians  and 
the  Germans,  especially  the  latter,  had 
organized  the  distribution  of  alcohol  to 
the  Russians  on  a  large  scale.  Sometimes 
the  Austro-German  soldiers  would  exchange 
it  individually  for  cigarettes  or  rations 

131 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

of  food ;  sometimes  also  there  were  regular 
distributions  that  were  made  on  a  large 
scale  to  the  extent  of  hundreds  of  litres. 
It  seems  that  the  quantities  of  alcohol 
thus  introduced  in  the  Russian  lines  was 
sufficient  in  some  cases  to  permit  the 
establishment  of  regular  little  stocks, 
which,  at  the  time  of  our  visit,  had  not 
become  quite  exhausted.  In  a  certain 
sector  of  the  south-west  some  of  the  liquor 
which  had  been  thus  obtained  from  the 
Germans  was  offered  to  us.  It  was 
excellent. 


4.  THE  GERMAN  PROPAGANDA. 

The  demoralizing  propaganda  carried  out 
by  the  Germans  on  the  Russians,  espe- 
cially since  the  Revolution,  is  most  for- 
midable. Daily,  enormous  quantities  of 
literature  are  thrown  from  aircraft  above 
the  Russian  lines.  We  have  been  told 
that  these  pamphlets  are  written  in  cor- 
rect colloquial  Russian,  whilst  on  the  other 
hand  we  were  shown  pamphlets  of  propa- 
ganda, prepared  by  the  Russians  and  the 
other  Allies  for  the  German  lines,  which 

182 


The    Revolution    in    the    Armies 

were  written  in  schoolboy  German,  destined 
from  their  sense  as  well  as  from  their 
form  only  to  evoke  laughter  among  their 
readers. 

The  essence  of  the  German  propaganda 
is  always  the  same  ;  they  try  to  convince 
the  Russians  that  they  are  the  victims 
of  British  and  French  imperialism,  for 
which  they  are  making  a  great  mistake 
in  allowing  themselves  to  be  killed.  It 
is  especially  against  England  that  their 
arguments  are  levelled.  In  this  regard 
there  is  a  curious  coincidence  between 
the  German  propaganda  proper  and  the 
views  that  we  heard  expressed  at  Petro- 
grad  by  certain  pacifists — Bolscheviki,  Men- 
scheviki,  and  Internationalists  :  one  of  the 
latter,  an  influential  member  of  the  Soviet 
of  Petrograd,  who  was  wearing,  moreover, 
the  uniform  of  a  Russian  officer,  and  who 
could  not,  apparently,  forget  that  he  had 
had  difficulties  in  obtaining  a  passport,  from 
the  English  military  authorities,  after  having 
for  several  years  enjoyed  the  British  hos- 
pitality that  is  granted  to  all  political 
refugees,  went  so  far  as  to  affirm  gravely 
that  the  real  danger  which  threatens  Europe 

133 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

to-day  is  not  German  militarism,  but  British 
imperialism ! 

One  method  of  propaganda  is  a  large 
map,  very  well  drawn  up  by  the  German 
staff,  with  a  broad  margin  containing  very 
clever  commentaries.  This  map,  which  has 
been  distributed  throughout  the  Russian 
front  by  hundreds  of  thousands,  shows 
the  Russian  Empire  surrounded  on  all  sides, 
from  Port  Arthur  to  Archangel,  by  the 
tentacles  of  the  British  octopus.  The 
zones  of  British  influence  are  printed  in 
the  same  shade  as  the  metropolitan  and 
colonial  territory :  they  include  notably 
Archangel,  Cronstadt,  and  Aaland;  and 
outside  of  Russia,  Persia,  Arabia,  Syria, 
Macedonia,  Northern  France,  and  that  part 
of  Belgium  which  is  not  occupied  by  the 
Germans.  .  .  . 

It  seems,  moreover,  that  this  propaganda, 
while  admirably  organized  and  splendidly 
carried  on,  has  the  same  fault  that  we 
find  in  all  German  enterprises  of  this  sort ; 
it  overreaches  its  mark,  and  provokes 
finally,  by  its  ponderous  insistence,  a 
psychological  reaction,  which  is  the  one 
result  that  its  organizers  had  failed  to 

184 


The    Revolution    in    the    Armies 

foresee.  Certainly  the  Russians  showed 
during  the  first  weeks  of  the  revolutionary 
era  a  credulity  all  the  more  admirable 
in  that  it  comes  less  from  their  profound 
ignorance  of  everything  foreign  than  from 
a  temperament  which,  after  all,  is  very 
sympathetic.  There  is  something  touching 
in  the  almost  mystic  ardour  with  which 
the  Russians  cling  to  the  idea  of  the  frater- 
nity of  all  humanity,  and  the  nai've  and 
hospitable  confidence  with  which  they 
greet  any  one  who  comes  from  other  lands 
with  manifestations  of  friendship.  But 
there  is,  unfortunately  for  those  who  try 
to  exploit  his  credulity  in  an  unscrupulous 
manner,  another  side  to  the  picture  as 
soon  as  the  inevitable  and  final  disillusion 
manifests  itself.  The  disillusioned  moujik 
feels  against  the  person  who  has  abused 
his  good  faith  a  resentment  all  the  keener 
the  greater  his  belief  has  been. 

It  is  said  even  that  towards  the  end  of 
the  era  of  fraternization  certain  so-called 
enemy  parliamentarians  have  been  aware 
of  this  to  their  cost.  At  the  time  of  our 
visit  to  the  south-western  and  southern 
fronts  every  one  of  them  had  begun  to 

135 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

perceive  the  white  thread  with  which  the 
German  tissue  of  falsehoods  was  sewn. 
The  Russians  had  ended  by  saying  to  them- 
selves that  after  all  the  German  revolution, 
which  they  had  thought  certain  in  the 
first  intoxication  of  their  triumph,  did  not 
seem  likely  to  take  place,  and  if  anything 
was  changed,  it  was  only  on  their  own 
side  of  the  trenches.  And  so  when  we 
visited  the  trenches  they  were  no  longer 
exchanging  cigarettes  and  bottles  of  vodka 
with  the  enemy,  but  shot  and  shell. 

None  the  less,  a  few  days  before,  a  Ger- 
man officer  had  tried  to  penetrate  into  the 
Russian  lines  under  cover  of  the  white  flag 
of  the  parliamentary  party.  He  was  allowed 
to  approach,  and  taken  to  the  nearest 
military  authority  with  the  usual  cere- 
mony, and  there  they  asked  him  the 
reason  for  his  visit.  He  exhibited  a 
paper,  the  original  of  which  was  shown 
to  us,  and  which  said,  in  so  many  words, 
"  that  the  staff  of  the  Austro-German 
Army  of  the  South  had  deputed  the  officer 
bearing  the  passport  to  go  and  negotiate 
with  the  delegates  of  the  Russian  soldiers 
in  order  to  expose  to  them  the  point  of 

136 


The    Revolution    in    the    Armies 

view  of  the  German  and  Austrian  Govern- 
ments." The  Russian  authority  decided  that 
this  action  was  an  abuse  of  the  white  flag 
in  order  to  cover  a  mission  of  demoral- 
izing propaganda,  and  the  German  colonel 
was  sent  to  Siberia,  there  to  make  some 
complementary  reflections  at  his  leisure  on 
the  "  point  of  view  of  the  German  and 
Austrian  Governments."  It  is  said  that 
the  anger  of  the  poor  man,  who  had  obviously 
expected  a  different  reception,  was  really 
laughable.  He  had  to  admit  to  himself 
that  the  Russians  had  ceased  to  be  as 
trustful  and  credulous  as  they  had  seemed 
in  the  beginning.  It  is  not  remarkable, 
therefore,  to  learn  that  the  Austro-German 
General  Staff  at  the  beginning  of  June 
issued  an  order  to  stop  all  attempt  at 
intercourse  with  the  Russians. 

5.  WITH  THE  TTH  ARMY. 

Following  the  advice  of  General  Brous- 
siloff,  we  decided  to  go  to  the  south- 
west front  of  the  armies  before  going  to 
Jassy,  where  the  Roumanian  Government 
had  invited  us.  We  were  to  visit  succes- 

187 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

sively  the  three  armies  who  held  the  front 
in  Galicia,  and  which  would  be  called  upon 
to  play  the  principal  part  in  the  coming 
offensive  :  the  7th  Army  in  the  centre,  the 
llth  on  the  right,  and  the  8th  on  the  left. 
There  were  twenty  hours'  railroad 
journey  from  the  Stavka  to  Kamenetz 
Podolski,  where  the  headquarters  of  the 
armies  of  the  south-west  were  installed. 
General  Goutor,  who  had  just  succeeded 
Broussiloff,  received  us.  He  had  already 
made  the  necessary  arrangements  for  the 
rest  of  our  journey,  which  was  to  be  made 
by  motor-car.  Indeed,  after  leaving  the 
Austrian  frontier  near  Kamenetz  there 
are  only  narrow-gauge  railways,  on  which 
our  wide  Russian  railway  carriage  could 
not  travel.  We  were  to  return  to  it  only 
at  Jassy.  Between  Kamenetz  and  Jassy 
we  were  to  motor  about  1,500  kilometres, 
half  of  them  only  on  roads  which  are 
worthy  of  the  name.  The  rest  was  done— 
and  how  ? — on  sandy  tracks  made  through- 
out the  country  simply  by  the  passage  of 
mounted  troops,  or  on  roads  that  the 
Creator — for  human  intervention  in  their 
construction  was  never  clearly  demonstrated 

138 


The    Revolution    in    the    Armies 

— had  certainly  never   intended   to  be  used 
for   motoring. 

We  were  to  leave  on  the  same  night 
for  Buczacz,  the  headquarters  of  the  7th 
Army,  which  we  hoped  to  reach  during 
the  night.  Before  leaving  Kamenetz 
Podolski  we  were  received  by  the  Soviet 
of  the  officers  and  soldiers'  delegates  of 
the  armies  of  the  south-west.  It  was  the 
first  time  that  we  had  come  actually  into 
touch  with  an  organization  of  that  kind. 
Our  interview  was  much  the  same  as  the 
numerous  interviews  that  we  were  to 
have  with  the  Soviets  of  all  forma- 
tions and  units  that  we  visited  later 
on — an  extremely  cordial  reception,  an 
exceptionally  attentive  public,  who  listened 
to  our  statements  with  evident  sympathy ; 
then  questions,  nearly  always  the  same, 
on  the  situation  in  occupied  Belgium,  the 
possibility  of  a  revolution  in  Germany, 
and  especially  the  Stockholm  conference. 
The  insistence  with  which  they  questioned 
us  on  this  subject,  in  the  Soviets  as  at 
the  meetings  on  the  front,  shows  the  ex- 
treme importance  that  this  attempt  at  a 
reunion  of  the  International  had  gained 

139 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

in  the  mind  of  the  Russian  soldier:  had 
not  the  Soviet  of  Petrograd  made  them 
believe  that  it  would  be  a  regular  peace 
conference  ? 

It  seemed  quite  clear  to  us,  however, 
that  the  enthusiasm  of  the  army  for  the 
Stockholm  Conference  had  considerably 
cooled  down  since  it  had  become  more 
and  more  clear  that  the  hopes  of  a  demo- 
cratic revolution  in  Germany,  as  a  direct 
result  of  the  Russian  Revolution,  were 
denied  by  stern  reality.  Also,  with  one 
exception — that  of  a  somewhat  timid  Bol- 
cheviki  heckler  at  a  meeting  at  Podgaice 
— the  statement  we  made  regarding  our 
attitude  in  connection  with  the  proposed 
International  Socialist  Conference  met  on 
the  front  with  nothing  but  complete 
approval. 

We  had  the  pleasure  of  meeting  again 
in  the  Soviet  of  the  armies  of  the  south- 
west one  of  the  delegates  from  the  sailors 
of  the  Black  Sea,  whom  we  had  met  three 
weeks  previously  at  Petrograd.  We  met 
several  others  later  on.  After  having 
visited  Petrograd  and  the  other  large  towns 
of  the  provinces,  these  160  delegates,  sent 

140 


The    Revolution    in    the    Armies 

by  their  comrades  to  carry  on  a  propaganda 
for  the  re-establishment  of  discipline  and 
for  the  offensive,  had  separated  to  go  to 
the  front,  where  they  visited  the  Soviets  of 
all  the  units.  Their  work  had  certainly 
a  considerable  effect  on  the  moral  recon- 
struction of  the  army. 

6.  A  LAND  OF  MILK  AND  HONEY. 

As  soon  as  the  sitting  of  the  Soviet  was 
over  we  set  forth  'for  Buczacz.  Shortly 
after  leaving  the  town  of  Kamenetz, 
beautifully  situated  on  a  hill  overlooking 
an  idyllic  valley  and  surmounted  by  the 
ruins  of  a  Turkish  fortress,  we  reached 
the  Austrian  frontier.  Here  we  saw  first 
the  traces  of  the  combats  of  the  three 
preceding  years,  the  ruins  of  the  Austrian 
Customs  House  reminding  us  of  the  first 
invasion  of  Galicia  by  the  Russians  in  1914. 

This  invasion  seems  scarcely,  however, 
to  have  done  much  harm  to  the  country. 
Certainly  here,  as  elsewhere,  war  has 
caused  cruel  devastation  :  about  one  hun- 
dred kilometres  farther  inland,  where  the  old 
line  of  trenches,  showing  the  extreme  point 

141 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

of  the  advance  of  the  Austrians  in  1915, 
begins,  we  entered  the  zone  of  villages  and 
towns  destroyed  and  of  abandoned  farms. 
But  outside  the  area  that  has  been  the 
scene  of  military  operations  it  would  seem 
that  Galicia  and  Bucowina  are  the  parts 
of  Europe  that  have  least  felt  the  war. 

In  the  first  place,  they  have  this  par- 
ticularity :  that  it  is  the  only  country 
engaged  in  war  where  the  majority  of 
the  adult  population  is  now  at  home. 
They  had  been  called  up,  of  course,  during 
the  Austrian  mobilization,  but  they  soon 
returned.  The  majority  of  the  soldiers 
from  that  part  of  the  country  only  awaited, 
as  a  matter  of  fact,  an  opportunity  to  be 
made  prisoners  by  the  Russians,  so  as 
to  be  able  to  return  to  then*  homes.  They 
were  well  aware  that  the  Russians  granted 
great  freedom  to  prisoners  of  Slavonic 
origin.  Cases  have  been  known  where 
entire  units  of  the  Austrian  army,  composed 
of  Slavs  and  Ruthuanians,  surrendered 
without  fighting,  on  the  express  condition 
that  they  were  allowed  to  return  to  their 
farms  in  the  occupied  part  of  the  country. 
And  thus  it  is  that  the  majority  of  the 

142 


The    Revolution    in    the    Armies 

men  whom  one  sees  working  on  the  farms 
or  smoking  their  pipes  at  the  door  of  their 
little  farmhouses  wear  Austrian  uniform. 

Our  automobiles  passed  through  pictu- 
resque villages,  the  whitewashed  cottages 
and  farmhouses,  with  their  extraordinarily 
shaped  thatched  roofs,  surrounded  by 
gardens  and  orchards  of  apple-trees.  Few 
trees  are  to  be  seen,  however,  outside  of 
the  little  oases  that  form  the  villages ; 
farther  on  lay  the  bare  plain,  with  prairies 
and  wheatfields  stretching  to  the  horizon. 

The  sun  was  setting,  and  in  all  the  villages 
that  we  passed  through  an  atmosphere  of 
gaiety  reigned.  It  was  a  Saturday  night, 
and  under  the  elm  that  shades  the  church 
square  or  in  the  fields  on  the  roadside 
all  the  villagers  in  the  picturesque  costume 
of  Ruthuanian  peasants,  among  which  the 
uniforms  of  the  Austrian  prisoners  made 
patches  of  grey,  had  gathered  to  dance 
to  the  sound  of  a  violin,  played  by  a  musician 
posted  under  a  tree.  Every  one,  even  the 
dancers,  were  singing,  and  their  voices  in 
choruses  of  two  and  three  parts  blended 
with  the  music  of  the  violin.  At  half- 
past  ten  we  could  still  see  the  whole 

143 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

population  of  a  village  dancing  on  the 
roadside,  singing  folk-songs,  while  in  the 
automobile  which  was  bearing  us  along 
we  could  not  help  thinking  in  contrast 
of  the  sufferings  of  occupied  Belgium.  .  .  . 


But  other  surprises  were  in  store  for 
us.  About  eleven  o'clock  we  reached  a 
little  town,  Tchertkoff.  In  the  town's 
principal  square  there  was  one  big  house 
brightly  illuminated.  It  proved  to  be  one 
of  the  largest  cafes  of  the  district,  where, 
as  in  all  towns  or  villages  of  Austria,  the 
major  part  of  the  population  spend  the 
most  of  their  time.  We  went  in.  An 
animated  crowd,  with  many  Russian 
officers  among  them,  filled  the  place.  They 
paid  scarcely  any  attention  to  us,  and 
allowed  us  to  install  ourselves  quietly  at 
the  only  unoccupied  table.  On  that  table, 
as  on  all  the  others,  there  were  platters 
filled  with  cake  and  a  delicious  white  bread 
made  with  milk  and  eggs,  which,  except  for 
the  currants,  reminded  us  of  our  Brussels 
"  cramiques."  Along  with  that  there  was 
excellent  coffee  with  cream,  such  as  is 

144 


The    Revolution    in    the    Armies 

only  to  be  found  in  the  Austrian  caf£s. 
We  leave  it  to  the  reader's  imagination 
to  judge  how  we  enjoyed  this  feast,  after 
two  months  of  "  voluntary  rationing "  in 
London,  Resbrodkort  in  Sweden,  and  the 
horrible  black  viscosity  that  they  served 
us  in  the  name  of  bread  at  Petrograd. 

We  found  the  same  abundance  later  in 
the  other  Austrian  towns  that  we  visited. 
If  we  think  for  a  moment,  such  a  condition 
is  not  surprising.  That  part  of  Austria 
which  is  occupied,  a  district  as  large  as 
Belgium,  is  an  entirely  rural  region ;  the 
rare  towns  and  villages  that  one  comes 
across  are  only  agricultural  markets.  The 
soil  is  fertile.  Products  of  every  description 
are  plentiful.  The  exportation  of  these 
products  is  very  difficult,  indeed  practi- 
cally impossible,  for  there  is  on  the  one 
side  the  barrier  of  the  trenches,  and  on 
the  other  hand  the  impossibility  of  using 
the  Russian  railway  lines  for  anything 
besides  military  transports.  The  Russian 
army  of  occupation  furnishes  a  surplus 
population  just  dense  enough — save  on  the 
immediate  front,  where  the  concentration 
of  troops  leads  to  more  difficulty  in  obtaining 

145  K 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

their  supplies  on  the  spot— to  enable  the 
inhabitants  to  dispose  of  the  surplus  of 
their  produce  at  prices  slightly  above  the 
former  very  low  cost  of  living.  Thus  we 
see  that,  economically,  this  district,  which 
one  might  have  imagined  devastated  by 
three  invasions  in  three  years,  is  a  veritable 
land  of  plenty,  in  comparison  with  any 
other  country,  belligerent  or  neutral. 

Let  us  hasten  to  add  that  the  rule  of 
the  Russians  in  occupation  is  very  mild. 
We  have  already  seen  an  example  of  this 
in  the  presence  of  the  freed  prisoners,  who 
walk  about  in  their  Austrian  uniforms 
from  the  frontier  of  Podolia  to  the  second 
line  of  trenches.  Generally  speaking, 
the  presence  of  the  Russian  army  does 
not  seem  to  inspire  the  civilians  of  that 
district  with  the  terror  that  remains  in 
our  land,  for  instance,  at  the  mention  of 
the  Cossacks  to  the  great-grandchildren 
of  those  who  remember  1815. 

In  certain  cases  the  Russians  of  1914, 
in  Eastern  Prussia  for  instance,  may  have 
shown  themselves  worthy  descendants  of 
their  ancestors,  but  in  all  our  journeying 
in  Galicia  we  did  not  meet  with  a  single 

146 


The    Revolution    in    the    Armies 

instance  of  depredation.  On  the  contrary, 
at  every  step  we  had  fresh  instances  of 
the  extreme  respect  of  the  Russians  for 
the  rights  of  the  population  in  the  occupied 
country.  And  this  is  not  only  because 
of  their  affinity  of  race  and  language.  The 
peasant,  for  instance,  has  not  made  a  very 
good  impression  upon  the  Russian  soldier, 
who  accuses  the  native  of  exploiting  him 
and  making  him  pay  very  much  too  dear 
for  food. 

It  would  be  an  exaggeration  to  state 
that  the  population  manifests  anything 
that  would  remotely  resemble  enthusiasm 
for  Russia.  The  Ruthuanians,  properly 
speaking,  are  the  only  ones  who  look  upon 
the  Russians  as  their  liberators.  The 
greater  part  of  the  peasant  population 
obviously  take  no  interest  in  the  war  as 
a  political  event ;  they  think  of  it  only 
with  regard  to  its  effect  upon  their  im- 
mediate material  interests.  They  submit 
with  indifference  to  the  flux  and  reflux 
of  the  occupations,  alternately  Russian 
and  Austrian,  and  only  try  to  get  what 
profit  they  can  out  of  both  armies,  while 
a  minority,  composed  of  a  part  of  the 

147 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

Jewish  and  German  populations  of  the  small 
towns,  is  evidently  hostile  to  the  Russians, 
and  longs  for  the  return  of  Austrian  rule  : 
the  Austrian  Germans,  for  obvious  reasons, 
the  Jews  especially,  from  their  ancient 
resentment  to  the  Russians,  which  the 
Russian  Revolution  has  hardly  attenuated, 
because  of  the  oppression  of  their  race  in 
Russia. 


This  hostility  of  a  minority  of  the 
populations  of  the  towns  is  openly  shown. 
That  is  further  proof  of  the  benevolence 
of  the  Russian  rule.  Belgians  and  British 
whom  we  met  in  Galicia  were  astonished 
to  see  the  Russians  accommodating  them- 
selves so  benevolently  to  this  resentful, 
contemptuous  attitude,  that  was  demon- 
strated, for  instance,  by  young  Jews  in 
the  cafes.  Our  fellow-countrymen  did  not 
hide  their  contempt  of  what  they  called  the 
cowardice  of  the  Russians.  At  a  meeting  in 
the  open  air  that  we  had  held  at  Tarnopol, 
about  a  thousand  Austrian  civilians,  men 
and  women,  were  among  our  soldierTaudi- 
ence,  During  one  of  the  speeches  one  of  the 

U8 


The    Revolution   in    the    Armies 

auditors,  it  seems,  had  manifested  loudly 
his  hostility  to  the  cause  that  we  were 
defending.  The  Russian  soldiers  who 
surrounded  him  had  politely  asked  him 
to  be  quiet,  but  without  molesting  him 
in  any  way,  so  that  the  incident  had  passed 
unnoticed  by  the  member  of  our  party 
who  was  speaking  at  the  time.  Such 
tolerance  was  certainly  astonishing  to 
Westerners,  but  they  were  wrong,  we 
think,  in  calling  it  cowardice.  We,  who 
had  been  in  Russia  for  several  weeks,  had 
constant  proofs,  just  as  surprising,  of  the 
extreme  respect  for  liberty  of  opinion 
which  characterizes  this  good-natured 
people,  and  to  us  this  came  less  as  a 
surprise.  Certainly  one  must  admit  there  is 
an  element  of  native  indolence,  of  nitche- 
wo'isme,  in  the  mild  manner  in  which  the 
Russians  rule  the  inhabitants  of  this  enemy 
territory.  But  at  bottom  this  attitude  is 
the  same  as  the  psychological  disposition  of 
the  average  Russian  taken  individually.  It 
is  especially  a  manifestation  of  that  naive 
kindness,  of  that  evangelical  passivity,  of 
that  deep-rooted  hospitality  which  is  the 
most  striking  characteristic  of  the  Russian. 

149 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

How  can  we  explain  otherwise  that 
these  same  Russians,  who  have  everywhere 
in  their  own  country  destroyed  and  burned 
the  slightest  sign  reminiscent  of  the  Czarist 
Government,  have  left  in  Bucowina  and 
in  Galicia  all  the  Austrian  symbols  ?  Every- 
where on  the  public  buildings  one  saw 
the  Austrian  eagle  and  German  inscriptions, 
superfluous,  moreover,  in  a  country  where  the 
only  languages  spoken  are  the  Ruthuanian, 
Slav,  and  Polish.  Even  the  old  tobacco 
shops  of  the  Austrian  monopoly  have 
retained  their  black  and  yellow  signs.  At 
Czernowitz,  when  General  Korniloff  received 
us  at  the  General  Headquarters,  estab- 
lished in  the  palace  of  the  former  Austrian 
Governor,  he  was  seated  under  a  life-sized 
portrait  of  the  Emperor  Francis  Joseph. 
Now  in  Russia  we  should  have  to  look 
long  before  we  could  find  a  portrait  of 
the  Czar  with  anything  left  but  the  frame  ! 

In  that  same  city,  accompanied  by  two 
Russian  officers,  we  had  gone  to  make 
some  purchases  in  a  shop.  It  was  kept 
by  people  whose  Viennese  accent  clearly 
showed  their  origin.  They  wrapped  up 
our  purchases  in  a  copy  of  the  Arbeiter 

150 


The    Revolution    in    the   Armies 

Zeitung,  dated  July  1914.  One  of  us 
who  had  been  a  student  in  Vienna,  ex- 
claimed :  "  Well,  it  reminds  one  of  many 
things  to  see  a  copy  of  the  Arbeiter 
Zeitung  of  pre-war  days."  And  the  shop- 
keeper added  immediately,  with  a  deep 
sigh  :  "  If  only  we  could  begin  to  receive 
it  again  every  morning  as  we  used  to  before 
the  war !  "  Our  Russian  friends  only 
smiled  at  this  statement.  We,  however, 
could  not  help  thinking  what  would  have 
happened  to  a  Belgian  shopkeeper  if  he 
had  made  a  similar  remark  in  the  presence 
of  German  officers  in  the  zone  of  the 
armies  or  if  a  citizen  of  Noyon,  before  some 
French  officer,  had  expressed  regret  at  not 
seeing  the  Liller  Kriegszeitung  any  more. 

We  had  another  example  of  Russian 
tolerance  when  we  arrived  at  Buczacz.  It 
was  one  o'clock  in  the  morning,  and  the 
General  Staff  had  not  expected  our 
arrival  in  the  middle  of  the  night.  Most 
of  the  town  having  been  demolished  by 
the  bombardments,  lodgings  were  scarce. 
To  make  room  for  us,  soldiers  and  officers 
who  were  occupying  a  little  villa  that  had 
remained  intact  in  the  outskirts  of  the 

151 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

town  were  asked  to  turn  out.  The  next 
morning  we  inspected  the  place,  which  had 
evidently  served  as  a  billet  for  the  Russian 
troops  during  several  months.  On  all 
the  walls  there  were  photographs  of  the 
former  owner  of  the  house,  an  Austrian 
officer,  generally  taken  in  his  full  regalia 
and  uniform.  They  had  not  disturbed 
the  portraits  nor  any  of  the  other  souvenirs 
that  had  belonged  to  the  former  inhabitants. 
Can  we  imagine  Belgian  or  French  soldiers 
living  for  weeks  under  the  martial  gaze 
of  a  German  officer,  even  if  only  in  a 
portrait  ? 

7.  THE  108TH  DIVISION. 

After  a  very  cordial  reception  from  General 
Belkovitch,  commanding  the  7th  Army, 
and  from  his  General  Staff,  and  a  long 
conference  with  the  army  Soviet,  we  got 
into  touch  for  the  first  time  with  the  troops 
at  the  front.  The  infantry  of  the  108th 
Division  was  in  billets  at  about  fifty 
kilometres  from  Buczacz,  north  of  Pod- 
gaice.  The  army  commander  had  given 
the  order  to  assemble.  Two  hours'  motor- 
ing, over  the  horrible  sandy  tracks, 

152 


The    Revolution    in    the    Armies 

through  the  grand,  wild  scenery  of  the 
Galician  plains,  brought  us  to  the  appointed 
place.  There  we  received  one  of  the  most 
striking  impressions  of  our  whole  trip. 
Our  automobiles  were  going  through  a 
deep  valley,  when  suddenly,  at  a  turning, 
we  saw,  some  hundreds  of  yards  distant, 
the  long  brown  ribbon  of  the  troops  massed 
along  the  two  sides  of  the  road  which  we 
were  following.  Amidst  that  mass  of  more 
than  nine  thousand  men  there  flashed  in 
the  sun  the  brass  musical  instruments 
that  were  playing  "La  Marseillaise,"'  and 
the  scarlet  flags.  For  the  first  time  we 
saw  an  army  marching  under  the  red  flag 
of  the  Internationale.  This  sight  reminded 
us  of  our  splendid  workmen's  processions 
of  the  past,  and,  indeed,  if  instead  of  these 
Galician  hills  there  had  been  on  the  horizon 
the  slag-heaps  of  our  mining  districts,  we 
might  have  believed  we  were  transported 
by  magic  in  the  midst  of  one  of  those 
crowds  of  demonstrating  workmen  that  were 
so  familiar  to  us  before  the  war. 

We  got  down  from  our  car  to  shake 
hands  with  the  divisional  commander, 
Stephanovitch,  who  had  come  to  meet  us, 

158 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

and  with  him  we  reviewed  the  three  regi- 
ments, passing  during  twenty  minutes 
between  a  double  line  of  companies  drawn 
up  for  review.  The  impression  was  once 
more  purely  military ;  not  a  muscle  of 
these  sunburned  faces  twitched,  not  a  ges- 
ture, if  it  were  not  the  stiff,  martial  salute 
of  the  officers,  broke  the  correct  immo- 
bility of  the  whole  line.  At  a  sign  from 
the  General,  while  we  were  installing  our- 
selves on  a  rising  on  the  side  of  the  road, 
the  ranks  broke  up,  and  that  mass  poured 
towards  us,  bringing  in  its  train  the  General, 
the  officers,  the  flags,  the  music,  and  forming 
silently  and  very  quickly  a  great  audience. 
In  a  moment  the  review  became  a  public 
meeting,  and  the  straight  military  lines 
of  the  troops  gave  place  to  the  picturesque 
irregular  outline  of  an  open-air  meeting. 

This  succession  of  impressions  had  been 
so  bewildering  that  the  member  of  our 
party  who  was  to  speak  first  found  himself 
quite  at  a  loss.  There  had  been  nothing 
to  indicate  up  to  the  present  what  had 
been  expected  of  us  by  these  soldiers 
marching  under  the  red  flags  :  while  passing 
us  in  the  review  their  faces  expressed 

154 


The    Revolution    in    the    Armies 

nothing  but  the  mechanical  impassibility 
of  the  disciplined  soldiers ;  but  in  the 
mass  crowded  around  us  we  could  read 
intense  curiosity. 

But  as  soon  as  our  interpreter,  who  trans- 
lated each  sentence,  had  said  in  Russian 
the  first  words,  "  This  red  flag  under 
which  you  are  fighting  is  also  our  own,  ..." 
there  broke  forth  an  amazing  deafen- 
ing burst  of  delirious  applause.  Frantic 
hurrahs  drowned  the  music  of  the  "  Mar- 
seillaise "  and  the  "  Braban9onne "  which 
the  military  bands  began  playing  at  full 
blast.  And  so  it  was  after  each  sentence, 
after  every  allusion  to  the  sufferings  of 
Belgium,  to  the  solidarity  between  the 
Allies,  to  the  responsibility  of  the  Russian 
Revolution  with  regard  to  international 
socialism,  and  the  necessity  of  safeguarding 
our  honour  by  breaking  by  a  determined 
offensive  the  inactivity  on  the  eastern  front. 

The  advice  of  friends  who  understood 
the  psychology  of  the  Russian  people,  and 
a  certain  amount  of  experience  gained 
from  the  audiences  at  Petrograd,  Moscow, 
and  Kieff,  had  taught  us  to  be  on  our  guard 
against  the  sometimes  fleeting  and  childish 

155 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

enthusiasm  of  this  impressionable  public, 
very  hospitably  disposed  at  first  sight 
with  regard  to  strangers,  very  eager  to 
hear  speeches,  since  they  are  no  longer 
forbidden,  and  quite  ready,  especially  when 
young  soldiers  are  concerned,  to  manifest 
loudly  for  or  against  any  statements  that 
are  made. 

So  we  restrained  ourselves  as  well  as 
we  could  from  being  carried  away  by  this 
collective  enthusiasm.  But  there  could 
be  no  possible  doubt  as  to  the  veritable 
feeling  of  our  audience  as  soon  as  the 
speakers  delegated  by  the  soldiers  began 
to  speak  and  their  speeches  were  translated 
to  us.  They  all  told  us  in  touching  terms 
how  great  was  their  admiration  for 
Belgium  and  their  attachment  to  the 
Internationale  that  we  represented.  They 
told  us  of  their  readiness  to  complete  the 
work  of  the  Revolution  by  an  offensive 
against  the  last  autocracies  of  Europe. 
There  was  only  one  attempt,  timid  enough 
it  is  true,  at  contradiction  on  the  part 
of  a  Bolcheviki  soldier,  who,  evidently 
hoping  to  embarrass  us,  asked  a  question 
concerning  the  Stockholm  Conference.  But 

156 


The    Revolution    in    the    Armies 

his  question  and  our  reply  that  *'  we  were 
adversaries  of  fraternization  with  the 
agents  of  the  Kaiser,  whether  at  Stockholm 
or  in  the  trenches,"  was  received  in  such 
a  manner  that  the  Bolcheviki,  urged  mock- 
ingly by  his  comrades  to  defend  his 
opinions,  promptly  vanished  in  the  crowd 
without  insisting  further. 

The  sun  was  setting  when  the  manifes- 
tation ended,  and  it  was  not  without  some 
difficulty  that  our  automobiles,  to  which 
we  were  carried  on  the  robust  shoulders 
of  the  soldiers,  could  start  on  the  sandy 
tracks  again  in  the  direction  of  Buczacz. 

8.  A  MUTINOUS  ARMY  CORPS. 

As  we  started  we  saw  another,  not 
less  remarkable,  sight.  From  the  heights, 
gilded  by  the  setting  sun,  there  came 
interminable  columns  going  towards  the 
front.  All  of  them  had  the  red  flag  at 
their  head,  and  the  inscriptions  on  some 
of  them  were  translated  to  us :  "  To 
victory  or  death,"  "  To  the  Trenches 
for  Liberty,"  "  Let  us  defend  Russian 
Liberty,"  and  another,  on  the  standard 

157 


Three    Aspects    of   ike    Russian    Revolution 

of  a  mounted  artillery  brigade :  "  Our 
cannons  will  thunder  for  Liberty."  Nothing 
could  be  more  picturesque  than  the  sight  of 
these  troops  covered  with  the  dust  of  their 
march,  accompanied  by  horse  transport 
columns  which  seemed  to  date  from  the  First 
Empire,  and  singing  the  "Marseillaise"  in 
that  slow,  modulated  manner  that  the 
Russians  affect.  The  artillery  especially, 
which  formed  the  largest  part  of  these 
caravans,  was  very  characteristic.  For 
instance,  the  sight  of  two  officers  seated 
in  an  ancient  coach,  dusty  and  dirty,  drawn 
by  a  tired  horse,  while  two  other  officers, 
who  evidently  took  turns  with  those  in 
the  conveyance,  were  walking  on  the  dusty 
road,  holding  to  the  vehicle  with  one  hand, 
was  like  a  picture  from  Meissonnier. 

These  columns  that  we  saw  marching 
towards  the  trenches  were  the  loyal  troops 
of  the  7th  Siberian  Army,  part  of  which 
had  just  mutinied. 

This  corps,  which  formed  part  of  the 
7th  Army,  was  resting  during  several 
weeks,  after  a  long  spell  in  the  trenches. 
The  Bolcheviki  propaganda,  helped,  as  we 
were  informed  from  reliable  sources,  by 

158 


The    Revolution    in    the    Armies 

Austro-German  agents,  became  very  im- 
portant, and  led  the  men  to  mutiny  against 
the  authority  of  the  Commandant  of  the 
army.  The  rebels  asked  to  be  sent  for 
two  or  three  months  to  a  town  in  the 
interior  of  Russia,  not  only  to  rest,  but 
to  discuss  at  leisure  the  political  and  inter- 
national situation,  after  which  they  would 
decide  whether  or  not  to  take  part  in  the 
offensive.  At  their  head  was  a  Lieutenant- 
Colonel,  who  had  succeeded  in  carrying 
with  him  two-thirds  of  the  infantry.  The 
rest  of  the  infantry,  all  the  artillery,  and 
the  other  special  arms  of  the  service,  in  all 
about  half  of  the  total  effective,  refused  to 
listen  to  the  propagandists  of  desertion.  They 
even  ended  by  deciding  that  they  wished 
to  have  nothing  more  to  do  with  the  rebels, 
and  that  they  would  leave  immediately  of 
their  own  free  will  for  the  front.  It 
was  these  men  that  we  had  just  seen 
pass. 

As  soon  as  we  knew  who  they  were  we 
stopped  beside  a  group  of  infantrymen  to 
harangue  them.  It  is  easy  to  imagine 
what  we  said  to  these  brave  fellows,  and 
that  it  gave  them  pleasure  was  evident 

150 


Three    Aspects    of    the    Russian    Revolution 

from  their  enthusiasm.  Long  after  we  had 
left  them  we  could  still  see  them,  on  looking 
back,  waving  their  fur  caps  at  the  end 
of  their  long  bayonets  that  were  sparkling 
in  the  last  rays  of  a  glorious  sunset. 

Long  shall  we  keep  the  memory  of  this 
epic  scene,  which  irresistibly  made  us  think 
of  the  heroic  days  of  1792.  With  what 
fervour  did  we  wish  that  evening,  as  we 
saw  the  red  flag  guiding  these  men  towards 
the  setting  sun,  that  it  could  lead  them 
to  a  grand  repetition  of  Jemmapes  and 
Valmy.  The  reminiscence  was  so  striking 
that  one  of  us  quoted  the  words  of  Goethe 
to  those  around  him  on  the  night  of  Valmy  : 
"  From  this  day  dates  a  new  era  in  the 
history  of  the  world,  and  you  will  be  able 
to  say  :  I  was  there." 

But  was  it  to  be  Valmy  ?  Or  would 
it  be  Neerwinden  ?  Some  weeks  later  we 
knew  :  it  began  as  Valmy  and  ended  like 
Neerwinden. 


9.  A  TERRORIST  FUNCTIONARY. 

When  we  arrived  at  Buczacz  we  learned 
that  the   affair   of  the   7th   Siberian   Corps 

160 


The    Revolution    in    the    Armies 

had  become  serious.  The  rebels  had  just 
refused  to  consider  the  conciliatory  pro- 
positions of  the  Government's  emissary. 
They  were  intending  to  march  on  Tarnopol, 
and  to  encamp  there  without  authority. 
What  made  the  situation  difficult  was  that 
they  had  retained  all  the  machine-guns 
of  the  infantry,  which,  nevertheless,  was 
gradually  separating  from  the  rebels  and 
following  the  artillery  to  the  front. 

General  Belkovitch,  judging  that  our 
intervention  might  be  useful,  decided  that 
the  next  day  we  should  visit  the  rebels 
in  their  camp,  about  two  hours'  motor 
drive  from  Buczacz. 

The  next  morning,  however,  the  situation 
had  become  still  more  grave.  The  Govern- 
ment emissary  had,  after  the  refusal  of 
the  rebels  to  consider  his  propositions, 
finally  broken  off  all  negotiations  with  the 
rebels,  leaving  them  only  as  a  last 
resource  the  assurance  that  if  they  had 
any  further  proposals  to  make  he  would 
be  ready  to  listen  to  their  delegates  until 
evening.  In  these  conditions  he  asked 
us  to  abandon  the  idea  of  visiting  them, 
which  was,  of  course,  such  a  sensible  view 

161  L 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

that  we  could  not  do  otherwise  than  agree 
with  him.  We  decided  then  that  instead 
of  visiting  the  rebels  we  would  go  and 
address  a  part  of  the  troops  that  had 
voluntarily  returned  to  the  front. 

Before  setting  out  we  had  a  long  conver- 
sation with  the  Government  emissary  in 
question.  He  was  no  other  than  the 
Revolutionary  Socialist  Savinkoff,  who 
had  on  his  record  of  services  several 
deeds  of  terrorism,  of  which  the  most 
famous  was  that  against  Plevhe  at  Odessa. 
The  terrorist  of  Odessa  was  now  in  khaki 
uniform,  representing  the  Government,  and 
preaching  discipline  and  national  duty  to 
the  troops.  And  he  had  quite  the  air 
of  being  the  right  man  in  the  right  place. 
Such  was  certainly  the  opinion  of  the 
Commandant  of  the  7th  Army,  who  was 
nevertheless  an  old  soldier,  trained  in 
quite  a  different  school  from  that  of  the 
Revolution.  While  by  no  means  concealing 
his  dislike  for  the  institution  of  "  com- 
missioners to  the  armies,"  in  which  he 
saw  an  attempt  to  rescind  the  authority 
of  the  hierarchic  leaders,  he  loyally  owned 
that  Savinkoff  was  rendering  great  service 


The    Revolution    in    the    Armies 

to  him  in  the  re-establishment  of  discipline 
in  the  army,  and  that  "  it  was  a  pleasure, 
moreover,  to  have  personal  dealings  with 
a  man  possessed  of  such  good  common 
sense."  Also,  if  one  were  to  judge  by 
the  manner,  both  firm  and  prudent,  in 
which  he  had  conducted  the  affair  of  the 
7th  Siberian  Corps,  Savinkoff,  who  was 
soon  to  become  Minister  of  War,  deserved 
this  flattering  appreciation.  We  learned 
some  days  later  that  the  question  of  the 
7th  Army  Corps  had  been,  thanks  to  his 
diplomacy,  settled  in  a  satisfactory  manner. 
As  soon  as  the  Government  had  shown 
that  it  was  ready  to  employ  force,  if  neces- 
sary, to  reduce  the  rebels  to  obedience, 
they  had  yielded  at  once  and  abandoned 
their  resistance.  In  order  to  punish  them, 
and  at  the  same  time  to  act  justly  towards 
the  loyal  troops  who  had  refused  to  serve 
again  in  the  same  units  with  the  traitors, 
they  were  immediately  sent  to  the  front 
in  small  groups,  separated  among  various 

units. 

***** 

One  hour  in  the  automobile  brought  us, 
through  Monasterjiski,  to  the  little  hamlet 

168 


Three    Aspects    of    the    Russian    Revolution 

where  we  found  some  thousands  of  infan- 
trymen of  the  7th  Corps  "  who  had  deserted 
towards  the  front."  We  addressed  them 
from  the  doorstep  of  a  little  church,  around 
which  there  were  only  orchards  and  no 
houses,  the  cottages  of  the  villages  being 
very  scattered.  As  there  were  among 
these  Siberians  a  fairly  large  percentage 
of  industrial  labourers,  the  socialistic  note 
was  particularly  accentuated  in  the  mani- 
festations of  the  assembly. 


10.  FROM  BUCZACZ  TO  IEZIERNA. 

The  same  day  we  left  Buczacz  and  the 
7th  Army  Corps  for  the  General  Head- 
quarters of  the  llth  Army,  the  right  wing 
of  which,  the  6th  Corps,  was  encamped 
at  lezierna. 

During  the  motor  run,  as  on  the  two 
previous  days,  we  saw  interesting  traces 
of  the  military  operations  which,  since 
1914,  had  been  taking  place  in  this  district. 
Many  of  the  villages  that  we  passed  through 
were  in  a  large  measure  destroyed  by  bom- 
bardment. Some  had  been  completely 
abandoned  by  their  inhabitants,  and  the 

164 


The    Revolution    in    the    Armiet 

whole  surrounding  country,  left  unculti- 
vated, was  covered  by  veritable  jungles 
of  weeds  and  flowers  of  many  colours. 
We  came  across  the  old  lines  of  trenches 
and  barbed-wire  entanglements.  Shell-holes 
and  little  wooden  crosses  were  alongside 
the  roads,  marking  the  places  where  the 
combats  had  been  most  fierce. 

In  this  undulating  country,  with  little 
vegetation,  it  is  easy  to  take  in  at  one 
glance  the  whole  former  organization  of 
the  land  for  several  kilometres  round. 
On  that  bare  soil,  where  the  zigzag  of 
the  trenches  and  of  the  lines  of  barbed- 
wire  entanglements  are  the  traces  left 
of  the  gigantic  battles  that  had  taken 
place  there,  it  did  not  need  a  very  great 
effort  of  imagination,  thanks  to  the  shell- 
holes  which  revealed  the  artillery  prepara- 
tions and  the  individual  pits  dotted  here 
and  there  that  showed  the  progress  of  the 
attacking  troops,  to  bring  to  our  minds 
the  often  terrible  battles  that  have  marked 
the  flux  and  the  reflux  of  the  enemy  forces 
during  three  years. 

A  particularly  tragic  impression  was 
awaiting  us  some  kilometres  north  of 

103 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

Buczacz.  The  country  was  entirely  deserted, 
with  its  uncultivated  lands  and  the  immense 
plain  without  a  tree,  without  even  a  shrub. 
As  we  reached  a  cross-road  the  Russian 
officer  who  accompanied  us  said  :  "  Look  !  " 
We  only  saw  two  roads,  and  to  the  left 
of  the  principal  one,  a  few  hundred  yards 
away  from  each  other,  two  bits  of  ruined 
walls  rising  out  of  the  brushwood,  all  that 
was  left  of  a  formerly  prosperous  little 
town.  The  walls  indicated  the  sites  of 
two  churches,  and  had  evidently  been  left 
there  as  signposts.  As  far  as  the  houses 
were  concerned,  there  was  not  the  slightest 
trace  of  even  their  ruins.  We  got  out 
of  the  motor-car  to  see  if  we  could  not 
discover  some  trace  of  remains.  We  looked 
in  vain ;  there  was  nothing  anywhere  but 
a  mass  of  weeds,  which  came  up  to  our 
waists,  wild  flowers  of  a  thousand  colours, 
over  which  the  butterflies  were  fluttering. 
From  time  to  time  we  struck  our  feet 
against  some  bricks  or  against  a  little 
eminence  that  perhaps  had  been  a  wall. 
The  only  visible  trace  of  habitation  that 
remained  was  the  wells,  of  which  the  little 
walls  had  been  razed  to  the  ground ;  the 

166 


The    Revolution    in    the    Armies 

holes    seemed    like    big    dark    eyes    gazing 
up  at  the  heavens. 

Assuredly,  we  had  never  seen  such 
diabolically  refined  devastation ;  they  had 
not  been  content  with  demolishing,  but 
the  material  even  had  been  carted  away 
and  thrown  out  on  the  roads  or  in  the 
ditches.  Who  was  it  that  had  done  that  ? 
It  was  neither  the  Russians  nor  the 
Austrians.  The  Germans  had  been  there 
in  1915.  They  pretended  that  francs- 
tireurs  had  fired  upon  their  troops  from 
the  houses,  and  they  had  made  an  ex- 
ample with  the  Griindlichkeit  that  charac- 
terizes all  their  methods.  After  that  we 
understood  why  in  this  part  of  Austria 
the  population,  which  shows  a  certain 
indifference  when  they  are  asked  whether 
they  prefer  the  Russians  or  the  Austrians, 
reply  in  a  very  decisive  manner  when 
questioned  as  to  their  sentiments  concerning 
the  Germans. 


At  Tarnopol,  where  we  stopped  for 
five  minutes,  we  had  the  pleasure  of  dis- 
covering suddenly  among  the  grey  mass 

167 


Three    Aspects    of    the    Russian    Revolution 

of  soldiers  grouped  at  the  corner  of  a 
street  the  red  tassel  that  adorns  the  cap 
of  the  Belgian  gunners.  They  were  the 
blue  police  caps  with  red  tassels  of  the 
soldiers  of  the  Belgian  armoured  cars  that 
have  been  on  the  Russian  front  more  than 
two  years.  We  spoke  to  them  for  a 
moment,  and  then  said  au  revoir,  for  we 
were  to  see  them  that  evening  in  their  camp 
at  lezierna,  where  they  were  to  follow  us. 

11.  OUR  VISIT  TO  THE  GTH  CORPS. 

The  hours  passed  at  lezierna  are  among 
our  happiest  memories.  Was  it  the  delight 
of  having  found  ourselves  this  time  on 
a  real  battle  front,  was  it  the  sympathetic 
cordiality  with  which  General  Nottbeck 
and  his  staff  greeted  us,  or  was  it  the 
presence  of  our  fellow-countrymen  of  the 
Belgian  armoured  cars  that  seemed  to 
take  us  back  in  a  sense  to  our  little  country 
of  the  Yser  ?  All  these  reasons,  and 
something  more — the  extraordinarily  enthu- 
siastic reception  that  our  propaganda  met 
with  from  these  troops  of  the  6th  Army 
Corps. 

168 


The    Revolution    in    the   Armies 

Here  we  felt  much  nearer  the  front  than 
in  the  General  Headquarters  of  the  armies 
or  of  the  groups  of  armies  through  which 
we  had  just  passed.  We  were  made  aware 
of  that  at  once  by  the  material  details 
of  life — by  the  improvised  camping  in 
the  staff-offices  of  the  corps,  by  the 
meals  of  the  picnic  order,  where  good 
appetite  and  gaiety  on  the  part  of  the 
guests  made  up  for  the  frugality  of  the 
dishes ;  but  we  were  made  aware  of  it 
also  by  the  atmosphere  of  comradeship 
that  reigned  among  the  officers,  whose  mess 
reminded  us  of  similar  experiences  in 
Belgium. 

So  we  shared,  for  a  day  at  least,  the 
life  at  the  front.  Before  seven  o'clock  in 
the  morning  a  member  of  our  party  had 
already  tasted  Austrian  fire,  by  flying  in 
a  Russian  observation  biplane  over  the 
enemy  lines.  Before  midday  we  had 
taken  a  long  walk  with  General  Nottbeck 
to  the  first  line  of  trenches,  and  for  the 
first  time  in  several  months  we  heard 
again  the  familiar  music  of  the  shells  and 
bullets. 

But    these    excursions    were    not    under- 

169 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

taken  mainly  in  a  spirit  of  curiosity.  Flying 
over  the  Austro-Turko- German  lines  at  an 
altitude  of  from  800  to  900  metres  along 
the  whole  line  of  the  projected  offen- 
sive, Lieutenant  de  Man  had  been  able  to 
make  very  interesting  observations  of  the 
organization  of  that  part  of  the  front. 
And  our  visit  to  the  trenches  of  the  first 
line  allowed  us  to  take  note  of  many  details 
that  it  was  interesting  to  know  in  order 
to  appreciate  the  conditions  in  which  the 
coming  offensive  would  be  undertaken. 

We  might  sum  up  what  we  saw  as 
follows  : 

We  were  surprised  to  find,  that  the 
trenches  and  positions  on  the  Russian 
front,  or  at  least  on  that  part  of  the  front 
which  we  have  seen  and  which  we  were 
told  was  typical,  resemble  much  more  what 
is  to  be  seen  on  the  western  front  than 
one  would  expect.  The  sector  of  Koniucki- 
Brzezany,  notably,  scarcely  differs  from 
that  of  a  "  calm "  sector  on  the  western 
front,  except  that  in  view  of  the  com- 
parative scarcity  of  artillery  on  a  given 
front  there  are  much  fewer  shell-holes  and 
mine  craters. 

170 


The    Revolution    in    the    Armies 

All  the  same,  the  proportion  of  daily 
losses  per  division  is  nearly  the  same  as 
with  us.  We  were  told  the  number  of 
killed  and  wounded  daily  during  the  recent 
months  for  all  the  divisions  of  the  6th  Corps, 
which  occupied  what  is  supposed  to  be  a 
"  calm "  sector ;  these  totals  are  pretty 
much  the  same  as  those  of  a  Belgian  division 
for  the  same  period.  Their  proportion 
of  losses  by  infantry  fire  is  rather  more 
than  ours. 

It  was  easy  to  observe,  on  the  other 
hand,  that  the  enemy  positions  were  much 
more  strongly  fortified  than  those  of  the 
Russians.  Officers  having  visited  different 
parts  of  the  front,  from  the  Baltic  to 
the  Black  Sea,  told  us  that  it  is  the 
same  thing  everywhere.  It  is  not  that 
the  Russians  have  fewer  men  to  carry 
on  their  trench  construction.  On  the 
contrary,  they  have  just  now  an  enormous 
numerical  superiority.  The  number  of  the 
divisions  on  the  battle  front  on  June  1st 
was  five  to  three,  but  allowing  that  the 
Russian  divisions  have  much  greater 
effectives  than  the  German,  Austrian, 
Turk,  or  Bulgarian  divisions,  the  number 

171 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

of  Russians  on  the  front  is  at  least  double 
that  of  their  enemy.  Let  us  not  forget, 
moreover,  that  for  one  Russian  soldier  at 
the  front  there  are  at  least  four  in  the 
reserve  camps  or  depots. 

For  the  very  reason  that  they  are 
inferior  in  numbers  the  Austro- Germans 
have  made  a  great  effort  by  employing 
probably  second-rate  or  tired  troops  to 
organize  their  front  in  such  a  manner 
as  to  obtain  a  maximum  of  defensive 
power  with  a  minimum  of  men.  In 
the  sector  where  the  offensive  of  the 
1st  of  July  was  being  prepared,  for  in- 
stance, the  enemy  trenches  of  the  first 
line  were  a  system  of  four,  five,  or  six 
parallel  lines,  while  the  Russian  trenches 
opposite  formed  in  general  only  one  or 
two.  Moreover,  the  enemy  trenches  were 
much  deeper  than  the  Russian  trenches. 
In  short,  what  struck  us  most  was  the 
great  abundance  of  barbed-wire  entangle- 
ments that  protected  the  Austrian  positions 
for  a  great  distance  behind  the  first  line. 
In  some  places  where  the  Russian  and 
Austrian  trenches  were  relatively  far  apart 
— from  800  to  1,000  metres  on  the  oppo- 

172 


The    Revolution    in    the    Armies 

site  sides  of  a  valley — the  Austrian  lines 
were  protected  by  four  continuous  and 
parallel  barbed-wire  entanglements,  ground- 
level  entanglements  and  knife-rests  pre- 
dominating. 

The  contrast  was  striking,  not  only 
between  the  Austrian  and  Russian  positions 
which  were  opposite,  but  also  between  the 
present  lines  held  by  the  enemy  and  the 
former  ones  which  have  been  successively 
abandoned,  and  which  one  meets,  in  some 
cases  almost  intact,  between  the  present 
front  and  the  Austro-Russian  frontier. 
The  new  enemy  front  was  infinitely 
stronger  and  better  organized  than  any 
of  their  former  fronts. 

How  can  we  explain  the  relative  weakness 
of  the  Russian  positions  ?  Probably  we 
must  seek  the  chief  motive  in  the  industrial 
inferiority  and  poor  means  of  transport. 
That  is  what  determines  at  least  the 
scarcity  of  concrete  and  barbed  wire  in 
the  Russian  trenches.  But  this  expla- 
nation is  not  sufficient,  for  even  with  the 
available  material — the  stones  on  the  ground 
and  the  wood  of  the  forests  that  they  had 
at  hand — the  Russians  might  have  done 

178 


Three    Aspects    of    the    Russian    Revolution 

better,  dug  deeper  trenches,  fortified  them 
more  strongly,  and  constructed  more 
comfortable  and  stronger  dug-outs.  Prob- 
ably we  must  attribute  this  ineffective 
organization  to  the  native  indolence  and 
the  fatalist  temperament  of  the  Russian. 
There  is,  of  course,  a  theoretical  justifi- 
cation for  this  state  of  affairs.  The  Russian 
generals  told  us  that  if  the  enemy  had 
constructed  much  stronger  positions  it 
was  because  the  poverty  of  his  effectives 
forced  him  to  make  a  stronger  defence, 
while  the  Russians,  knowing,  the  enemy 
too  weak  to  attack  and  themselves  pre- 
paring for  an  offensive,  were  content  with 
parallel  lines  of  trenches  sufficiently  well 
protected  by  barbed-wire  entanglements 
to  prevent  the  enemy  from  coming  over 
freely  during  the  night.  But  it  is  only 
just  to  say  that  those  who  explained  that 
theory  to  us  did  not  seem  to  be  quite 
convinced  themselves  of  its  soundness. 
#  *  *  *  * 

The  Russian  generals  with  whom  we 
spoke  took  into  account  the  fact  that  the 
proposed  offensive  would  have  to  deal 
with  material  difficulties  much  more  con- 

174 


The    Revolution    in    the    Armies 

siderable  than  those  of  the  preceding  years. 
It  would  obviously  be  necessary  to  make 
artillery  preparations  much  more  extensive 
than  those  of  1916  to  destroy  the  first 
line  of  trenches  and  the  barbed-wire  en- 
tanglements before  sending  the  infantry 
to  the  attack.  They  understood  that 
necessity  all  the  better  since  the  soldiers 
who  had  taken  part  in  the  offensive  of 
1916  had  never  forgotten  what  it  cost 
them  to  advance  before  the  Austrian 
barbed-wire  entanglements  had  been  com- 
pletely destroyed.  General  Nottbeck  said 
to  us :  "  This  time  the  Russian  infantry, 
before  receiving  the  order  to  attack, 
must  be  freed  from  the  least  appre- 
hension of  finding  the  enemy  barbed  wire 
insufficiently  demolished.  When  they  ask 
us  after  the  first  day's  bombardment  of 
the  enemy  front  if  the  moment  for  attack 
has  come,  we  shall  simply  have  to  tell 
them  to  wait,  and  give  them  during  the 
second  day  the  sight  of  our  bombardment 
reducing  the  enemy  defences  to  naught. 
Then  on  the  evening  of  the  second  day 
we  shall  tell  them  once  more  to  wait,  and 
it  will  only  be  after  the  third  day's  artillery 

175 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

preparation,  when  they  begin  to  get  irri- 
tated by  such  a  waste  of  shells,  that  we 
shall  give  the  word  :  Forward  !  " 

The  6th  Army  Corps  disposed  for  its 
artillery  preparation  on  the  part  of 
the  enemy's  line  that  it  was  going  to 
attack  of  about  fifty  rounds  per  metre 
of  frontage.  In  short,  in  spite  of  the 
increased  difficulties,  the  material  con- 
ditions of  the  offensive  seemed  rather 
favourable  to  our  Allies. 

The  chief  problem  seemed  to  be  how 
best  to  deal  with  the  moral  of  the  troops. 
There  were  two  aspects.  The  first  ques- 
tion that  we  asked  ourselves  was  this : 
In  spite  of  the  Leninist  and  German  propa- 
ganda, in  spite  of  the  deceptive  illusions 
aroused  regarding  the  coming  of  the 
Messiah  of  Stockholm,  had  the  Russian 
troops  kept  their  will  to  fight  sufficiently 
well  to  obey  the  order  to  attack  ?  And 
the  second :  Supposing  that  the  will  to 
fight  still  existed,  would  the  discipline 
of  the  army,  shaken  by  revolution,  be 
sufficiently  strong  for  operations  to  take 
place  that  would  not  degenerate  into 
disorder,  confusion,  and  disaster  ? 

176 


The    Revolution   in    the    Armies 

In  short,  there  were  two  questions  to 
be  dealt  with,  not  wholly  independent  of 
each  other,  certainly,  but  distinct :  the 
moral  and  the  discipline. 


12.  THE  MORAL  OF  THE  TROOPS. 

Of  the  moral  of  the  troops  we  received 
at  the  6th  Army  Corps,  the  7th,  and  later 
at  the  Russian  Army  in  Roumania,  the  very 
best  impression. 

At  the  three  big  meetings  when  we 
had  addressed  the  troops  of  the  6th  Army 
Corps  and  of  the  llth  Army — at  Wymy- 
slovka,  at  lezierna,  and  at  Tarnopol — the 
men  were  most  enthusiastic. 

The  meeting  at  Wymyslovka  had  this 
peculiarity  :  it  was  held  in  a  little  Ruthu- 
anian  village,  immediately  behind  the 
trenches.  All  the  roads  leading  to  the 
village  were  within  sight  of  the  enemy. 
Thus  the  troops  came  to  the  meeting- 
place  in  small  detachments,  and  our  auto- 
mobiles, which  raised  clouds  of  dust,  had 
to  keep  a  certain  distance  from  one  another, 
so  as  not  to  arouse  the  suspicion  of  the 
Austrian  observers.  In  spite  of  that,  some 

177  M 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

shrapnel  did  burst  after  we  had  passed, 
and  wounded  a  soldier  on  the  road  behind 
us.  But  the  meeting,  at  which  four 
thousand  troops  were  present,  took  place 
without  any  disagreeable  interruptions  in 
an  orchard  out  of  sight  of  the  enemy. 
What  struck  us  most  there  was  to  observe 
among  the  audience  numerous  soldiers 
taking  down  notes ;  they  were  the  delegates 
from  Soviets  of  distant  units,  who  were 
thus  going  to  let  their  comrades  know 
what  we  had  said. 

Through  delivering  many  speeches  to 
these  soldier  audiences  we  had  been  able 
to  make  certain  observations  on  the 
national  psychology,  and  to  find  out  which 
arguments  were  suitable  and  which  were 
not,  and  the  best  method  of  presenting 
them.  The  interpreter's  method  of  trans- 
lating sentence  by  sentence  gave  us  time 
to  observe  our  audiences  at  our  leisure, 
while  the  preceding  sentence  was  being 
translated  into  Russian.  The  general  con- 
clusion to  which  we  came  was  that  we  had 
to  do  with  more  naive  and  simple  audiences 
than  the  average  popular  audience  of  the 
West,  but  with  none  the  less  an  extremely 

178 


The    Revolution    in    the    Armies 

quick  intelligence,  a  ready  appreciation  of 
concrete  facts,  and  an  astonishing  eager- 
ness to  learn  something  new.  The  infantry 
troops  that  we  were  addressing  were  all 
peasants,  for  the  most  part  illiterate. 
Their  character  had  the  same  mixture  of 
naivete  and  cunning  that  characterizes  the 
peasant  everywhere,  but  in  a  different 
proportion :  rather  more  naivete  and  less 
cunning.  Combined  with  that,  amazing 
good  sense  and  a  very  great  aptitude  for 
following  no  matter  what  argument  on 
condition  that  it  be  presented  simply  and 
in  a  concrete  form. 

A  delightful  example  of  this  peasant 
simplicity,  with  the  touch  of  cunning  which 
frequently  counterbalances  it,  was  given 
us  after  the  meeting  at  lezierna  by  a 
Russian  officer.  Mixing  among  the  soldiers, 
he  had  listened  to  the  commentaries  of 
two  of  them  during  my  speech.  I  stopped 
after  each  sentence  to  give  our  interpreter 
time  to  translate.  The  interpreter  was  a 
Russian  Socialist  who  had  enlisted  in  the 
French  army,  and  there  had  won  his  Lieu- 
tenant's stripes,  the  Legion  of  Honour, 
and  the  Croix  de  Guerre.  His  dignity,  the 

179 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

beauty  of  his  fine  light-blue  uniform,  with 
its  row  of  decorations  and  stripes,  evidently 
made  a  great  impression  on  these  two 
Russian  soldiers,  for  the  following  dialogue 
took  place  : 

"  Who  is  that  big  officer  in  blue  ?  Is 
that  not  the  Minister's  staff  officer  ?  " 

"  Not  at  all.  Don't  you  know  ?  That 
is  the  King  of  the  Belgians." 

"  Well  then,  the  King  of  the  Belgians 
is  simply  a  fool.  He  does  nothing  but 
repeat  what  his  Minister  says." 

After  that  will  they  tell  us  that  in  order 
to  govern  the  Russian  people  it  is  neces- 
sary to  have  the  prestige  of  a  constitutional 
monarchy  ? 

To  adapt  our  language  to  the  intelligence 
of  our  public,  we  had  ended  by  selecting 
different  metaphors  that  seemed  to  pro- 
duce the  best  impression.  Here  are  a  few 
examples : 

"  Tyranny  in  Europe  is  like  a  monster 
that  we  read  of  in  old  legends  that 
had  three  heads.  Every  time  that  a  brave 
knight  destroyed  one,  another  head  grew 
up.  To  kill  the  monster  it  was  neces- 
sary to  destroy  the  three  heads  at  once. 

180 


The    Revolution   in    the   Armies 

Well,  the  monster  of  European  despotism 
has  three  heads.  They  are  called  Romanoff, 
Hohenzollern,  and  Habsburg.  They  are 
those  of  the  Czar  at  Petrograd,  the  Czar 
at  Berlin,  and  the  Czar  at  Vienna.  The 
Russian  people  have  destroyed  one  of  the 
three  heads.  But  beware.  It  will  grow 
again  if  they  do  not  cut  off  the  other  two 
also." 

And  then  : 

"  The  Germans  who  try  to  fraternize 
with  you  are  like  the  wolf  that  devoured 
little  Red  Riding  Hood.  The  wolf,  to 
deceive  little  Red  Riding  Hood,  put  on 
the  nightcap  and  the  spectacles  of  the 
grandmother.  '  Why  have  you  such  large 
eyes  ? '  asked  little  Red  Riding  Hood. 
'  The  better  to  see  you  with,  my  child,' 
said  the  wolf.  '  Why  have  you  such  large 
ears,  grandmother  ?  '  l  The  better  to  hear 
you  with.'  *  Why  have  you  such  long 
teeth,  grandmother  ?  '  '  The  better  to  eat 
you  with,  my  child.'  And  the  wolf  devoured 
the  too  trustful  child.  And  so  beware  of 
the  German  wolf  1  While  he  is  trying  to 
deceive  you  with  fine  words,  he  is  getting 
ready  to  devour  you." 

181 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

Or  else  the  following  metaphor,  suggested 
by  General  Nottbeck  : 

"  The  Russian  people,  having  made  its 
Revolution,  is  like  a  bird  that  has  been 
imprisoned  too  long,  and  whose  cage  has 
just  been  opened.  Blinded  by  the  light, 
unaccustomed  to  flying,  he  flaps  his  wings 
and  flies  to  the  right  or  to  the  left,  stupidly 
hitting  his  beak  against  the  windows,  and 
hurting  his  wings  against  all  obstacles. 
It  would  seem  as  if  he  must  fall  exhausted, 
and  be  picked  up  and  put  back  into  his 
cage,  but  suddenly  he  sees  the  light  through 
a  wide-open  window,  and  this  time  he  flies 
strong  and  straight  before  him  to  the  open 
air,  leaving  his  prison  for  ever  behind 
him.  .  .  ." 

And  then  as  a  peroration  : — 

"  Pacifist  agitators  will  tell  you  that  the 
Germans  and  the  Austrians  ask  nothing 
better  than  a  revolution,  and  the  right  to 
follow  the  red  flag,  and  free  themselves 
from  the  yoke  of  their  Czars.  Well,  they 
will  soon  be  able  to  prove  the  truth  of 
their  words.  When  you  go  over  the  top 
of  your  trenches,  carrying  before  you  the 
red  standard  of  liberty,  with  the  device  : 

182 


The    Revolution    in    the    Armies 

1  No  Annexations  !  No  contributions  of 
war  !  The  right  for  all  nations  to  dispose 
of  themselves  !  '  If  they  are  sincere,  they 
will  follow  your  standard  and  march  with 
you  to  Berlin  and  Vienna  to  dethrone  the 
Emperor  and  establish  their  liberty.  But 
should  they  fire  on  you,  and  insult  the  red 
flag,  will  you  let  them  do  so  ?  No,  it 
is  you  yourself  then  who  will  go  and 
plant  it  in  their  cities,  bringing  liberty 
to  your  enemies  on  the  point  of  your 
bayonets  !  " 

***** 

Such  words  always  aroused  a  storm  of 
applause.  At  the  meeting  at  lezierna, 
the  enthusiasm  was  beyond  all  bounds ; 
even  General  Nottbeck  was  borne  shoulder- 
high  in  triumph  and  tossed  in  the  air  in 
the  Russian  fashion.  We  were  frequently 
submitted  to  this  treatment  ourselves, 
which  is,  it  seems,  the  orthodox  method 
of  showing  enthusiasm.  It  consists  of 
seizing  the  object,  or  rather  the  victim,  of 
their  enthusiasm  in  twenty  pairs  of  strong 
arms,  which,  with  a  rythmical  movement 
broken  by  wild  cries,  fling  him  into  the 
air  as  high  as  possible,  as  if  he  were  shot 

188 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

from  a  catapult.  Then  the  muscles  relax 
and  the  arms  form  as  it  were  a  mattress, 
into  which  the  victim  falls,  only  to  be 
flung  up  in  the  air  again  immediately,  and 
so  on.  General  Nottbeck  submitted  to 
this  treatment  with  the  stoicism  of  a  real 
soldier,  his  body  stiff,  his  face  immovable, 
his  hand  at  the  salute.  I  am  convinced 
that  we  Belgians,  unaccustomed  to  this 
type  of  enthusiasm,  made  but  a  piteous 
figure  the  first  time  we  underwent  it.  The 
first  day  of  our  arrival  in  Petrograd  I  was 
the  victim  of  the  enthusiasm  of  the  sailors 
of  the  Black  Sea,  and  my  colleagues  told 
me  after  all  that  was  seen  after  the  first 
leap  in  the  air  was  a  collar  and  two  cuffs 
waving  wildly,  and  a  heap  of  clothes,  pre- 
sumably containing  a  man.  Afterwards  we 
got  on  better,  for  one  becomes  accustomed 
to  everything,  even  to  Russian  enthusiasm. 
This  enthusiasm,  moreover,  sometimes 
takes  a  less  disconcerting  form.  We  had 
a  memorable  example  at  a  meeting  at 
lezierna.  It  was  a  wonderful  scene. 
It  was  at  dusk  on  these  wide  Galician 
Steppes,  night  was  falling  when  the  meeting 
ended.  The  applause  continued  until  our 

184 


The    Revolution   in    the    Armies 

motor-car,  to  which  the  strong  shoulders  of 
the  soldiers  had  borne  us,  had  left  the 
meeting-place  to  return  across  country  to 
the  General  Headquarters. 

Suddenly  a  group  of  Cossacks,  who  had 
been  listening  at  a  little  distance  from  the 
crowd,  mounted  on  their  horses,  put  them 
to  the  gallop,  and  executed  round  our 
motor-car  a  kind  of  fantastic  dance,  only 
stopping  when  their  horses  gave  out.  One 
of  them  went  on  after  the  others,  and  for 
long  we  could  see  his  silhouette,  like  some 
centaur  wheeling  round  us  in  the  dusk 
uttering  hoarse  shouts. 

Once  more  we  endeavoured,  after  such 
memorable  scenes,  not  to  let  ourselves  be 
carried  away  by  the  impression  of  the 
moment,  and  to  draw  only  prudent  con- 
clusions from  these  manifestations,  but 
when  we  heard  the  men,  as  the  officers  of 
the  Belgian  armoured  car  whom  General 
Nottbeck  had  tactfully  invited  to  meet  us 
at  dinner  that  evening,  affirm  that  as  far 
as  they  knew,  and  speaking  at  least  for 
the  7th  Army  Corps,  the  moral  of  the  men 
had  never  been  better  since  the  Russian 
Revolution,  we  were  compelled  to  believe 

185 


Three    Aspects    of    the    Russian    Revolution 

them.  Their  opinion,  corroborated  by  that 
of  others,  with  whom  we  talked,  was  un- 
doubtedly of  considerable  value,  since  they 
had  been  fighting  for  two  years  with  the 
Russian  troops  in  Galicia. 

Moreover,  General  Nottbeck  himself,  who 
up  till  then  had  preserved  a  phlegmatic 
calm  that  justified  his  British  origin,  yielded 
finally  to  the  excitement  of  these  enthu- 
siastic scenes,  and  when  we  bade  him  farewell 
and  were  climbing  into  the  automobile 
which  was  to  take  us  to  Czernowitz,  it 
was  with  visible  emotion  that  he  said  to 
us  in  shaking  hands,  "  Now,  I  have  confi- 
dence." 

*  *  *  *  * 

But  that  such  a  confidence  be  justi- 
fied, we  must  look  for  something  more 
than  enthusiasm,  more  than  the  applause 
of  audiences,  three  weeks  before  the  attack. 
The  hierarchical  organization  of  the  army 
is  necessary,  its  moral  cohesion,  the  spirit 
of  subordination  and  of  responsibility  must 
be  such  that  this  enthusiasm  runs  no  risk 
of  being  wasted  or  transformed  into  panic 
at  the  first  check.  In  short,  there  must 
be  a  certain  minimum  of  discipline,  and 

186 


The    Revolution    in    the    Armies 

that  is  the  second  part  of  the  problem  of 
the  moral  reconstruction  of  the  Russian 
front.  It  is,  we  must  admit,  the  more 
delicate  and  difficult,  and  it  is,  moreover, 
not  easy  for  observers,  more  or  less  super- 
ficial, to  give  a  definite  opinion. 

We  need  not  deny  that  the  first  effect  of 
Revolution  on  the  army  was  purely  destruc- 
tive. The  Russian  armies  were  certainly 
reduced  even  before  the  Revolution  to 
lamentable  impotence,  because  of  the  dis- 
organization and  the  demoralization  of  the 
nation,  for  which  the  Czar's  rule  was  to 
blame,  and  which  was,  moreover,  the  cause 
of  its  downfall.  In  this  point  of  view  the 
Revolution  only  brought  to  light  a  deplor- 
able situation,  which,  had  it  been  prolonged, 
would  have  led  Russia  inevitably  to  a 
separate  peace. 

But  at  least  the  army  held  together.  It 
kept  its  outward  appearance,  thanks  to  the 
discipline,  to  the  blind  obedience  that 
reigned  in  it.  The  Revolution  put  an  end 
to  this  discipline  completely,  upsetting  the 
hierarchy  on  which  it  was  based.  Now  it 
is  quite  true  that  the  Russian  army  may 
have  gained  enormously  by  replacing  this 

187 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

form  of  hierarchy,  which  had  become  un- 
bearable, by  a  new  hierarchy  conforming 
to  democratic  ideas,  but  it  is  equally  certain 
that  the  fighting  power  of  an  army  without 
any  sort  of  discipline  is  inferior  to  that  of 
a  disciplined  army,  no  matter  how  imperfect 
that  discipline  may  be. 

The  Russian  army  is  a  proof  of  this. 
Some  days  after  the  Revolution  the  Ger- 
mans, with  the  greatest  ease,  cut  in  pieces, 
on  Stokhod,  several  Russian  regiments, 
whose  Soviet  during  the  attack  were  dis- 
cussing what  steps  it  were  best  to  take. 
While  Bolschewiki  and  Menschewiki  were 
making  speeches  and  trying  to  come  to 
an  agreement,  or  not  to  come  to  an  agree- 
ment, on  the  principles  of  strategy  and 
revolutionary  tactics,  the  Germans  were 
massacring  thousands  of  men  and  striking 
panic  among  the  survivors. 

It  seems  certain  that  the  first  idea  of 
the  Revolution  was  to  replace  completely 
this  former  "  autocratic  "  rule  of  the  officers 
by  a  new  so-called  "  democratic "  rule, 
that  of  the  Soviets.  During  the  first 
week  of  the  revolutionary  era,  the  Soviets 
that  had  been  formed  in  the  smallest  units, 

X88 


The    Revolution    in    the    Armies 

while  leaving  the  officers  nominally  in 
power,  claimed  and  exercised  in  reality  the 
power  which  had  belonged  to  them. 

To  realize  that  such  a  state  of  things 
could  not  last,  we  need  not  go  very  deeply 
into  the  question.  We  have  but  to  ask 
ourselves  how  such  quasi-parliamentary 
institutions  as  the  Soviets  could  be  usefully 
incorporated  in  the  organization  of  a  modern 
army.  The  system  adopted  left  all  respon- 
sibility to  the  officers,  while  giving  all  the 
power  to  irresponsible  assemblies,  who  even 
claimed  the  direction  of  strategic  operation, 
or,  to  be  more  exact,  non- operations.  This 
system  was  given  a  trial,  negative,  it  must 
be  admitted,  in  the  domain  of  military  tactics 
at  Stokhod,  and  in  the  domain  of  the  internal 
discipline  of  the  units  at  the  front.  But 
little  by  little  the  force  of  facts  compelled 
them  to  admit  that  the  power  of  the  Soviets 
must  be  limited,  in  a  large  measure  the 
authority  of  the  officers  re-established. 

We  can  see  now  that  the  former  hier- 
archy had  simply  suffered  a  partial  eclipse. 
At  first  it  was  a  total  eclipse,  but  that  did 
not  last.  The  partial  eclipse  will  probably 
last.  The  present  regime  is  a  co-existence, 

189 


Three    Aspects    of    the    Russian    Revolution 

imperfectly  organized  as  yet  and  full 
of  illogisms]  of  the  two  methods  of  dis- 
cipline,] the  former  hierarchy  and  that  of 

the  Soviet. 

t 

Indeed,  there  is  one  strong  factor  that 
we  must  take  into  account  in  the  Russian 
army.  It  is  habit,  custom  handed  down  by 
tradition  and  endorsed  by  common  sense. 

In  Petrograd  we  were  given  a  propos  of 
this  a  typical  instance.  The  rebel  sailors 
of  Kronstadt  had  massacred  many  of  their 
officers,  a  certain  number  of  whom  were 
brutes,  deserving  no  better  fate;  they  then 
threw  the  survivors  into  prison.  They 
announced  that  the  Germans  were  their 
brothers.  They  declared  that  they  would 
only  obey  those  of  their  own  class,  whom 
they  had  chosen  freely.  Now  these  same 
sailors  continued  all  the  same  their  service 
of  guarding  the  coast,  just  as  before.  They 
would  have  been,  no  doubt,  rather  em- 
barrassed had  the  necessity  arisen  to  attack 
a  German  torpedo  boat,  but  as  for  the 
daily  routine  of  service  they  were  simply 
obeying  an  illogical  but  tyrannical  habit. 

This  same  force  of  moral  inertia  has 
made  itself  felt  in  the  army. 

190 


The    Revolution    in    the    Armies 

The  most  noticeable  sign  lies  in  the 
continued  signs  of  outward  respect. 

In  the  rear,  it  is  true,  no  soldier  salutes 
an  officer.  This  is  one  of  the  first  inno- 
vations of  the  Revolution.  The  right 
not  to  salute,  a  reform  which  probably 
was  welcomed  with  equal  joy  by  officers 
as  by  men,  for  they  can  scarcely  have 
relished  the  necessity  in  going  through  the 
streets  of  Petrograd  or  Moscow,  crowded 
with  troops,  of  constantly  returning  the 
salute.  Be  that  as  it  may,  in  the  rear 
the  soldiers  make  it  a  point  of  honour  not 
to  salute  any  officer.  On  the  front,  on 
the  contrary,  we  did  not  come  across  one 
soldier  who  did  not  salute  his  officer.  Such 
a  situation  is  all  the  more  striking  because 
the  famous  decree  of  June,  of  the  minister 
Kerensky,  on  the  "  Rights  of  Soldiers," 
strange  and  provisional  mixture  of  the 
hierarchical  tradition  and  democratic  ideal- 
ism, proclaims  that  saluting  an  officer  is  not 
an  act  of  duty,  but  a  mere  act  of  voluntary 
courtesy. 

*  *  *  *  * 

We  met  few  officers  who  did  not  tell  us 
that,  in  spite  of  the  relaxation  of  former 

191 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

discipline,  the  daily  routine  was  carried  on 
almost  as  well  as  under  the  Czarist  regime. 
That  is  partly  owing  to  the  Soviets  and 
partly  in  spite  of  them.  In  spite  of  the 
Soviets,  because  at  the  beginning  of  the 
revolutionary  era  they  systematically 
sapped  the  prestige  of  the  recognized  au- 
thorities of  the  army,  which  constitute, 
after  all,  the  sole  responsible  authority 
competent  to  deal  with  all  questions  of 
military  tactics,  properly  so  called. 

The  Soviets,  in  a  whole  series  of  ques- 
tions of  internal  discipline,  have  obtained 
from  the  soldier  better  obedience  by  re- 
placing the  former  slavish  obedience  by  a 
new  and  more  spontaneous  discipline  with 
a  more  direct  bearing  on  the  needs  and 
views  of  the  men. 

They  have  had  a  weakening  influence 
when  they  introduced  into  the  conduct  of 
military  operations  and  the  general  direc- 
tion of  the  army,  an  element  of  parlia- 
mentary deliberation,  political  discussion 
being  incompatible  with  the  principles 
imposed  by  the  necessities  of  war,  which 
demand  unity  of  command,  centralization 
of  responsibilities,  and  rapid  decisions. 

192 


The    Revolution    in    the    Armies 

But  they  have  had  and  continue  to  have 
a  good  effect  when  they  limit  their  power 
to  what  seems  rightly  their  moral  domain, 
the  participation  in  disciplinary  justice  and 
the  control  of  the  administration  of  units. 

At  the  time  of  writing  no  officer  had 
the  right  to  punish  a  soldier.  For  that  the 
decision  of  the  Soviet,  composed  of  the 
commandant  of  the  unit  and  three  dele- 
gates chosen  by  the  subalterns  and  soldiers, 
was  necessary. 

We  can  see  at  a  glance  that  this  organ- 
ization is  still,  in  its  present  form,  both 
imperfect  and  provisional. 

But  it  is  all  the  more  interesting  to  hear 
such  officers  as  we  have  questioned  on  the 
matter,  even  those  who  by  their  military 
training  might  be  less  disposed  to  approve 
of  democratic  Utopianism,  proclaiming  that 
the  Soviets  have  already  rendered  them 
great  service  from  a  disciplinary  point  of 
view.  We  were  given  several  examples, 
which  showed  that  very  often  the  Soviets 
of  units,  for  infringement  of  discipline, 
inflicted  more  severe  punishments  than  those 
meted  out  by  the  "  autocratic "  leaders 
of  other  days.  Let  us  add.  that  these 

198  N 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

punishments  inflicted  on  the  soldiers  by 
their  own  comrades,  having  a  greater  moral 
effect,  discipline  has  generally  improved. 

In  what  concerns  internal  administra- 
tion, all  the  officers  whom  we  questioned, 
especially  Generals  Broussiloff,  Korniloff,  and 
Nottbeck,  did  not  hide  their  opinions  that 
the  authority  of  the  Soviets,  especially  since 
it  was  limited  to  certain  questions,  con- 
stituted in  their  eyes  a  real  advance  on 
the  old  discipline.  The  domain  in  which 
their  influence  is  most  beneficial  is  the 
control  of  internal  administration  of  units, 
participation  in  the  control  of  the  Com- 
missariat, in  the  organizing  of  reliefs,  sentry 
duty,  recreation,  and  in  the  political  edu- 
cation of  the  soldiers. 

In  short,  it  seems  that  this  institution, 
after  having  been,  during  the  first  days  of 
the  Revolution,  an  instrument  of  dissolution 
of  established  authority,  has  gradually 
modified  its  character,  tacitly  abdicated 
from  certain  of  its  extreme  ambitions,  and 
may  be  in  a  fair  way  not  to  take  the  place 
of  the  hierarchical  discipline,  but  by  con- 
trolling it  and  collaborating  with  it,  to 
become  a  useful  organ  for  the  maintenance 

194 


The    Revolution    in    the    Armies 

of    discipline,    and    the    reorganization    of 
the  army. 

*  *  *  *  « 

This  evolution  is,  of  course,  only  in  its 
infancy.  The  stage  of  maturity  at  which 
it  has  arrived  apparently  varies  greatly  in 
different  parts  of  the  Russian  army.  At 
the  time  of  our  mission  in  Russia  it  presented 
a  strange  spectacle  of  a  provisional  amalgam 
full  of  surprises  and  contradictions,  a  mix- 
ture of  the  old  iron  discipline  and  the 
democratic  and  fraternal  customs  of  the 
new  regime. 

We  had  an  amazing  example  of  the 
curious  contrast  that  this  transition  offers 
during  our  last  visit  to  the  Russian  troops 
at  the  front.  We  had  reached  Roumania, 
after  having  said  farewell  to  the  6th  Army 
Corps  in  an  open-air  meeting  at  Tarnapol, 
and  visited  at  Czernowitz  General  Korniloff, 
Commandant  of  the  8th  Army.  After  two 
days  spent  with  the  Roumanian  army  we 
saw  a  review  on  the  front  at  Tereth  of  two 
regiments  of  Russian  infantry,  the  57th 
and  the  59th,  with  General  Tcherbatcheff 
in  command. 

The  review  had  taken  place  with  a 
195 


Three    Aspects    of    the    Russian    Revolution 

correct  discipline  that  would  have  made 
the  Potsdam  guard  or  the  guard  of  Buck- 
ingham Palace  green  with  envy.  French- 
men who  were  present,  and  who  had  seen 
this  military  ceremony  at  Tsarskoi'e  Selo, 
under  the  former  regime,  told  us  that  this 
review  was  exactly  like  these  used  to  be. 
The  troops  marched  in  companies  in  im- 
peccable lines,  singing  their  battle  songs. 
These  choruses,  set  for  several  voices,  with 
each  rank  singing  its  part  in  the  strong, 
beautiful  voices  peculiar  to  the  Russians, 
keep  admirable  time  with  their  march. 
After  the  march  past  the  men  presented 
arms,  keeping  their  orderly  lines  so  exactly 
that  the  men  in  the  second  rank  had  the 
point  of  their  bayonets  just  at  the  neck 
of  the  leaders  of  the  file. 

To  listen  to  our  speech,  the  troops  then 
formed  a  square  with  remarkable  rapidity, 
and  during  the  whole  meeting  remained 
at  attention,  without  moving  a  rifle,  with- 
out a  man  stirring.  But  immediately  the 
parade  was  over,  when  we  were  to  have  a 
conference  with  the  Soviets  of  the  two 
regiments,  the  military  authorities  who 
accompanied  us — the  Chief  of  the  Rou- 

196 


The    Revolution   in    the    Armies 

manian  General  Staff,  General  Tcherbatcheff, 
General  Berthelot,  and  General  Cumont, 
Chief  of  the  Belgian  military  mission  in 
Roumania — went  away,  to  give  us  full 
liberty  to  discuss  with  the  officers  and  the 
soldier  delegates  who,  mixing  together  fra- 
ternally, surrounded  us.  We  replied  to 
their  questions,  and  finally  they  gave  a 
touching  demonstration  of  their  respect 
and  enthusiasm  for  Belgium.  Then  we 
saw  the  officers  and  soldiers,  who  had  just 
half  an  hour  before  given  us  so  admirable 
an  example  of  discipline,  embrace  each 
other  cordially.  A  Russian  soldier,  whose 
speech  in  French — he  had  formerly  been 
a  student  at  Nancy — had  greatly  moved 
Generals  Tcherbatcheff,  Berthelot,  and 
Cumont,  who  had  now  returned  and  mingled 
with  the  crowd,  was  embraced  by  the 
three  Generals,  while  the  Colonel  of  the 
57th  Regiment,  a  fine  old  man,  who  had 
been  wounded  four  times,  was  borne  aloft 
in  triumph  by  the  soldiers.  Finally  the 
Generals  present — those  same  Generals  who 
had  no  longer  the  right  to  put  a  man  in 
cells  without  the  intervention  of  the  police 
and  the  Soviets — were  borne  in  triumph 

197 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

among  cries  of  **  Long  live  Russian 
Liberty  !  "  "  Long  live  Belgium  !  " 
"  Long  live  Socialism  !  "  "  Long  live  the 
International !  " 

Then  what  General  Nottbeck  had  said 
several  days  before  recurred  to  our  minds  : 
"  To-day,  you  see,  Generals  have  much 
harder  work  than  formerly ;  then  they  only 
gave  orders,  now  they  must  give  speeches. 
They  know  that  their  men  will  only  march 
if  their  leaders  can  convince  them  of  the 
necessity.  I  think  men  so  convinced 
fight  better  than  those  who  merely  obeyed 
orders  which  they  did  not  understand.  But 
shall  we  succeed  this  time  in  convincing 
them  ?  That  is  the  whole  question.  After 
all  it  is  on  us,  the  leaders,  that  the  answer 
depends." 


198 


CHAPTER  IV 

THE  POLITICAL  SITUATION 

WE  had  a  threefold  aim  in  going  to 
Russia.  In  the  first  place  to  join 
our  efforts  to  those  of  Thomas,  Henderson, 
and  other  Socialists  from  the  Allied  coun- 
tries, against  the  tendency  which  seemed 
to  exist  in  certain  circles  in  favour  of  either 
a  separate  peace  or  of  bringing  pressure 
to  bear  on  the  Allies  to  obtain  peace  at 
any  price.  In  the  second  place,  to  bring 
before  our  Russian  comrades  the  case  of 
Belgium  and  the  situation  of  the  Belgian 
workmen,  to  appeal  to  their  solidarity 
in  this  struggle  that  we  were  carrying  on 
against  German  Imperialism.  Lastly,  to 
take  up  a  definite  attitude  on  the  subject 
of  the  proposed  Conference,  or,  more  cor- 
rectly, the  Conferences  at  Stockholm. 

199 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian   Revolution 

1.  THE  SEPARATE  PEACE. 

We  have  already  stated  that  no  one  in 
Russia  seemed  to  consider  a  separate 
peace  seriously.  The  Extremists  them- 
selves recognized  that  if  Russia  deserted 
the  Allied  cause  she  would  be  constrained 
to  take  up  arms  against  them  with  Germany, 
in  which  conditions  their  desire  for  peace 
would  not  be  gratified.  But  we  were 
bound  to  observe,  on  the  other  hand, 
that  German  propaganda  was  active,  that 
many  Socialists  were  ultra-Pacifists,  that 
after  three  years  of  war  there  is  a  consider- 
able feeling  of  war  weariness  among  a 
large  part  of  the  population.  Zimmerwald's 
theories  have  still,  even  now,  a  considerable 
influence  on  the  Soviet,  and  even  on  certain 
members  of  the  Provisional  Government, 
who  were,  before  accepting  their  present 
responsibilities,  militant  Zimmerwaldiens. 

Still,  during  our  short  stay  in  Russia, 
it  was  possible  already  to  notice  the  change 
which  has  since  become  more  apparent  in 
the  feeling  of  the  masses  as  among  their 
Socialist  leaders. 

In  the  early  days  of  the  Revolution, 
200 


The    Political   Situation 

which  took  place  almost  entirely  in  the 
capital,  it  was  the  Soviet  of  Petrograd 
alone  that  spoke  and  decided  in  the  name 
of  the  workmen  and  soldiers  of  the  whole 
country.  The  Extremists  are  represented 
there  in  a  minority,  but  in  an  aggressive 
and  determined  minority.  The  Moderates 
are  especially  moderate  when  it  is  a  ques- 
tion of  an  energetic  carrying  on  of  the 
war.  There  are,  in  this  revolutionary 
commune,  many  foreigners,  Cosmopolitans, 
Jews  especially,  hiding  under  a  borrowed 
name  their  German  origin,  but  who  cannot 
regard  as  their  fatherland  a  country  where 
they  have  scarcely  known  anything  but 
persecution. 

But  soon  the  Soviet  of  Petrograd  took 
second  place.  It  gradually  became  a 
local  assembly,  very  influential,  certainly, 
but  whose  influence  was  henceforth  limited. 
The  Congress  of  Peasants  met.  The  Con- 
gress of  the  Soviets  of  all  Russia  assembled 
in  its  turn.  The  feeling  there  is  quite 
different.  Provincial  elements  bring  to  it 
a  breath  of  national  enthusiasm.  They  are 
longing  for  peace,  certainly,  for  the  country 
is  war  weary,  and  peasants  and  soldiers 

201 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

demand  that  they  may  have  as  soon  as 
possible  the  right  to  taste  the  fruits  of 
their  Revolution,  but  they  will  not  at  any 
price  accept  a  separate  peace  and  a  German 
peace. 

On  the  other  hand,  among  the  leaders, 
the  Revolution  is  taking  place  still  more 
rapidly.  Kerensky  in  his  propaganda 
unites  indissolubly  the  Revolution  with 
national  defence.  Skobekeff  and  Tscher- 
noff,  in  unofficial  conversations,  protested 
against  any  idea  of  a  premature  peace. 
Amongst  the  more  advanced  of  the  Cadets 
and  the  more  political  of  the  Socialists 
there  is  an  obvious  desire  for  closer  union. 

Tseretelli  is,  perhaps,  in  young  Russia, 
the  one  who  remains  most  faithful  to 
Zimmerwaldian  theories,  and  it  is  Tsere- 
telli who,  with  Skobeleff,  demands  the 
expulsion  of  Grimm,  the  President  of 
Zimmerwald.  It  is  he  who  first  asked 
that  strong  measures  be  taken,  when,  on 
June  2nd,  the  Leninists  announced  their 
intention  of  making  an  armed  manifes- 
tation in  the  streets  of  Petrograd,  and  it 
was  with  his  support  that  Kerensky  made 
his  great  effort  to  renew  in  the  Russian 

202 


The    Political    Situation 

army  the  will  to  carry  through  the  great 
offensive. 

In  short,  we  believe  we  are  justified  in 
saying  that  among  the  Socialists,  the  great 
majority  of  whom  have  broken  with  the 
Extremists,  a  revolution  is  taking  place, 
very  like  that  which  took  place  with  Presi- 
dent Wilson.  Like  the  latter,  they  wish 
a  peace  "  without  victory,"  that  is  to  say, 
in  reality  without  conquests.  But  they 
wished,  and  they  still  wish,  a  just  and 
durable  peace.  Now,  in  face  of  the  attitude 
of  the  Central  Powers,  they  have  been 
forced  to  admit  that  the  road  to  this  peace 
is  necessarily  by  war.  When  we  were 
leaving  Petrograd,  one  of  us  made  a  note 
in  his  diary  :  "  They  still  speak  of  peace, 
but  they  are  preparing  for  an  offensive ; 
to-morrow  they  will  make  this  offensive 
to  achieve  peace."  Events  since  then 
have  confirmed  these  prophecies,  and  it 
was  not  their  fault  if  their  first  victories 
had  no  morrow. 

2.  THEIR  SYMPATHIES  FOR  BELGIUM. 

What  struck  us  most,  perhaps,  during 
this  trip,  where  there  was  so  much  to 

208 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

astonish  us,  was  the  great  sympathy  shown 
for  the  Belgians.  We  had  thought,  truth 
to  tell,  that  for  the  greater  part  of  Russia 
our  little  country  was  only  a  place  on  the 
map,  but  they  soon  convinced  us  of  the 
contrary. 

Many  of  them  had  completed  their 
studies  at  Lie"ge  and  other  Belgian  Univer- 
sities. They  knew  our  "  Houses  of  the 
People."  They  had  been  inspired  by  our 
co-operative  system  to  follow  our  example. 
They  had  translated  our  Socialist  literature, 
and  especially  did  they  remember  what 
Belgium  had  done  at  the  beginning  of  the 
war,  and  they  were  infinitely  grateful  to 
the  Belgians  for  opposing  the  German 
armies  when  they  themselves  were  attacked 
at  the  other  side  of  Europe. 

We  had  scarcely  passed  the  frontier 
before  we  were  given  a  striking  proof  of 
their  feeling  towards  us. 

It  was  in  the  dining-car  of  the  train 
between  Stockholm  and  Petrograd.  Our 
neighbours  at  table  were  two  army  doctors 
returning  from  Germany.  They  took  us 
for  Frenchmen,  and  spoke  in  a  friendly 
way  of  France.  In  the  midst  of  our  con- 

204 


The    Political    Situation 

versation  some  remark  revealed  the  fact 
that  we  were  Belgians.  Immediately  their 
faces  lit  up  with  smiles.  They  rose  to 
their  feet  and  insisted  on  calling  for  wine 
to  drink  to  the  health  of  the  defenders  of 
Lie*ge.  We  realized  that  our  little  country 
of  Belgium  held  a  big  place  in  the  heart  of 
great  Russia,  and  this  first  impression  was 
daily  strengthened. 

We  have  already  spoken  of  the  welcome 
of  the  masses  given  us  at  Petrograd.  We 
have  told  of  the  extraordinary  enthusiasm 
that  the  presence  of  the  Belgian  Labour 
and  Socialist  delegates  aroused  at  the 
front.  We  can  still  recall  the  touching 
reception  that  we  received  at  Moscow  from 
the  members  of  the  Municipal  Douma. 

But  nowhere,  perhaps,  were  we  made  so 
aware  of  the  depth  of  this  sympathy  as 
on  the  day  of  our  departure,  when  we  were 
bidding  farewell  to  the  Congress  of  Soviets. 

The  assembly  was  being  held  on  the 
left  side  of  the  Neva,  in  the  Cadet  School, 
with  which  Kropotkin's  Memoirs  had  made 
us  familiar.  The  heart  of  the  working 
population  of  Russia  was  there,  six  hundred 
delegates  representing  their  different  bodies 

205 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Rtissian    Revolution 

and  all  the  different  views  of  the  Socialist 
proletariat.  Tscheidze  presided.  Kerensky 
and  Tseretelli  were  beside  him.  Before  us 
in  the  first  row  was  the  General  Staff  of 
the  Leninists,  the  small  group  of  Trotsky's 
friends,  the  Extreme  Left  of  the  Revolution. 

Never  had  the  political  situation  been 
more  strained.  The  very  day  before,  the 
insurrection  of  the  Extremists  had  seemed 
inevitable,  and  it  was  expected  every  day, 
though  it  did  not  take  place  for  some  weeks, 
and  in  this  silent,  gloomy  assembly,  as 
divided  against  itself  as  the  Commune  or 
the  Convention  in  their  worst  days,  one 
might  well  ask  if  there  could  be  one  thought 
in  common. 

That  question  was  answered  in  a  striking 
way  when  President  Tscheidze  addressed 
to  us  these  simple  words :  "  Tell  our 
Belgian  comrades  that  the  cause  of  Bel- 
gium is  as  dear  to  us  as  the  cause  of  the 
Russian  Revolution."  From  every  bench 
applause  broke  forth,  and  for  one  moment 
at  least  there  was  complete  unity. 

The  partisans  of  Lenin  and  those  of 
Kerensky,  all  Revolutionary  Russia,  greeted 
Socialist  Belgium  ! 

206 


The    Political    Situation 

3.  THE  STOCKHOLM  CONFERENCE. 

It  might  be  as  well  to  recall  here  that 
at  the  time  of  our  visit  to  Russia  there 
was  under  discussion  at  Stockholm  not 
only  one  conference,  but  three.  In  the 
first  place,  that  of  the  Zimmerwaldians ; 
in  the  second,  that  of  the  Dutch- Scandi- 
navian Committee,  in  the  third  that  of  the 
Petrograd  Soviet.  Of  the  first  we  will 
say  nothing.  Grimm's  International  is  not 
ours.  There  remain  the  two  others. 

A.  The  Dutch- Scandinavian  Committee. 

When  the  Russian  Revolution  took 
place,  Stockholm  became  necessarily  the 
half-way  house  of  the  Socialists,  and  in  a 
general  way  of  all  travellers  between  Petro- 
grad and  Paris  or  London,  Berlin,  or  Vienna. 
It  was  since  the  defeat  of  the  Serbians  the 
only  road  to  Russia,  the  only  road  to  rejoin 
the  Trans- Siberian  Railway  and  go  round 
the  world. 

We  know  in  what  conditions  the  Dutch 
Delegation  of  the  Socialist  International 
Bureau  decided  to  take  up  its  abode  there. 

Since  the  beginning  of  the  war  the 
207 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

German  aggression  has  more  or  less 
suspended  the  existence  of  the  Inter- 
national. Belgium,  where  it  used  to  have 
its  headquarters,  was  invaded.  The 
Maison  du  Peuples  at  Brussels,  where 
its  offices  were,  was  guarded  by  German 
sentries.  Its  Executive  Committee  was 
scattered  and  could  not  meet.  The  Presi- 
dent was  at  Havre,  member  of  the  Com- 
mittee of  Public  Safety — that  is  what  the 
Belgian  Government  has  become ;  his 
colleagues,  Bertrand  and  Anseele,  could 
not  leave  their  town  without  a  special 
permit  from  the  Kommandantur,  and  it  was 
in  such  conditions,  in  a  strenuous  struggle 
for  their  national  existence,  that  Belgian 
Socialists  had  still  before  them  the  duty  of 
keeping  alive  the  sacred  fire  of  the  Inter- 
national, of  maintaining  a  bond,  however 
feeble,  between  the  working  classes  of  every 
country,  both  neutral  and  belligerent. 

Camille  Huysmans,  the  secretary  of  the 
International  Socialist  Bureau,  undertook 
this  difficult  task. 

He  began  with  the  Dutch.  He  had 
admitted,  in  spite  of  the  reservations  of 
the  French,  that  the  Dutch  Delegation 

208 


The   Political   Situation 

should  be  joined  to  the  Executive  Committee 
provisionally  for  the  duration  of  the  war. 
He  crossed  the  frontier  and  installed  his 
secretariat  at  The  Hague. 

From  the  beginning,  under  the  influence 
of  their  leader  Troelstra,  the  Dutch 
Committee  began  a  persevering  campaign 
for  the  re- establishment  of  international 
relations. 

In  Entente  circles  Troelstra  was  generally 
considered  Germanophile.  He  denied  the 
accusation  energetically.  But  the  least  that 
can  be  said  is  that  his  neutrality  certainly 
looked  kindly  on  the  Socialist  Democrats 
of  the  Central  Empires,  and  that  in  a 
country  where  the  Left  party  were  mostly 
"  Ententists "  he  seemed  to  have  rather 
a  tendency  to  lean  to  the  other  side. 

A  Scandinavian  Socialist  said  to  us, 
"  The  Vor stand  of  Berlin  has  two  branches  : 
one  at  Copenhagen,  the  *  other  at  The 
Hague." 

We  must  frankly  admit  that  in  their 
efforts  to  reconstruct,  even  at  the  present 
hour,  international  relations,  the  Dutch  and 
Danish  Socialists  were  influenced  chiefly  by 
their  wish  to  put  an  end  to  the  horrors  of  a 

209  O 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

war  which  seemed  to  them  could  only  end 
in  an  indefinite  result. 

But,  none  the  less,  in  the  present  state 
of  things  their  efforts  profited — voluntarily 
or  involuntarily — Germany,  and  in  these 
conditions  their  policy  could  not  but  excite 
the  suspicions  and  mistrust  of  the  Allied 
countries. 

Just  after  the  Russian  Revolution,  how- 
ever, circumstances  seemed  more  favourable 
to  their  action. 

The  Petrograd  Soviet  declared  for  peace 
without  annexations  or  contributions.  The 
German  and  Austrian  Socialist  Democrats 
declared  themselves  ready  to  accept  this  for- 
mula on  condition  that  they  interpreted  it 
in  the  same  sense  as  von  Hindenburg ;  and 
in  Great  Britain,  and  especially  in  France, 
an  increasing  minority  declared  themselves 
in  favour  of  taking  up  again  international 
relationships.  In  neutral  countries,  Social- 
ists were  unanimous  for  peace,  and  hoped 
to  achieve  it  by  a  general  Conference. 

In  the  beginning  of  April  the  Danish 
put  their  irons  in  the  fire.  The  Socialist 
Minister  Stanning  wrote  to  the  International 
Socialist  Bureau  that  if  the  Executive 

210 


The    Political    Situation 

Committee  were  not  willing  to  act,  or 
could  not  act,  the  Conference  would  take 
place  without  them.  The  members  of  the 
Dutch  Delegation,  on  receiving  this  letter, 
and  without  waiting  to  obtain  the  opinion 
of  their  Belgian  colleagues,  decided  to  set 
out  for  Stockholm.  They  went  via  Ger- 
many. Huysmans,  who  signed  on  as  a 
steward  on  a  Dutch  boat,  was  not  long  in 
joining  them,  and  installed  the  secretary's 
office  of  the  B.S.I,  in  the  Trade  Union 
House  of  the  Socialist  Party  of  Sweden. 

Immediately,  Hjalmar  Brant  ing,  the 
Swedish  Socialist  leader,  insisted  that  the 
convoking  of  a  full  Conference  should  not 
be  left  to  the  sole  initiative  of  the  Dutch 
Delegation.  A  convocation  by  the  Inter- 
national Socialist  Bureau  was  not  possible, 
since  the  permanent  members  of  the  Execu- 
tive Committee  could  not  meet.  They 
finally  decided,  in  agreement  with  the 
Norwegians  and  the  Danes,  to  create  the 
Dutch- Scandinavian  Committee,  with  the 
right  of  calling  a  full  meeting  of  the  Inter- 
national as  soon  as  possible. 

In  the  meantime  our  delegation  went 
to  Stockholm  and  got  into  touch  with  the 

211 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

new  Committee.  We  immediately  declared 
the  complete  hostility  of  the  Belgian  Labour 
Party  to  a  full  meeting  which  would  force 
them  to  meet  the  German  Socialist  Majority. 
But  we  added  that  separate  interviews  of 
the  Organizing  Committee  with  the  different 
sections  of  the  International  might  be 
useful.  They  would  facilitate  explanations 
or  necessary  declarations ;  they  would 
oblige  the  Socialists  of  all  countries  en- 
gaging in  the  war  to  express  their  views 
on  the  situation  ;  they  would  permit  neutral 
countries  to  make  a  united  statement  on 
the  situation.  These  interviews  have  since 
taken  place. 

Most  of  the  Socialist  bodies  took  part 
in  them,  and  notably  two  bodies  of  the 
German  Social  Democracy. 

The  memorandum  of  Scheidemann  and 
his  friends  was  published,  with  the  reply 
from  Albert  Thomas. 

The  greeting  that  the  members  of  the 
Committee  gave  to  the  declaration  of  the 
German  Majority  was,  it  seems,  anything 
but  favourable,  and  it  seems  almost  as  if 
this  greeting  had  something  to  do  with 
the  effort  that  Scheidemann  made  on  his 

212 


The    Political    Situation 

return  for  the  democratization  and  parlia- 
mentarization  of  Germany. 

As  for  the  Social  Democratic  Minority, 
represented  by  Kautsky,  Bernstein,  Hanse, 
Ledebour,  they  had  at  least  the  merit  of 
speaking  out  plainly. 

We  cannot,  unfortunately,  divulge  their 
verbal  declarations  without  putting  them  in 
a  difficult  position. 

What  can  be  repeated,  however,  is  that 
they  stated  that  in  their  opinion,  though 
at  present  their  action  was  met  with 
formidable  obstacles,  they  were  sure  when- 
ever peace  was  declared  to  have  the 
immense  majority  of  the  German  working 
classes  with  them ;  that  the  aggressive 
tone  of  the  Allies'  Note  in  reply  to  Presi- 
dent Wilson  made  their  propaganda  very 
difficult.  On  the  other  hand,  they  de- 
nounced the  absence  of  sincerity  in  the 
protestations  in  favour  of  the  rights  of 
the  people  of  Scheidemann  and  his  sup- 
porters, when  the  Majority  Socialists  were 
in  reality  in  the  service  of  a  fatal 
Imperialist  and  Militarist  policy  —  fatal 
both  for  Germany  and  for  Europe. 

From  these  declarations,  which  seem  to 
213 


Three    Aspects    of    the    Russian    Revolution 

have  strongly  impressed  all  those  who  heard 
them,  little  remains  in  the  memorandum 
drawn  up  for  the  public.  But  we  must 
in  justice  remember  that  on  leaving  Stock- 
holm the  Minority  Socialists  had  to  return 
to  Germany. 

The  Dutch-Scandinavian  Committee  re- 
ceived French  and  British  delegates.  They 
met  the  delegation  from  German  Austria, 
who  voiced  almost  entirely  the  opinion  of 
the  Germans.  They  noted  also  the  decla- 
rations of  the  Hungarian,  Bulgarian,  and 
Tcheco-Slav  Socialists,  who,  contrary  to 
their  allies,  pronounced  in  favour  of  repara- 
tion for  Belgium,  and  reparation  at  the 
expense  of  Germany. 

These  interviews  ended,  there  remained 
the  question  of  the  full  Conference,  but 
the  Soviet  on  its  side  convoked  an  Inter- 
national Conference,  and  it  was  decided 
that  all  must  await  the  arrival  of  the 
Russian  delegates  from  Petrograd. 

B.   The  Petrograd  Soviet. 

When  we  arrived  in  Russia,  Albert 
Thomas  and  de  Brouckere,  who  had  gone 
in  advance,  were  already  in  communication 

214 


The    Political    Situation 

f 
with  the  Soviet,  which  had  just  delivered 

its  convocation  to  Stockholm  for  a  Con- 
ference distinct  from  that  of  the  Dutch- 
Scandinavian  Committee.  We  joined  them, 
and  at  our  first  meeting  drew  up  a 
note  clearly  expressing  the  point  of  view 
of  the  Belgian  delegation.  This  note 
contained.  (1)  our  interpretation  of  the 
peace  formula  of  the  Provisional  Russian 
Government,  especially  in  what  concerned 
Belgium  ;  (2)  the  explanation  of  the  motives 
that  led  us  to  consider  a  full  meeting,  to 
which  would  be  admitted  those  who  held 
the  present  policy  of  the  Socialist  Majority 
in  the  Central  Empires,  would  be  both 
useless  and  dangerous. 

After  sending  off  this  note  the  pour- 
parlers were  interrupted,  Thomas  having 
gone  to  Moscow  and  thence  to  the  front ; 
but  during  his  absence  we  had  the  oppor- 
tunity of  learning  facts  that  it  would  be 
interesting  to  make  public,  could  one  write 
freely  the  complete  history  of  the  Stock- 
holm Conference.  Although  many  Social- 
ists in  France  and  Great  Britain  judged 
this  Conference  to  be  undesirable,  it  had 
in  certain  diplomats  open  partisans,  espe- 

215 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

cially  preoccupied  with  humouring  the 
Russians.  They  were  afraid  of  their 
meeting  with  the  Germans  only.  The 
opinion  was  expressed  that  Socialists  of 
the  Allied  countries  ought  also  to  attend 
this  Conference  to  plead  energetically  the 
cause  of  the  Western  Democracies. 

It  seemed,  indeed,  at  one  time  as  if 
Albert  Thomas  were  of  this  opinion,  and 
that  he  had  said  so  to  his  friends,  Moutet 
and  Cachin ;  but  the  latter,  very  much 
impressed  by  the  Russian  Revolution,  went 
further,  and  on  their  return  to  France 
advised  enthusiastically  the  national  duty 
of  the  Socialist  party  to  attend  the  Confer- 
ence without  making  any  stipulation  or 
accepting  any  guarantee.  We  know  what 
followed. 

Thomas  returned  to  Petrograd  when  the 
news  reached  Russia  from  France.  We 
found  him  very  much  upset  by  the  clearly 
hostile  welcome  that  Parliamentary  opinion 
gave  to  the  idea  of  a  meeting  with  the 
German  Majority  Socialists. 

The  same  evening  we  had  an  interview 
with  him,  along  with  Henderson,  who  had 
just  arrived  from  London. 


The    Political   Situation 

It  was  understood  that  in  a  reply  to 
the  convocation  of  the  Soviet  we  should 
announce  our  refusal  to  take  part  in  a  full 
Conference,  and  we  drew  up,  in  common 
agreement,  the  conditions  clearly  enough 
to  make  sure  there  would  be  no  mistake 
and  to  put  an  end  to  any  diplomatic  man- 
oeuvre on  the  part  of  our  adversaries. 
"  More  than  ever,"  said  our  letter,  "  are 
we  convinced  that  a  meeting  to  which 
would  be  admitted  those  who  supported 
the  present  policy  of  the  Majority  Socialists 
in  the  Central  Empires  would  be  useless 
and  dangerous ;  useless  because  such  a 
meeting  of  contraiy  views  could  not  end 
in  action ;  dangerous  because  it  would 
give  rise  to  misunderstanding,  and  would 
lead  the  working  and  peasant  classes  to 
think  that  a  just  and  durable  peace  was 
possible  before  aggressive  Imperialism  is 
destroyed. 

"  As  long  as  by  a  public  declaration  made 
without  reticence  or  reservation  in  their 
own  country,  on  the  responsibility  of  their 
own  working  classes,  the  Socialists  of  all 
nations  interested  have  not  renounced  their 
association  with  an  aggressive  Imperialism, 

317 


Three    Aspects    of    the    Russian    Revolution 

we  hold  that  an  International  Socialist 
Conference  would  be  morally  impossible." 

Some  days  later,  in  another  letter  to 
the  Soviet,  Henderson,  anxious  to  see  the 
Socialists  of  the  Allied  countries  clearly 
define  their  points  of  view,  announced 
the  convocation  in  London  for  the  middle 
of  July  of  a  Conference  of  the  Socialists 
of  the  Allied  nations. 

About  the  same  time  we  had  a  long 
conversation  in  a  friend's  house  with 
Skobeleff,  Kerensky,  and  Tseretelli,  who 
was,  and  who  still  is,  we  believe,  the  Presi- 
dent of  the  Committee  of  Foreign  Affairs 
at  the  Soviet. 

Tseretelli,  who  had  begun  by  taking  a  high 
hand,  imagining  that  the  services  rendered 
to  Socialism  by  the  Russian  Revolution 
gave  him,  in  a  sense,  the  right  to  pose  as 
arbiter  in  an  International  Conference, 
seemed  very  much  impressed  when  we 
told  him  that  we  would  not  allow  it  to 
take  place.  Finally,  he  promised  us,  in 
his  own  name,  to  insist  with  the  Soviet 
that  delegates  be  sent  to  London  with  a 
view  to  acquiring  information  and  coming 
to  an  understanding  on  the  conditions  of 

218 


The    Political    Situation 

admission  to  the  Conference  which  would 
prevent  the  attendance  of  Imperialistic 
Socialists. 

Did'  he  go  back  on  his  word,  or  did  he 
fail  in  his  effort  ? 

The  fact  remains  that  a  few  days  later 
we  received  from  the  Soviet  a  reply  which 
maintained  the  terms  of  the  former  convo- 
cation. 

We  were  at  the  front  when  this  letter 
was  sent  to  us.  Thomas,  who  was  returning 
to  France,  received  it  as  he  was  leaving. 
He  insisted  on  going  on  with  the  matter, 
but  maintaining  the  point  of  view  we  had 
come  to  together. 

It  was  in  such  a  frame  of  mind  that, 
before  leaving  Petrograd,  we  sent  to  the 
Soviet  a  last  note,  which  summed  up  the 
former  documents,  and  of  which  this  is 
the  text: 

To  the  Executive  Committee  of  the  Council 
of  Workmen  and  Soldiers'  Deputies  at 
Petrograd. 

HONOURED  FRIENDS, — 

On   our   return   from   the   Russian 
front,     where     the    delegates    of    Socialist 

219 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

Belgium  met  with  a  fraternal  and  enthusi- 
astic welcome,  we  found  waiting  for  us  the 
letter  that  has  been  sent  to  us  by  the 
Executive  Committee  of  the  Soviet  between 
the  1st  of  May  and  the  13th  of  June. 
Your  point  of  view  in  what  concerns  the 
preparation  for,  and  the  aim  of,  the  Inter- 
national Conference  could  be  summed  up 
in  the  following  terms  : 

(1)  The  responsibility  for  the  horrors  of 

the  World  War  rests  on  Interna- 
tional Imperialism. 

(2)  The    workmen    of    the    whole    world 

must  unite  in  this  struggle  against 
Imperialistic  influences  and  in  the 
struggle  in  favour  of  peace. 

(3)  The  peace  conditions  must  be  on  the 

following  lines  :  "  A  general  peace 
without  annexations  or  contribu- 
tions, founded  on  the  right  of 
nations  to  dispose  of  themselves." 

In  our  former  letters  we  have  already 
stated  our  agreement  with  this  formula, 
on  the  express  condition,  of  course,  that  it 
does  not  exclude  either  the  integral  resti- 

220 


The    Political    Situation 

tution  of  land,  as  in  Belgium,  which  has 
been  the  object  of  an  unjustifiable  act  of 
aggression,  nor  the  liberation,  the  disannex- 
ation,  of  territories  which  have  been  annexed 
against  the  will  and  the  imprescriptible 
right  of  their  inhabitants.  What  you  say, 
moreover,  in  that  which  concerns  Alsace-Lor- 
raine and  the  indemnities  due  to  Belgium, 
Poland,  etc.,  seems  to  indicate,  and  we 
are  very  glad  to  know  this,  that  our  points 
of  view  in  this  respect  are  the  same. 

On  the  other  hand,  we  are  forced  now 
to  make  the  most  definite  reservation  on 
the  other  points  of  view  which  serve  as 
the  basis  of  your  convocation. 

Certainly  we  agree  with  the  first  Inter- 
Allied  Conference  of  London  that  all 
Imperialistic  Powers  have  their  share  of 
responsibility  in  the  present  conflict.  Im- 
perialistic International  Capitalism  has 
brought  about  the  antagonism  that  made 
war  possible,  but  it  is  the  semi-feudal 
Imperialism  of  the  Central  Powers  which 
let  loose  the  catastrophe.  They  alone  have 
not  found  among  their  democracy  the 
resistance  which  would  have  made  such 
aggression  impossible.  Moreover,  we  can 

221 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

never  admit  that  a  comparison  can  be 
made  between  those  who  have  deliberately 
prepared,  provoked,  declared  war,  and 
those  who  have  submitted  to  it  by  remaining 
faithful  to  their  international  engagements, 
like  Belgium,  or  nations  that,  like  France, 
as  Jaures  publicly  declared  on  the  eve 
of  his  death,  did  all  in  human  power  to 
prevent  it. 

On  the  other  hand,  though  none  more 
than  ourselves  hope  for  the  union  of  the 
working  classes  of  the  whole  world  against 
all  Imperialistic  tendencies,  how  could  we 
count  seriously  on  the  German  Majority 
Socialists  uniting  themselves  with  us  in 
this  struggle,  when  their  whole  policy  for 
the  last  three  years  has  been  but  one  long 
abdication,  who  have  in  the  most  open 
manner  joined  with  their  Kaiser,  and  who, 
after  having  witnessed  the  martyrdom  of 
Belgium,  after  having  become  accomplices 
by  their  silence  in  all  the  claims  of  Prussian 
militarism,  go  to-day  to  Stockholm  or 
elsewhere  to  sound  public  opinion  for  the 
Imperial  Chancellor? 

To  unite  ourselves  with  them  under 
these  conditions  would  be  a  moral  im- 


The    Political    Situation 

possibility.  It  is  not  only  our  opinion,  it 
is  the  opinion  of  Mehring  and  of  all  Socialists 
who,  even  in  Germany,  have  remained 
faithful  to  the  principle  of  the  International. 

That  is  why  we  persist  more  than  ever 
in  thinking  that  alone  there  can  and  ought 
to  be  admitted  to  an  International  Con- 
ference those  who  publicly  in  their  own 
country,  speaking  on  behalf  of  the  working 
classes,  shall  in  acts  as  well  as  in  deeds 
break  with  the  Imperialistic  policy  of  their 
Governments. 

Recent  events,  moreover,  have  just  shown 
that  one  cannot  be  sufficiently  prudent  if 
one  would  evade  the  ambush  of  those 
Imperialists  who  hide  their  real  face  be- 
neath a  beautiful  mask,  and  consciously 
or  unconsciously,  under  the  guise  of 
Socialism,  play  the  game  of  German 
Imperialism. 

In  such  conditions,  before  continuing 
our  pourparlers,  it  would  be  desirable  to 
refer  to  our  mandates  and  to  come  into 
contact  with  the  Socialists  of  the  other 
Allied  countries.  The  Conference  that  our 
British  comrades  are  proposing  to  bring 
together  shortly  in  London  will  give  us 

228 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

such  an  opportunity.  We  earnestly  hope 
to  see  you  there,  and  we  believe  that  the 
negotiations  that  we  have  entered  upon 
may  be  more  usefully  carried  out  when 
the  Conference  of  London  will  have  made 
known  the  opinions  shared  by  all  the 
working  classes  of  the  Allied  countries. 

Fraternally  yours, 
(Signed)    VANDERVELDE  and 

DE  BROUCKERE. 


4.  SUMMING-UP  AND  CONCLUSIONS. 

In  short,  the  Russian  Revolution  did 
not  accept  the  inheritance  of  the  former 
Government  on  condition  of  not  being 
held  liable  with  regard  to  its  agreements 
with  the  Allies.  But  one  can  have  confi- 
dence in  the  Provisional  Government  when 
it  declares  that  it  will  remain  faithful  to 
the  Pact  of  London  and  that  it  is  unani- 
mously opposed  to  any  idea  of  a  separate 
peace. 

On  the  other  hand,  we  can  honestly  say 
that  from  the  point  of  view  of  Belgian 
propaganda  the  success  of  our  mission 
exceeded  our  greatest  hopes. 

224 


The    Political    Situation 

The  question,  which  was  always  a  delicate 
one,  of  the  International  Conference  of 
Stockholm  remains  to  be  discussed.  The 
Belgian  delegation  had  been  able  to  come 
to  an  agreement  on  the  common  attitude 
to  be  taken  up  with  Albert  Thomas  and 
Henderson.  But  afterwards  the  latter  was 
won  over  to  agree  to  a  consultative  Con- 
ference, and  in  any  case  up  to  the  present 
the  Russians  remain  immovable. 

When  we  were  in  Petrograd  they  seemed 
to  have  a  kind  of  Messianic  faith  in  the 
Conference.  They  believed  that  the 
prestige  of  their  Revolution  would  put 
them  in  a  position  to  impose  their  peace 
formula  on  the  other  Socialist  parties, 
including  the  German  Majority  Socialists. 
They  were  upheld  in  this  by  the  acqui- 
escence of  the  last  French  National  Council. 
They  knew,  perhaps,  that  in  other  Allied 
countries  the  idea  of  going  to  Stockholm 
to  explain  their  views  to  the  Germans 
found  sympathy  in  high  places.  Moreover, 
such  men  as  Tseretelli  and  Kerensky, 
whose  point  of  view,  at  bottom,  was 
very  like  our  own,  were  persuaded  that 
every  effort  in  favour  of  the  Stockholm 

225  P 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

Conference  would  strengthen  their  influ- 
ence in  view  of  an  energetic  pursuance  of 
the  war.  Thus  they  persisted  up  to  the 
last  in  attempting  to  gain  our  adherence. 

"  In  refusing,"  Tseretelli  said  to  us, 
almost  with  tears  in  his  eyes,  "  you  are 
taking  away  the  brightest  ray  of  hope  from 
our  horizon." 

And  Kerensky  added  : 

"  You  are  making  more  difficult  the 
propaganda  we  were  carrying  on  for  the 
coming  offensive." 

Let  us  add  that  soon  after,  when  we 
were  repeating  the  latter  remark  to  the 
Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs,  Mr.  Teret- 
schenko,  adding  that  it  seemed  paradoxical 
to  us  to  suppose  that,  to  induce  the  Russian 
soldiers  to  fight,  one  must  put  before  them 
the  idea  of  a  conference  in  favour  of  peace, 
his  answer  was  : — 

"  It  may  be  paradoxical,  but  Kerensky 
is  right.  Just  now  our  soldiers  would 
rather  fight  for  nothing  than  for  some 
definite  object." 

It  was  not  only  in  Petrograd  that  a 
general  Conference  was  eagerly  demanded. 
The  same  thing  was  going  on  in  Stockholm, 

226 


The    Political    Situation 

where  the  Dutch,  such  as  Vliegen  or  Van 
Kol,  whose  Entente  sympathies  were  ob- 
vious, tried  to  convince  us  with  an  insist- 
ence which  had  a  touch  of  national  egotism. 
With  rare  exceptions,  the  neutrals  are,  on 
the  whole,  for  the  Allies,  but  they  are 
governed  by  the  fear  of  being  sooner  or 
later  drawn  into  the  conflict. 

This  statement  would  not  be  complete 
if  we  did  not  give  the  main  points  of  an 
interview  which  we  had  on  our  way  through 
Christiania  with  Hjalmar  Branting,  who  is 
certainly,  of  all  the  Socialists  in  neutral 
countries,  the  most  influential  and  the  one 
who  shares  most  nearly  our  own  point 
of  view. 

His  views,  which  Huysmans  shared, 
can  be  summed  up  in  the  following 
words  : 

44  You  would  be  wrong  not  to  come  to 
a  general  Conference.  Except  for  the  Danish 
and  the  Dutch,  all  the  Socialists  of  neutral 
countries  sympathize  with  the  Socialists  of 
the  Entente.  There  are  serious  cracks  in 
the  solidarity  of  Central  Europe.  The 
Bulgarian  Socialists,  who  were  ignorant  of 
all  that  was  happening  on  the  West,  were 

227 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

much  impressed  when  they  learnt  the 
cause  of  the  war,  the  conditions  in  which 
Belgian  neutrality  had  been  violated,  and 
the  horrors  committed  in  that  country. 
In  the  same  way  the  Hungarian  Socialists, 
and  especially  the  Czechs,  have  clearly 
separated  their  cause  from  that  of  the 
German  Majority.  They  demand  that  not 
only  shall  Belgium  be  reconstructed,  but 
reconstructed  by  Germany.  They  demand 
the  independence  of  the  three  Polands ; 
they  hold  that  energetic  action  must  be 
taken  against  the  Imperialism  of  their 
Governments.  As  for  the  German  Minority 
Socialists,  they  would  be  the  most  ener- 
getic supporters  of  the  Allies  against  David, 
Scheidemann,  and  their  supporters.  In 
these  conditions,  if — and  this  is  indispens- 
able— the  first  point  brought  up  were  the 
examination  of  the  causes  and  the  responsi- 
bilities of  the  war,  if  you  came  and 
demanded  justice,  it  is  certain  that  the 
German  Majority  Socialists  would  find 
themselves  practically  isolated  and  that 
the  immense  majority  of  the  Conference 
would  force  them  into  the  position  of 
either  agreeing  or  resigning." 

228 


The    Political    Situation 

I  have  thought  it  wise  to  reproduce  in 
full  the  arguments  which  were  put  before 
us  in  favour  of  a  general  Conference,  but 
they  did  not  convince  us. 

Our  objections  remain  to-day  more  than 
ever  unsurmountable. 

Certainly,  in  admitting  that  the  holding 
of  a  Conference  might  be  possible  of  reali- 
zation, it  is  probable  that  there  would  be 
a  unanimous  statement  in  favour  of  the 
independence  of  Belgium,  and  that  the 
immense  majority  would  demand  integral 
restoration  by  Germany.  It  would  be 
the  same  possibly  for  the  reconstruction 
of  Serbia  and  Roumania,  the  total  evacu- 
ation of  France,  the  withdrawal  on  the 
part  of  the  Germans  from  all  attempts, 
direct  or  indirect,  at  annexation. 

But  it  would  obviously  not  be  the  same 
for  the  other  questions — that  of  Poland, 
or  Alsace-Lorraine,  for  example,  where  the 
Russians,  the  Italians,  as  well  as  many 
of  the  French  and  British  minority,  might 
readily  agree  in  their  longing  for  peace 
with  the  German  Social  Democrats. 

And,  on  the  other  hand,  supposing  that 
in  the  end  a  programme  acceptable  to  all 

229 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

Socialists  should  be  drawn  up,  it  is  obvious 
that  nothing  could  come  of  it  so  long  as 
the  German  Socialists  continued  to  support 
their  Imperial  Government,  and  that  the 
latter,  not  having  been  vanquished,  should 
maintain  at  least  a  part  of  its  present 
exigencies. 

On  our  return  journey  we  met  at  Chris- 
tiania  a  Norwegian  pacifist,  who  had 
played  an  important  part  in  the  movement 
in  favour  of  international  arbitration. 

He  came  from  Vienna  and  Berlin.  He 
had  been  interviewing  Count  Czernin, 
Zimmerman,  Dernburg,  and  other  poli- 
ticians. According  to  him,  the  German 
rulers  were,  in  July  1917,  ready  to  treat 
on  the  following  conditions :  A  simple 
rectification  of  the  frontiers  on  the  Cour- 
land  side ;  the  including  of  several  kilo- 
metres west  of  Metz,  France  to  keep  the 
basin  of  the  Briey ;  the  transformation  of 
Belgium,  nominally  independent,  into 
"  another  Luxembourg,"  incorporated  in 
the  Zollverein  and  with  Germany  control- 
ling her  railways  ;  suppression  of  Roumania, 
with  Volhynia  conferred  on  Austria  and 
Moldavia  on  Russia. 

280 


The    Political    Situation 

Needless  to  say,  even  the  neutral  Italians 
or  the  Russian  Extremists  would  hesitate 
to  accept  such  a  programme,  and  that  if 
a  general  meeting  took  place  the  German 
Majority  Socialists  would  not  dare  to  put 
it  forward. 

But  who  does  not  realize  that  even  to 
discuss  with  the  latter,  so  long  as  they 
are  allied  with  their  Imperial  Chancellor, 
would  weaken  the  mainspring  of  the  war 
and  give  to  the  nations,  longing  for  peace, 
deceptive  hopes,  while  embarking  the 
Socialist  International  in  an  undertaking 
that  might  land  it  in  confusion  ? 

It  is  true  that  the  partisans,  or  at  least 
certain  partisans,  of  the  Conference  said 
to  us,  *'  There  is  no  question  of  coming 
to  an  understanding  with  the  German 
Majority  Socialists ;  we  shall,  on  the  contrary, 
go  to  Stockholm  to  ask  the  question  of  war 
responsibilities,  to  denounce  the  weakness, 
the  compromise,  the  treachery  even,  of  the 
Socialist  Democratic  Majority,  to  force  them 
to  choose  between  their  Kaiser  and  Socialism, 
to  break  with  their  present  policy  or  resign 
from  the  International.  They  must  join 
with  us,  with  all  Socialists,  against  Imperi- 

281 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

alismu  or  else  stand  alone,  condemned  by 
us,  discredited  completely  in  their  own 
eyes  and  of  the  working  classes,  who  up 
to  the  present  have  been  faithful  to  them." 
To  speak  frankly,  there  might  have  been 
something  to  say  for  such  a  view  had  the 
Russian  Revolution,  by  a  triumphant  offen- 
sive, dissipated  any  idea  of  a  peace  from 
war  weariness  or  weakness ;  if  the  neutrals 
on  their  side  had  had  no  other  idea  than 
to  uphold  the  right  and  found  peace  on  a 
basis  of  international  justice;  if,  in  the  Allied 
countries,  Socialists  were  unanimous,  both 
as  to  the  responsibility  of  the  war  and  the 
conditions  necessary  for  peace.  But  at 
the  moment  when  the  friends  of  the  Russian 
Revolution  are  anxiously  asking  themselves 
not  only  if  she  can,  but  if  she  will  defend 
herself,  when  in  the  last  countries  to 
remain  neutral  public  opinion  is  almost 
entirety  governed  by  a  dread  of  being 
drawn  into  the  war — when,  in  short,  in  the 
Allied  countries,  the  Socialists  seem  further 
than  ever  from  agreeing  as  regards  a 
policy  of  war  or  peace,  we  do  not  hesitate 
to  say  that  it  would  be  worse  than  folly 
to  expect  a  general  Conference,  where  the 

232 


The   Political    Situation 

most  contradictory  views  would  meet  in 
a  confused  melee,  to  become  a  Court  of 
Justice  and  a  Grand  Jury. 

Just  after  the  Conference  of  the  Socialists 
of  the  Allied  countries  in  London  (August  28, 
1917),  Arthur  Henderson,  whose  great 
influence  had  some  weeks  before  carried 
the  decision  of  the  Labour  Party  in  favour 
of  Stockholm,  said  in  an  interview  : 

"  The  inability  of  the  inter- Allied  Con- 
ference of  last  week  to  come  to  any  even 
approximate  agreement  forces  us  to  examine 
the  whole  situation  anew. 

"  The  International  Conference,  by  reason 
of  the  great  divergence  of  views  that  have 
been  expressed  in  the  inter-Allied  Confer- 
ence, would  be  not  merely  harmful,  but 
disastrous. 

44  We  cannot  meet  in  an  International 
Conference  so  long  as  no  common  ground 
of  understanding  between  the  working 
classes  of  the  Allied  nations  has  been  dis- 
covered." 

Such  has  always  been  our  own  view, 
and  it  is  in  the  first  place  for  this 
reason  that  we  have  never  ceased  to  exact 
for  any  reunion  or  reconstruction  of  the 

233 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

International  necessary  and  preliminary 
guarantees.  These  guarantees  do  not  at 
present  exist.  A  general  Conference  where 
those  Socialists  who  are  fighting  for  the 
freedom  of  Europe  would  have  as  their 
judges  and  arbitrators,  among  others, 
Sudekum,  David,  or  Scheidemann,  Italian 
neutralists,  or  Scandinavian  pacifists,  Maxi- 
malists from  Petrograd,  or  Zimmerwald 
Extremists,  would  only  give  the  world  a 
lamentable  spectacle  of  confusion  and  im- 
potence. In  the  interests  of  the  Inter- 
national, we  could  not  wish  such  a  thing. 

It  now  only  remains  for  us  to  conclude. 

As  we  write,  the  Russian  Revolution  is 
passing  through  a  crisis  that  may  well 
prove  fatal. 

Riga  is  taken,  Courland  is  conquered, 
the  lines  in  the  North  are  broken,  and, 
what  is  infinitely  more  grave  than  the 
worst  defeats,  the  question  is  being  asked 
if  the  Revolutionary  armies  are  still  capable 
not  of  a  great  offensive,  but  simply  of 
holding  out  against  the  attacks  of  the 
enemy. 

Meanwhile,  in  the  interior  the  authority 
of  the  Provisional  Government  is  tottering. 

284 


The    Political   Situation 

The  Soviets  are  discussing  when  they  should 
be  acting,  party  and  class  antagonisms  are 
dominating  the  preoccupations  of  public 
safety,  and  in  this  immense  country,  where 
so  many  nationalities  meet,  one  looks  in 
vain  for  any  signs  of  a  national  spirit. 

We  must  expect  in  these  conditions  that 
in  Paris,  as  in  London,  the  Conservatives, 
who  have  been  forced  to  keep  silence  during 
the  first  successes  of  the  Revolution,  should 
to-day  open  their  mouths  to  judge  and  to 
condemn. 

And,  unfortunately  for  the  cause  even 
of  the  Entente,  they  are  doing  so  with 
such  bigoted  views,  such  a  petty  manner 
of  judging  the  Revolution  only  by  its  imme- 
diate military  results,  that  their  attacks 
risk  influencing  Western  opinion  against 
Russia  and  Russian  opinion  against  the 
Allies. 

Certainly  one  can  understand  that,  at 
the  news  of  reverses  which  defeated  so 
many  hopes,  there  should  have  been, 
among  those  who  were  counting  on  an 
early  and  victorious  peace,  feelings  of 
anger  and  disillusionment. 

But  though   disillusioned  we  should   not 

235 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

be  unjust,  and  still  less  should  we  forget 
what  would  have  inevitably  happened  had 
the  Russian  Revolution  not  taken  place, 
had  the  Sturmers  and  the  Soukhomlinoffs 
not  been  put  beyond  all  possibility  of  doing 
harm,  had  the  Czar's  regime.,  in  a  word, 
not  collapsed  beneath  the  weight  of  its 
own  mistakes,  crimes,  and  treasons. 

Let  us  suppose,  indeed,  that  Nicholas  II 
had  remained  on  the  throne :  is  there 
any  one  who  doubts  that  peace  would  have 
been  made  to-day  between  the  armies  of 
the  North — a  separate  peace  and  a  disas- 
trous one,  which  would  have  opened  up 
the  way  for  Germany  to  the  richest  grana- 
ries of  Europe  ?  And  instead  of  Russian 
liberty  having  been  in  spite  of  everything 
a  great  encouragement  to  the  efforts  of 
liberation  and  the  other  nations,  this  peace 
would  have  been  followed  by  new  grouping, 
a  new  coalition  arising  against  Western 
Democracies,  the  Triple  Alliance  of  the  Czars 
of  Petrograd,  Vienna,  and  Berlin. 

Thanks  to  the  Revolution,  on  the  con- 
trary, Russia  remains  part  of  the  great 
alliance  of  nations  against  all  that  remains 
of  autocracy  in  the  world.  She  is  fighting 

236 


The    Political    Situation 

for  her  liberty  and  for  that  of  others,  and 
though  the  difficulties  that  she  has  to 
contend  with  are  serious,  they  are  no 
greater  than  those  of  the  French  Revolution. 

In  the  month  of  July  last,  when  the 
armies  of  Brusiloff  announced  thirty-five 
thousand  Austro-German  prisoners,  we 
thought  of  Valmy  and  Jemmappes. 

Now,  in  September,  which  is  opening  so 
badly,  why  should  we  not  remember,  to 
give  us  fresh  hope,  those  terrible  days  of 
1793,  when  Belgium  was  evacuated,  Revolu- 
tionary France  invaded,  Lyons  in  revolt, 
the  English  in  Toulon,  and  La  Vendee  in 
open  rebellion  against  the  nation  ? 

The  Convention  none  the  less  triumphed, 
and  the  Russian  Revolution  will  surely 
triumph  in  its  turn. 

Between  these  two  periods,  it  is  true,  we 
must  remember  there  is  one  disquieting 
difference. 

The  defeats  of  the  Revolution  took  place 
in  France  when  the  war  was  only  beginning  ; 
they  have  taken  place  in  Russia  after  three 
years  of  a  war  which  has  ruined  the  finances 
of  the  country,  thrown  all  its  internal  ser- 
vices into  disorder,  and  created  among  the 

237 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

mass  of  the  people  an  irresistible  longing 
for  rest  and  peace. 

But  between  these  two  periods  also  there 
is  another  difference,  and  this  time  to  the 
advantage  of  the  Russian  Revolution.  It 
is  that  France  in  1793  had  against  her, 
if  not  the  peoples,  at  least  the  Governments 
of  all  Europe,  whilst  Russia  in  1917  has 
to  sustain  her  and  help  her  to  triumph  the 
Democracies  of  the  whole  world. 

Certainly  we  are  not  among  those  who 
refuse  to  recognize  the  faults,  weaknesses, 
and  the  sufferings  of  the  Russian  Revolu- 
tion. On  the  surface  she  seems  in  a  state 
of  anarchy.  That  which  existed  is  gone 
forever,  what  is  to  come  is  not  yet  in 
being.  The  whole  fabric  of  the  new 
regime  remains  to  be  manufactured,  aggra- 
vated by  the  circumstance  that  they  are 
at  war. 

But  great  as  may  be  the  difficulties  and 
the  perils  of  the  present  hour,  they  ought 
not  to  make  us  lose  sight  of  the  essential 
result.  For  the  first  time  throughout  the 
centuries  of  their  history  a  nation  of  a 
hundred  and  eighty  million  souls  is  de- 
livered from  the  most  bloodstained,  corrupt, 

288 


The    Political    Situation 

and  brutal  of  tyrannies,  and  breathes  at 
last  the  pure  air  of  liberty. 

And  this  liberty,  so  eagerly  longed  for, 
so  dearly  bought  by  the  martyrdom  of 
thousands  of  martyrs,  is  such  a  conquest, 
such  a  great  boon  and  blessing,  that  it  were 
to  despair  of  all  human  nature  not  to  believe 
that  to  defend  it  the  Russian  nation  will 
make  just  such  an  effort  as  was  made  in 
1793  by  the  people  of  France. 

We  cannot  too  often  draw  attention, 
indeed,  to  the  similarity  between  these 
two  periods.  With  this  outstanding  dif- 
ference, that  the  Russian  Revolution  is 
hastening  headlong  forward,  and  counting 
in  weeks  and  days  instead  of  in  years. 

That  is  what  we  said  on  the  evening  of 
our  departure  in  our  last  conversation  with 
Kerensky,  Teretscko,  Prince  Lvoff,  and 
other  members  of  the  Provisional  Govern- 
ment. 

The  Minister  of  Foreign  Affairs  received 
us  in  one  of  the  ministerial  palaces  on  the 
bank  of  the  Neva.  It  was  eleven  o'clock 
at  night,  but  the  sky  on  this  beautiful 
June  night  was  still  red  with  the  last  rays 
of  the  setting  sun.  ^Opposite,  across  the 

289 


Three    Aspects    of    the    Russian    Revolution 

river,  we  could  see  the  fortress  of  Peter 
and  Paul,  with  the  red  flag  flying  from  the 
ramparts.  Sturmer,  Protopopoff,  Souk- 
homlinoff,  the  dethroned  ministers,  were 
there  awaiting  judgment.  On  our  balcony, 
on  the  contrary,  were  those  men,  ministers 
to-day,  who  four  months  before  had  been 
prisoners  over  there.  An  amazing  turning 
of  the  tables  !  Those  who  had  lived  in 
the  palace  in  prison,  while  the  men  who 
had  spent  years  in  prison  were  now  installed 
in  the  palace.  And  at  the  same  time 
others — Tseretelli,  for  example — were  coming 
back  from  Siberia,  while  the  Czar  was  on 
his  way  to  that  land  of  exile. 

Need  we  be  astonished  that  after  such 
an  upheaval,  such  a  turning  of  the  tables 
both  socially  and  politically,  the  dis- 
order of  these  early  days  should  have 
allowed  the  enemy  to  gain  certain  advan- 
tages and  to  profit  from  the  inevitable 
disorder  following  on  the  Revolution  ?  On 
the  contrary,  the  astonishing  part  is  that 
his  gains  have  not  been  greater,  his  action 
more  decisive.  He  has  delayed  and  hesi- 
tated. He  has  miscounted  once  again  his 
adversaries'  capabilities,  and  left  the 

240 


The    Political   Situation 

Russian  nation  precious  time  in  which  to 
recover  her  force — time  that  surely  she  will 
know  how  to  profit  by. 

And  if  this  is  so,  what  matter  the 
defeats,  the  trials,  the  disasters  even,  which 
accompany,  as  they  always  have  accom- 
panied, great  revolutions?  Russian  liberty 
is  still  fighting  tooth  and  nail  for  its  very 
existence.  Russia  must  at  one  and  the  same 
time  defend  herself  against  the  menaces  of 
absolute  authority,  the  perils  of  anarchy, 
and  the  ravages  of  invasion.  At  first  glance, 
the  Revolution  seems  to  have  engendered 
only  chaos.  So  be  it ;  but  do  not  let  us 
forget  the  words  of  Nietzsche,  "  There  must 
be  chaos,  that  out  of  chaos  may  come  forth 
new  stars.  There  must  be  chaos,  that  new 
worlds  may  be  born." 


241 


APPENDIX 

THE  MEMORANDUM  OF  THE  BELGIAN  SOCIAL- 

ISTS      SUBMITTED       TO       THE      DuTCH- 
SCANDINAVIAN   COMMISSION. 


Dutch-Scandinavian  Commission 
JL  received  on  Saturday,  June  30th,  the 
Belgian  Delegation,  composed  of  citizen 
Emile  Vandervelde,  President  of  the  Inter- 
national Socialist  Bureau,  and  Louis  de 
Brouckdre,  Assistant  delegate  to  the  Inter- 
national Socialist  Bureau,  both  of  them 
members  of  the  General  Council  of  the 
Belgian  Labour  Party. 

The  Delegation  submitted  their  opinions 
in  the  following  Memorandum  :  — 

Open  up  before  dealing  with  peace  condi- 
tions the  problem  of  to-morrow  ;  we  wish 
to  recall  our  point  of  view  with  regard  to 
the  War,  the  problem  of  to-day. 

It  seems  to  us  less  a  war  between  nations 

243 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

than  a,  probably  decisive,  struggle  between 
two  political  principles.  It  is  in  this 
sense  that  it  has  justly  been  called  a  civil 
war  in  the  Society  of  Nations. 

This  true  nature  of  the  great  conflict 
was  evident  from  its  very  beginning,  and 
it  becomes  more  evident  every  day. 


DEMOCRACY  DEFENDS  ITS  CAUSE. 

The  Russian  Revolution,  of  which  this 
War  has  been  if  not  the  fundamental 
reason  at  least  the  opportunity  for  the 
United  States  to  come  in. 

America  has  had  recourse  to  force  of 
arms,  only  after  having  exhausted  all  the 
means  of  ending  this  great  quarrel  peace- 
fully. She  has  definitely  ranged  herself 
now  on  the  side  of  all  free  nations,  that 
is  to  say,  those  having  already  accom- 
plished their  democratic  revolution.  On 
the  other  side,  almost  entirely  isolated, 
are  the  last  three  semi-feudal,  semi- 
absolute  Powers,  that  of  the  Emperor 
of  Germany,  the  sovereign  of  Austria- 
Hungary,  and  of  the  Great  Turk. 

Against    this    triple   force    of   oppression 

244 


Appendix 

and  reaction,  whose  triumph,  or  simply 
whose  maintenance,  would  threaten  the 
world  with  an  unbearable  slavery,  would 
crush  all  hope,  all  possibility  of  the  political 
development  of  the  proletariat,  democracy 
is  fighting. 

No  one  could  seriously  contest  that  this 
War  on  the  part  of  the  Allied  Powers  is 
not  both  a  War  of  Defence  and  Liberation. 
Certainly  we  admit,  unanimously  with 
the  Allied  Socialists  represented  at  the 
Conference  of  London  in  1915,  that  all 
Capitalist  Governments  have  in  this  present 
conflict  their  share  of  the  responsibility. 
But  we  state  with  this  assembly  that  on 
the  rulers  of  the  Central  Powers,  and  on 
them  alone,  lies  the  direct,  immediate 
responsibility  of  the  conflict. 

THE  RESPONSIBILITIES  OF  THE  WAR. 

International  Capitalist  Imperialism  has 
created  economic  and  political  conditions 
which  have  rendered  the  catastrophe  possible, 
but  it  is  the  reactionary  military  Imperial- 
ism of  the  Central  Powers  that  has  used 
these  circumstances  to  attempt  universal 

245 


Three    Aspects    of    the    Russian    Revolution 

hegemony,  and  who,  conscientiously  and 
deliberately  carrying  out  a  plan  long  since 
matured,  have  let  loose  this  War  on  the 
vilest  pretext  and  for  the  most  miserable 
cause.  They  have  been  able  to  put  their 
designs  into  execution  owing  to  the  passivity 
of  their  people,  a  passivity  inconceivable 
in  any  other  country,  in  France,  Great 
Britain,  even  in  Russia  of  1914,  where 
already  the  forces  of  democracy  were  rising 
against  the  Czar,  and  would  have  certainly 
rebelled  against  so  amazing  an  endeavour. 

We  shall  dwell  but  an  instant,  and  only  to 
set  it  aside,  on  the  objection  that  if  the 
Central  Powers  are  guilty  of  Imperialism 
the  Allied  Powers  are  not  exempt  either, 
that  in  France,  Britain,  or  Italy  a  certain 
proportion  of  the  population,  certain 
interests,  certain  groups  always  aspire  to 
veritable  territorial  conquests,  either  colonial 
economic  gains  or  even  European,  we  should 
not  dream  of  denying,  no  more  than  we 
should  allow  plausible  conclusions  to  be 
drawn  from  that  fact. 

It  is  only  in  the  ideal  land  of  dreams 
that  causes  appear  with  simplicity  and 
theoretic  purity.  In  the  world  in  which 

246 


Appendix 

we  live  it  is  otherwise.  Nothing  is  en- 
tirely exempt  from  some  mixture  of  its 
opposite.  But  in  politics,  so  in  all  other 
domains  of  action,  we  must  find  out  the 
leading  characteristics  without  dwelling  on 
the  exceptions. 

FRANCE  AND  GREAT  BRITAIN. 

France  of  the  Revolution,  France  whose 
effort  to  bring  to  triumph  the  cause  of 
arbitration  has  been  shown  on  every  page 
of  her  International  Annals,  France  who 
in  August  1914  withdrew  her  troops  to 
10  kilometres  from  the  frontiers  and  ex- 
posed her  country  to  invasion  to  avoid 
even  the  appearance  of  provocation,  is  she 
less  France  because  some  financiers  en- 
deavoured to  compromise  her  in  Morocco  ? 

Britain,  who  was  arranging  her  naval 
vacations,  who  endeavoured  with  an 
energy  and  zeal  unequal  to  the  task  to 
turn  aside  the  catastrophe  and  find  a 
juridicial  solution  to  the  conflict,  is  she 
less  the  old  and  strong  democracy  that 
has  set  so  powerful  an  example  to  the 
world  because  a  handful  of  landlords  have 

247 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

obstinately     opposed     themselves     to     her 
liberal  traditions  ? 

The  essential  difference  between  the 
Central  Powers  and  those  of  the  Entente, 
that  difference  to  which  we  have  already 
alluded  and  to  which  we  always  return 
because  it  is  the  leading  feature  in  the 
whole  problem  of  the  War,  lies  in  the  fact 
that  while  on  our  side  a  strong  and  active 
democracy  exercising  considerable  political 
power,  succeeds  generally  in  holding  in 
check  Imperialist  power,  in  keeping  them 
at  least  within  certain  limits,  the  events 
of  the  three  last  years  have  shown,  alas  1 
but  too  clearly,  that  in  the  nations  that 
are  fighting  against  us  democracy  is  power- 
less in  the  decisive  hour,  and  so  will  she 
remain  so  long  as  deep  and  organic  up- 
heavals have  not  transformed  the  very 
constitution  of  their  country. 

We  need  not  dwell  on  the  evidence  of  this. 
If  the  responsibility  of  the  German  Empire 
in  the  present  conflict  were  still  to  be 
established,  if  the  side  from  which  comes 
the  Imperialist  danger  were  still  to  be 
sought,  Germany's  own  avowals  would 
set  at  rest  all  further  doubts. 

248 


Appendix 

We  observe  with  joy  the  opinion  of  the 
German  minority  of  Haase,  Bernstein,  and 
Kautsky  is  in  this  matter  the  same  as  our 
own,  and  we  consider  it  our  duty  to  express 
here  our  admiration  of  the  courage  with 
which  they  have  expressed  it. 

From  what  we  have  just  said  come 
certain  practical  consequences,  which  we 
shall  enumerate.  And  now  we  come  to 
the  kernel  of  our  subject.  In  the  first 
place  Imperialism  is  nowhere  reduced  to 
complete  impotence,  a  part  of  the  ruling 
classes  endeavour  [everywhere  to  |lead 
governments  to  a  policy  of  conquest,  and 
from  that  comes  the  necessity  of  Socialists 
in  all  countries  opposing  energetically 
national  Imperialism  and  preventing  its 
imposing  on  the  people  its  own  War  aims. 

The  Socialists  of  the  Entente  are  also 
under  these  obligations.  Their  duty  is 
to  purify,  as  it  were,  this  defensive  War, 
to  clear  it  of  all  desire  for  revenge,  the 
abuse  of  power  towards  the  vanquished, 
the  extorted  ransom,  the  lands  placed 
under  foreign  rule  against  the  will  of  the 
people,  and  they  have  never  drawn  back 
from  this  duty. 

349 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

In  what  concerns  the  Belgian  Socialists, 
the  only  ones  of  whom  we  are  qualified 
to  speak,  it  may  be  of  use  to  recall  here 
that  they  have  fought  and  vanquished  the 
annexationist  danger  that  existed  even  in 
their  own  country  in  a  certain  measure, 
and  that  the  Belgian  Government  is  agreed 
on  our  programme  of  peace  without  conquest. 

The  special  note  added  by  Belgium  to 
the  reply  of  the  Allies  shows  that  this 
nation,  which  before  the  War  aspired  only 
to  live  at  peace  with  her  neighbours,  has 
to-day  no  other  aim  in  the  War  but  the 
re-establishment  of  peace  and  justice,  but 
that  she  wishes  a  peace  that  will  assure 
to  her  country  legitimate  reparation  and 
the  guarantee  of  future  security. 

The  present  circumstances,  and  especially 
the  Russian  Revolution,  which  will  be  felt 
throughout  the  entire  world,  open  up  new 
possibilities  in  the  struggle  against  Im- 
perialism. 

THE  SOCIALIST  DUTY. 

Everywhere  Socialists  can  now  act  with 
more  chances  of  success.  We  do  not 

250 


Appendix 

hesitate  to  say  that  they  owe  it  to  them- 
selves to  take  full  advantage  of  this,  not 
only  by  influencing  the  diverse  Governments 
where  they  are  represented,  or  by  parlia- 
mentary influence,  but  by  making  a  direct 
appeal  to  public  opinion  by  influencing 
the  masses  dealing  directly  with  the  people 
themselves,  and  directed  at  this  purifica- 
tion of  war  aims  in  which  Russia  has  set 
us  an  example. 

Having  said  this,  we  hasten  to  come 
back  to  what  we  consider  at  present  an 
essential  Socialist  duty,  that  of  defence 
against  the  aggression  of  German  Imperial- 
ism, and  against  its  attempt  at  universal 
hegemony.  We  Belgians  have  even  been 
reproached  with  having  defended  ourselves. 
We  shall  not  reply  to  that  by  quoting 
the  resolutions  of  the  International,  which 
recognizes  the  right  of  national  defence 
and  recommends  the  creation  of  militia 
for  that  purpose.  We  should  blush  to 
reduce  this  argument  to  a  mere  interpre- 
tation of  text.  We  shall  only  say  that 
attack  and  invasion  have  made  weigh  upon 
us  the  most  heavy  of  tyrannies,  the  German 
military  tyranny,  to  which  Bismarck  assigned 

251 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

as  aim  that  the  people  should  be  left  only 
their  eyes  to  weep  with.  Belgian  Socialism, 
which  so  often  has  risen  against  oppression 
within,  was  not  likely  to  submit  to  oppres- 
sion from  without. 

When  they  burned  our  villages,  when 
they  insulted  our  women,  when  they 
brutally  suppressed  our  hardly-won  liber- 
ties, how  could  we  admit  that  this  was  a 
simple  bourgeois  quarrel  which  did  not 
concern  the  working  classes. 

On  the  other  hand,  if  they  had  given 
up  the  idea  of  fighting  and  protested  that 
William  II's  soldiers  were  too  numerous 
and  his  cannons  powerful,  they  would  have 
been  dishonoured  in  their  own  eyes, 
cowardice  never  having  been  numbered 
among  revolutionary  virtues. 

We  must  add  that  such  renunciation 
was  not  even  discussed.  With  their  rifles 
and  their  strikes  they  have  fought,  and 
all  the  reports  that  come  to  us  from  our 
country  are  at  one  in  stating  that  they 
will  go  on  fighting  whatever  may  be  the 
sacrifices,  however  long  may  be  the  suffer- 
ing, until  this  tyranny  is  vanquished. 


252 


Appendix 

THE  SACRED  UNION. 

We  have  been  reproached  with  having 
allied  ourselves  in  this  struggle  with  all 
classes  of  the  people,  with  having  achieved 
the  sacred  union.  We  do  not  dream  of 
excusing  ourselves.  German  aggression 
has  created  among  all  Belgian  common 
interests  since  they  are  crushed  beneath 
common  yoke. 

We  are  asked  to  think  only  of  inter- 
class  conflicts.  Shall  we  do  so  amidst  our 
ruined  factories  in  a  country  where  there 
is  now  scarcely  any  regular  work  ?  Shall 
our  deported  workmen  lead  such  a  cause  ? 

To  be  able  to  take  up  again,  otherwise 
than  in  mere  words,  the  political  struggle 
of  our  working  classes,  who  does  not  see 
that  we  must  have  first  a  real  national 
political  life,  that  we  must  have  regained 
our  independence,  nay,  more,  that  we 
must  have  put  it  beyond  the  possibility 
of  further  attack. 

We  have  been  reproached  with  having 
behaved  as  the  German  majority  did, 
because  we  also  helped  our  Government 
in  the  continuance  of  this  War.  No  dis- 

253 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

tinction  is  drawn  between  the  aggressor 
and  the  victim,  and  speeches  are  made  on 
the  technical  difficulty  of  recognizing  the 
real  assailant.  The  failure  of  BebeFs 
thesis  is  proclaimed.  We  have  no  intention 
of  stopping  to  discuss  this  mere  verbiage. 

To  all  clear  consciences  the  fact  of  dealing 
a  blow  will  always  be  distinct  from  the 
fact  of  parrying  that  blow.  And,  what, 
although  the  guilt  of  the  German  Govern- 
ment be  not  sufficiently  established  by-  the 
mere  fact  that  they  declared  war,  if  other 
manifest  proofs  exist  to  show  their  criminal 
intention,  their  long  premeditation  and 
their  methodical  carrying  out  of  their  plan. 
All  comparison  between  us — we  who  join 
with  all  the  nation  because  she  is  attacked 
— and  those  who  joined  their  Emperor  to 
attack  us  seems  to  us  an  outrage,  which 
we  deeply  resent  and  which  makes  any 
common  understanding,  any  discussion  even, 
impossible. 

The  defence  against  aggressive  imperial- 
ism implies  for  us  something  more  than 
the  mere  driving  back  of  the  invader  from 
our  frontiers.  Now  that  the  attack  has 
been  made  we  can  no  longer  exist,  the 

254 


Appendix 

world  can  no  longer  go  on,  under  the  per- 
petual threat  of  its  recommencement.  As 
long  as  in  Berlin,  Vienna,  and  Constanti- 
nople emperors,  believing  themselves  to  be 
invested  with  the  Divine  mission  of  governing 
the  world,  continue  to  dispose  as  they  will 
of  all  the  moral  and  material  forces  of 
their  docile  people,  ready  to  follow  them 
in  all  their  enterprises,  there  can  be  no 
security  for  us,  no  social  life  possible,  no 
hope  of  development  nor  of  democratic 
progress.  No  treaty,  whatever  may  be  its 
terms,  can  give  us  the  indispensable  guarantee 
since  we  know  from  experience  how  enemy 
countries  treat  those  scraps  of  paper. 

BELGIAN  NEUTRALITY  AND  GERMANY. 

On  the  2nd  of  August  1914  the  German 
minister  at  Brussels  solemnly  declared  that 
we  should  remain  apart  from  this  conflict, 
that  it  might  be  we  should  see  our  neigh- 
bour's house  in  flames,  but  our  own  roof 
would  be  spared.  Some  hours  after  he 
delivered  the  ultimatum  giving  us,  as  is 
known,  but  a  few  hours  to  reply.  Almost 
immediately  the  invasion  began,  and 

255 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Rwsian    Revolution 

systematically  they  burned  our  towns  and 
villages. 

We  cannot  live  henceforth  in  the  per- 
petual dread  of  such  horror  happening 
again,  and  sleep  at  nights  wondering  if 
we  shall  waken  to  the  clatter  of  the  Uhlans' 
horses  through  our  streets.  Let  them  not 
tell  us  that  the  destruction  of  German 
Imperialism  is  the  business  of  the  Germans 
themselves.  It  could  only  be  so  if  their 
Imperialism  remained  at  home.  To-day 
it  has  outstepped  its  limits  and  oppresses 
us.  We  are  not  disposed  to  let  them 
work  their  will  on  us.  We  mean  to  break 
the  power  of  our  tyrant.  We  desire  this 
as  legitimately  as  the  Russians  for  example, 
who  resolved  to  break  the  power  of  their 
tyrant,  and  the  fact  that  ours  is  seated 
in  Berlin  is  not  a  sufficient  reason  to  make 
us  change  our  opinion. 

Moreover,  what  we  say  of  Belgium's 
decision  in  this  matter  applies  to  all  the 
nations  of  the  Entente. 

The  suppression  of  German  Imperialism 
is  obviously  a  world-wide  necessity. 

There  is  no  Democratic  development 
possible,  there  is  notably  no  future  for  the 

256 


Appendix 

working  classes  other  than  in  a  durable 
peace,  and  the  only  durable  peace  con- 
ceivable lies  in  the  development  of  inter- 
national law,  in  the  solution  of  conflicts 
by  legal  ruling,  in  the  establishment  of 
international  institutions  that  will  ad- 
minister justice  in  this  society  of  nations 
that  the  President  of  the  United  States 
has  announced  amid  the  applause  of  the 
democracy  of  the  world. 

But  how  could  nations  engage  in  this 
worthily,  how  could  they  become  useful 
parties  to  the  international  contract  if  in 
the  first  place  they  are  not  masters  of  their 
own  destinies,  if  they  could  not  effectively 
control  a  Government  responsible  to  them. 

We  insist  on  making  quite  clear,  to  avoid 
all  possibility  of  a  mistake,  that  the  neces- 
sary struggle,  in  our  opinion,  is  the  struggle 
against  German  Imperialism,  and  not 
against  the  German  people. 

Whatever  may  have  been  our  grief  and 
indignation  when  we  learned  what  the 
German  people  had  become  in  this  War, 
the  servile  executors  of  the  will  of  their 
master,  when  we  saw  Socialists  whom  we 
had  become  accustomed  to  consider  as 

257  B 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

brothers  taking  their  part,  in  our  country,  in 
the  pillage  and  massacre,  in  the  aggression 
and  insult  of  our  most  cherished  feelings, 
mocking  at  the  credulity  of  internation- 
alists who  counted  on  their  aid,  we  would 
not,  all  the  same,  for  that  reason  hate 
the  German  people. 

We  ask  no  revenge  against  them,  we 
do  not  wish,  when  our  turn  comes,  to  oppress 
them,  we  only  wish  to  deliver  them  in 
delivering  ourselves,  to  give  them  the  right 
to  dispose  of  themselves  in  the  same  way 
even  as  the  Russian  Revolution  has  done 
for  the  Russian  people. 

This  right,  obviously  implying  the  deliver- 
ance from  national  despotism  as  from  all 
foreign  despotism,  all  project  of  dismem- 
berment of  Germany  or  Austria-Hungary, 
whether  that  territories  really  German  be 
joined  in  spite  of  the  wish  of  their  in- 
habitants to  some  foreign  Power,  or  that, 
on  the  contrary,  existing  empires  be  forced 
to  divide  themselves  up  into  independent 
sovereignties,  would  find  us  immovably 
opposed.  And  even  any  economic  league 
against  Germany  with  the  aim  or  the  result 
of  preventing  the  legitimate  development  of 

258 


Appendix 

her  industry,  all  attempt  to  submit  her 
to  a  contribution,  or  any  action  directed 
towards  isolating  her. 

These  precautions  might  be  indispensable 
against  the  subjects  of  the  Hohenzollern, 
obstinately  resolved  to  bind  themselves  to 
their  destinies  and  to  serve  them  against 
humanity,  but  they  are  not  conceivable, 
indeed  they  would  bring  about  a  revolt 
of  the  world's  democracy  if  we  attempted 
to  apply  them  to  a  Germany  liberated. 

THE  CONDITIONS  OF  A  DURABLE  PEACE. 

Our  conception  of  a  peace  comes  from 
what  we  have  just  said  of  the  manner  in 
which  we  regard  this  War.  We  can  con- 
ceive of  no  durable  peace  being  possible 
while  the  Hohenzollerns  and  the  Hapsburgs 
keep  their  present  power.  If  it  were 
imposed  on  the  world  it  would  only  lead 
to  extension  and  reinforcement  of  tyranny, 
followed  by  a  new  war,  whose  preparation 
would  absorb  for  a  generation  probably 
the  living  forces  of  the  world,  and  would 
condemn  it  to  the  most  terrible  material, 
political,  and  moral  stagnation. 

259 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

The  greatest  danger  of  the  present 
moment  is  the  danger  of  the  free  countries 
giving  way  to  war  weariness  and  accepting 
a  precarious  peace,  a  peace  which  would 
not  solve  the  vital  problem  that  is  before  us. 

We  feel  that  we  could  not  become  a  party 
to  it  without  betraying  in  the  deepest 
sense  our  Socialistic  convictions. 

As  for  peace  with  the  peoples  of  the 
Central  Powers,  the  day  that  they  are 
delivered  from  their  rulers,  be  it  by  their 
own  effort  or  by  ours,  we  have  already 
stated  our  views  on  this  subject  to  the 
Council  of  Workmen  and  Soldiers'  deputies 
at  Petrograd. 

The  Council  of  Workmen  and  Soldiers' 
deputies  at  Petrograd  had  drawn  up  in 
their  appeal  to  the  Socialists  of  all  coun- 
tries the  essential  conditions  for  a  general 
peace.  A  peace  without  annexation  or  in- 
demnities, on  a  basis  of  the  right  of  all 
nations  to  dispose  of  themselves. 

In  the  name  of  the  Belgian  Socialists 
who  have  deputed  us  to  represent  them 
abroad,  we  have  declared  that  we  associate 
ourselves  unreservedly  with  the  sense  of 
democracy  and  justice  which  has  inspired 

260 


Appendix 

this  statement.  We  adhere  to  all  its 
terms,  but  we  desire  to  make  clear  the 
sense  in  which  we  understand  them.  Like 
all  general  formulae,  that  of  the  Committee 
is  possible  of  various  interpretations,  and 
it  is  important  to  avoid  in  exchanging 
views  the  misunderstanding  that  might 
result  by  using  equivocal  expressions. 

No  annexation.  Annexation  occurs  when 
the  belligerents  by  force  and  against  the 
will  of  the  inhabitants  attach  all  or  a  part 
of  the  territories  of  their  adversaries  to 
the  kingdom  of  their  own  sovereign.  The 
classical  example  of  this  is  the  annexation 
of  Alsace-Lorraine  by  the  German  Empire. 

If,  conforming  to  the  will  of  the  inhabi- 
tants, this  province  were  now  returned 
to  France,  we  see  in  that  no  annexation 
in  the  sense  in  which  we  have  just  denned 
it,  we  should,  on  the  contrary,  consider 
it  a  dis-annexation.  Even  the  constitu- 
tion of  the  Polish  unity,  the  completion 
of  Italian  and  Servian  unity,  desired  by 
the  population  in  question,  would  not 
have  that  character  of  violence  or  force 
which  is  characteristic  of  an  annexation. 
These  territorial  changes  would  only  serve 

261 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

for  the  realization  of  legitimate  national 
aims,  conforming  to  all  traditions  of  de- 
mocracy and  to  the  doctrine  so  often 
formulated  of  the  International. 


THE  POLICY  or  ANNEXATION. 

Belgian  Socialists  have  not  waited  till 
to-day  to  oppose  strongly  the  policy  of 
annexation.  A  small  part  of  our  Con- 
servative Party  has  made  a  campaign  in 
view  of  the  complete  victory  of  the  Allies. 
Belgium  receiving  an  important  part  of 
the  German  territory  on  the  left  bank  of 
the  Rhine,  Aix-la-Chapelle,  and  even 
Cologne.  Our  annexationists  would  reclaim 
from  Holland  a  part  of  Limburg,  yielded 
to  that  country  in  1839,  and  from  Dutch 
Flanders  which  would  give  us  access  to 
the  mouth  of  the  Scheldt,  and  would  thus 
assure  in  all  time  the  free  navigation  of 
the  river.  By  our  efforts  we  have  suc- 
ceeded in  deleting  from  the  programme 
all  claims  of  this  description.  Public 
documents  declare  it  in  which  all  the 
members  of  the  Cabinet  are  engaged. 

We  shall  content  ourselves  by  referring 
363 


Appendix 

to  the  declaration  added  by  Belgium  to 
the  general  reply  made  by  the  Allies  to 
President  Wilson.  There  it  is  expressly 
stated  that  the  nation  which  before  the 
War  only  wished  to  live  at  peace  with  its 
neighbours  has  to-day  no  other  aim  than 
the  establishment  of  peace  and  order. 
But  that  she  insists  on  a  peace  which 
would  assure  the  country  legitimate  repara- 
tion and  the  guarantee  of  future  security. 

The  refusal  of  all  annexation  does  not 
necessarily  imply  the  maintenance  of  the 
territorial  statu  quo,  we  have  already  pointed 
out  that  the  modification  of  frontiers 
seems  legitimate  to  us  when  it  conforms 
to  the  wishes  of  the  inhabitants.  With 
regard  to  Belgium  we  see  two  possible 
applications  of  this  general  principle. 

There  are  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Stavelot  several  villages,  at  present  attached 
to  Prussia,  which  appear  to  wish  to  become 
Belgian  again.  The  peace  treaty  would 
grant  them  their  aspiration  if  this  aspira- 
tion were  clearly  expressed. 

In  the  same  way  the  little  state  of 
Luxembourg,  numbering  hardly  200,000 
inhabitants,  provided  that  her  return  to 

263 


Three    Aspects    of    the    Russian    Revolution 

Belgium,  from  which  she  was  detached, 
would  give  her  more  advantages  than  she 
could  hope  for  in  a  separate  existence ; 
we  believe  that  we  shall  be  able  to  welcome 
her  as  part  of  Belgium  did  she  freely  attach 
herself. 

REPARATIONS. 

No  contributions.  We  mean  by  contri- 
butions an  indemnity  such  as  that  which 
Bismarck  exacted  in  1871  from  vanquished 
France,  or  that  which  Germany  imposes 
continually  in  occupied  Belgium.  This 
contribution  is  like  a  tax  levied  on  the 
weakest.  It  is  one  of  the  most  cynical 
applications  of  the  doctrine  that  might 
is  right.  Needless  to  say  that,  as  strongly 
as  the  Workmen  and  Soldiers'  Committee, 
we  object  to  such  an  idea.  But  just 
because  we  do  object  so  strongly  we  can 
only  admit  a  peace  treaty  which  would 
in  some  way  sanction  contributions  levied 
by  the  invader  during  the  war  being 
repaid. 

This  question  has  a  special  interest  for 
Belgium — let  us  say  without  exaggera- 
tion a  vital  interest ;  for  if  we  do  not 

204 


Appendix 

arrive  at  an  equitable  solution  of  this 
problem  the  greater  part  of  our  working- 
class  population  will  be  condemned  for  long 
years  to  suffering,  poverty,  and  lack  of 
work,  from  which  their  only  escape  would 
be  emigration  en  masse. 

German  authority  has  by  threats  and 
violence  exacted  from  our  towns  the  pay- 
ment of  several  millions  in  money  since 
the  beginning  of  the  German  occupation. 
They  requisition,  moreover,  for  the  needs 
of  the  army  a  monthly  contribution  of 
fifty  millions  in  corn,  and  that  has  been 
increased  to  sixty  millions.  They  have 
seized  several  millions  in  raw  food  material 
and  machinery.  They  have  carried  out 
much  destruction  for  military  operations  : 
in  many  cases  this  was  simply  to  terrorize 
the  population  and  assure  for  the  future 
economic  advantage  by  suppressing  a 
troublesome  competition. 

The  Belgian  nation  must  indemnify  the 
victims  of  all  such  violence,  and  this  charge 
will  be  added  to  those  which  we  have 
enumerated. 

It  would  be  the  height  of  injustice  to 
allow  the  victim  of  this  oppression  to  bear 

365 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

the  burden  of  repaying  it.  It  might  even 
lead  to  the  risk  of  her  succumbing 
beneath  the  burden. 

Surely  in  common  justice  the  author 
of  the  ill-doing  should  repair  what  wrong 
he  has  done,  in  so  far  as  it  is  reparable. 

On  October  4,  1914,  the  Chancellor 
admitted  in  the  Reichstag  that  Germany 
had  violated  the  neutrality  of  Belgium, 
and  that  she  owed  her  reparation.  We 
are  firmly  convinced  that  Russian  demo- 
cracy will  not  admit  less  than  did  the 
representative  of  the  Kaiser,  and  will 
recognize  in  this  matter  the  obvious  rights 
of  an  oppressed  nation. 

RIGHTS  OF  NATIONS  TO  DISPOSE  OF 
THEMSELVES. 

According  to  us,  this  right  implies  that 
nations  shall  have  no  foreign  rulers,  and 
that  they  cannot  be  placed  against  their 
will  under  a  selected  sovereignty.  The 
principle  proclaimed  by  the  Soviet  is 
opposed  by  its  former  conception  of  the 
territorial  statu  quo,  to  which  the  Holy 
Alliance  had  brought  its  influence  to 

266 


Appendix 

bear,  to  that  which  bound  once  for 
all  every  province  to  a  State,  or  rather 
placed  it  in  the  domain  of  a  sovereign. 
Any  change  made  was  considered  as  in- 
fringing the  divine  right  on  which  the 
sovereignty  was  founded,  but  to-day,  when 
the  Constitution  is  based  on  the  naturally 
variable  will  of  the  people,  the  right  of 
populations  to  change  their  rulers  seems 
no  less  essential  than  their  right,  to  retain 
them.  It  would  be  as  tyrannical  to 
maintain  against  their  will  in  the  Hun- 
garian or  Austrian  State,  Bosnia  or  Bohemia 
or  Transylvania,  which  aspired  to  other 
national  destinies,  as  it  would  be  to 
attach  by  force  to  the  German  Empire 
Belgium,  which  has  an  invincible  repugnance 
to  abandon  her  independent  existence. 

The  right  of  nations  to  dispose  of  them- 
selves implied  no  less  surely  that  they 
shall  have  no  masters  in  their  own  coun- 
tries either.  It  was  only  a  misleading 
verbalism,  for  example,  when  one  spoke 
of  the  right  of  Russia  to  dispose  of  herself 
before  the  Revolution,  since  the  Czar 
could  dispose  of  the  Empire.  In  the  same 
way  we  cannot  honestly  say  that  Germany 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

disposes  of  herself  as  long  as  the  semi- 
absolutism  of  the  Hohenzollern  exists. 
This  seems  to  us  essential.  We  consider 
the  Democratic  Constitution  of  Germany 
not  only  as  a  right  that  she  can  claim, 
but  as  a  condition  to  which  other  nations 
have  the  right  to  subordinate  their 
adhesion  to  a  general  peace. 

We  can  certainly  trust  ourselves  to  an 
agreement  signed  in  the  name  of  a 
people  having  the  will  and  the  power  to 
guide  their  own  destinies,  but  we  can 
consider  only  as  another  scrap  of  paper 
a  treaty  which  would  be  guaranteed  only 
by  an  Emperor  accustomed  to  hold  lightly 
his  given  word,  and  having,  as  in  the 
past,  the  power  to  lead  a  docile  nation 
where  he  chose. 

We  do  not  hesitate  to  add  that  this 
necessity  for  liberty  a  interio,  without 
which  the  world  can  know  no  durable 
peace,  is  necessary.  What  we  have  just 
said  can  be  applied  elsewhere  than  to 
Germany.  A  Democratic  Constitution 
should  be  brought  into  being  every- 
where, developed  or  consolidated,  so  that 
nations  can  at  last  associate  them- 


Appendix 

selves  in  the  same  international  justice. 
Our  views  on  this  point  are  in  entire 
accordance  with  those  which  citizen 
MacDonald  expressed  in  a  letter  to  one 
of  ourselves,  a  letter  which  has  since  been 
made  public. 

This  opinion  had,  moreover,  been  forcibly 
expressed  in  the  manifesto  of  President 
Wilson,  and  all  the  Socialist  democracies 
of  the  allied  countries  find  in  it  an  echo 
of  their  own  views.  We  believe  that  even 
on  this  point  the  opinion  of  our  Russian 
friends  will  be  the  same  as  our  own,  and 
that  if  they  have  not  expressly  mentioned 
the  Democratic  Constitution  of  States  and 
the  establishment  of  a  Society  of  Nations 
in  the  programme  that  they  submitted  to 
the  working  classes  of  the  whole  world, 
it  is  because  they  have  considered  both 
as  implicitly  understood  in  the  right  of 
nations  to  dispose  of  their  own  destinies. 

AGAINST  IMPERIALISM. 

We  shall  rejoice  unreservedly  if  it  is 
permitted  us  to  see  in  all  countries,  in 
those  governed  by  the  coalition  of 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

Emperors  as  in  those  of  the  Entente,  the 
energetic  action  of  the  working  class  against 
Imperialism  carried  out  on  the  lines  of 
the  programme  that  the  Workmen  and 
Soldiers'  Council  has  formulated,  and  of 
which  we  have  endeavoured  to  explain  the 
exact  bearing  in  the  first  part  of  the 
memorandum.  We  wish  to  state  also  that, 
in  what  concerns  the  Belgian  Socialists, 
they  have  not  for  one  day  ceased  fighting 
against  the  policy  of  aggression  and  con- 
quest. We  have  been  accused  of  having 
sacrificed  ourselves  to  Imperialism  because 
we  have  defended  our  independence  and 
our  national  liberty,  in  combination  with 
all  classes  in  our  country,  because  one  of 
us  has  accepted  a  place  in  the  Committee 
of  Public  Safety  in  the  Government  of 
Havre.  It  is  not  the  Russian  Socialists, 
placed  since  the  Revolution  in  the  same 
difficult  circumstances,  and  who  have  been 
led  by  these  circumstances  themselves  to 
like  solutions,  who  will  echo  these  calumnies. 
They  understand,  as  we  did,  that  the  duty 
of  defending  liberty  against  foreign  tyranny 
is  as  sacred  a  duty  as  to  defend  it  within 
our  own  country. 

270 


Appendix 

But  though  we  do  not  deny  our  former 
conduct,  though  we  proudly  affirm  that 
our  Party  and  ourselves  have  fulfilled  in 
this  matter  our  duty  as  Socialists,  we 
hasten  to  state,  and  we  state  it  gladly, 
that  the  Russian  Revolution  has  created 
new  conditions  which  allow  of  an  added 
intensity  and  a  greater  influence  being 
brought  to  bear  on  anti-imperialistic  action. 

Free  Russia  has  just  revised  and  purified 
her  war  aims.  The  moment  seems  to 
have  come  when  the  Allied  Socialist  Parties 
can  with  more  authority  and  more  hope 
of  success  than  in  the  days  of  Czardom 
demand  that  their  respective  Governments 
do  the  same. 

To  the  diplomatic  step  which  the  Pro- 
visional Russian  Government  has  just 
inaugurated  in  this  respect  can  and  ought 
to  be  added  the  political  influence  of  the 
Socialist  Party,  not  only  influence  with 
ministers  and  rulers,  not  only  parliamentary 
influence,  but  influence  on  public  opinion, 
on  the  opinion  of  the  masses. 

In  this  necessary,  positive,  immediate 
action  we  are  ready  to  collaborate  with 
all  our  strength. 

271 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

It  is  by  this  that  can  be  manifested  in 
full  publicity  and  open  daylight  the  com- 
munity of  thought  and  action  of  the  working 
classes,  and  the  International  can  be  re- 
constituted as  something  more  than  the 
mere  reunion  of  Committees. 


RECONSTRUCTION   OF  THE    INTERNATIONAL. 

We  are  firmly  convinced  that  the  Inter- 
national must  be  reconstructed  from  its 
very  foundation ;  that  the  action  of  the 
masses  must  precede  any  action  of  the 
congress ;  which  can  only  bear  fruit  if  it 
has  the  support  of  the  people.  It  is 
sufficient  to  say  that  we  could  not  agree 
in  the  present  circumstances  to  the 
suggestion  of  a  general  conference  to  which 
would  be  admitted  unconditionally  all  the 
parties  and  bodies  affiliated  to  the  Socialist 
International  Bureau. 

A  plenary  assembly,  to  which  would  be 
admitted  those  who  support  the  present 
policy  of  the  Socialist  majority  of  the 
Central  Empires,  appears  to  us  both  useless 
and  dangerous — useless  because  such  an 
association  of  contrary  opinions  could 

272 


Appendix 

produce  no  action.  Now,  to  our  great  grief, 
events  have  constantly  shown  us  since  the 
beginning  of  the  war  that  the  Socialist 
majority  of  the  Central  Empires,  or  at 
least  the  leaders  who  speak  in  their  name, 
the  only  ones  that  we  could  meet  in  con- 
ference, are  opposed  to  us  in  thought  and 
action. 

They  attached  themselves  from  the  very 
first  day  to  that  aggression  of  which  we 
have  been  the  victims.  They  have  not 
ceased  to  uphold  it,  and  they  are  still 
upholding  it. 

It  is  with  their  complicity,  with  the 
help  that  they  give  their  Emperor,  that 
our  country  is  invaded  and  that  our 
comrades  suffer. 

We  are  fighting  for  our  liberty  and  for 
the  defence  of  universal  democracy. 

They  are  supporting  against  the  Union 
of  Democratic  Nations  the  military  effort 
of  the  last  semi-absolute  monarchs.  They 
are  even  supporting  it  against  the  first 
effort  of  German  democracy. 

It  is  they  who  foresee  and  who  fight 
against  the  revolt  against  the  Hohenzollern. 

What  purpose  could  a  meeting  of  them 
278  s 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

and  ourselves  serve,  in  what  could  it  end, 
other  than  some  equivocal  resolution, 
whose  skilfully  veiled  phrases  should  hide 
the  lack  of  unanimity  ? 

We  believe  that  it  is  frankness  rather 
than  diplomatic  skill  that  the  international 
working  class  has  need  of  at  present. 

If  an  assembly  in  such  conditions  seemed 
simply  useless,  we  might  still  give  in  to  it 
in  deference  to  our  comrades.  But  we  con- 
sider it  dangerous  for  the  cause  of  demo- 
cracy, and  even  for  the  cause  of  the 
International  itself.  That  is  why  we 
insist.  It  is  dangerous  because  it  is  mis- 
leading ;  because  it  obscures  the  situation ; 
because  it  holds  out  the  illusion  that  a 
just  and  durable  peace  is  possible  before 
Imperialism  has  been  destroyed  ;  because, 
finally,  in  holding  out  the  false  hope  of 
an  equitable  and  early  solution  it  weakens 
energy  and  favours  that  drifting  of  weak 
wills  towards  peace  at  any  price.  We 
who  aspire  to  peace  only  with  liberty 
cannot  associate  ourselves  with  what  might 
favour  a  German  peace,  under  the  hege- 
mony of  the  King  of  Prussia. 

We  wish  it  to  be  clearly  understood 
274 


Appendix 

that  we  do  not  refuse  to  meet  the  German 
people,  but  to  associate  ourselves  with  the 
supporters  of  the  Imperialism  of  William 
and  Charles. 


GERMAN  SOCIALISTS. 

We  see  no  objection  to  join  in  common 
action  with  those  who,  in  the  Central 
Empires,  are  opposed  to  a  policy  of  aggres- 
sion and  conquest,  and  have  the  same 
aims  as  ourselves.  We  would  not  refuse 
to  meet  the  Majority  Socialists  if,  renounc- 
ing their  present  errors,  they  openly  and 
bravely  took  part  against  their  Emperors. 
That  is  why  we  have  asked  the  French 
and  British  delegations  not  to  admit  to 
the  proposed  Conference  all  the  parties 
and  bodies  affiliated  to  the  International, 
but  to  make  a  condition  of  admission  that 
each  group  shall  give  its  adherence  to  an 
anti-Imperialist  programme  which  would 
serve  as  the  basis  of  the  deliberations. 

The  Soviet,  in  a  spirit  of  conciliation, 
has  agreed  in  a  measure  to  this  request, 
declaring  that  only  those  would  be  author- 
ized to  take  part  in  the  Conference  who 

275 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

would  accept  the  principles  of  peace 
formulated  by  the  C.O.S. 

Unfortunately,  the  formula  of  the  Soviet 
admits  of  extremely  different  interpreta- 
tions. Obviously,  before  being  of  use  for 
this  Conference  its  sense  ought  to  be  clear. 
Without  that  there  would  be  a  regrettable 
misunderstanding,  as  the  basis  of  our  work 
and  the  whole  object  for  which  new  Russia 
calls  the  International  would  be  affected 
by  it. 

The  essential,  vital  point  which  remains 
to  be  discussed  is  to  know  by  what  pro- 
cedure one  could  fix  this  common  interpre- 
tation, which  would  then  be  imposed  on 
all  the  participants  and  prevent  these 
which  are  separated  from  us  by  a  moral 
abyss,  as  well  as  by  a  political  abyss,  from 
changing  the  aims  of  our  meeting  and 
making  it  serve  for  the  execution  of 
projects  conceived  in  the  Government 
circles  of  Berlin  and  Vienna. 

Three  methods  immediately  present 
themselves  to  our  minds.  The  first  would 
consist  of  making  clear  the  reading  of  the 
formula  of  the  Soviet.  Each  party  would 
then  have  to  decide  if  it  would  accept  it. 
276 


Appendix 

But  the  Soviet  does  not  seem  to  desire 
to  do  this.  It  seems,  we  believe,  not  to 
have  the  power  to  decide  alone  a  question 
which  has  an  international  bearing.  And 
we  can  only  appreciate  these  scruples. 

THE  EXCHANGE  or  VIEWS  OF  STOCKHOLM. 

The  second  is  that  which  the  organizers 
of  the  Stockholm  Conference  have  already 
adopted  ;  to  obtain  an  exchange  of  different 
views  between  the  convening  authorities 
and  the  different  international  sections  of 
their  bodies.  All  would  thus  be  able  to 
state  their  views  and  their  intentions. 
Many  misunderstandings  arising  from  the 
rarity  of  personal  contact  since  the  War 
between  the  militants  of  different  coun- 
tries would  disappear,  and  perhaps  it  would 
end  by  certain  general  opinions  standing 
out  which  might  thus  serve  as  a  basis 
for  the  convocation  of  a  General  Conference 
of  ant i- Imperialist  Socialists. 

We  add  that  in  our  mind  this  exchange 
of  views  can  only  be  of  service  if  care  be 
taken  to  remove  from  it  all  character  of 
secret  diplomacy.  There  must  be  no 

277 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

question  of  some  militants,  more  or  less 
delegates,  discussing  together  in  the  twilight 
of  private  meetings  and  replacing  in  the 
debate  the  working  classes — the  party 
interested.  They  must  speak  in  the  name 
of  their  working  classes,  give  their  views 
consciously,  clearly,  honestly  expressed. 
In  other  words,  the  first  condition  of  all 
useful  debate  is,  in  all  the  countries  taking 
part,  this  action  of  the  masses  that  we 
have  tried  to  make  clear  above.  It  only, 
moreover,  can  guaranteee  the  sincerity  of 
engagements.  These  alone  count  in  our 
eyes  that  can  be  interpreted  by  acts,  and, 
after  the  terrible  experience  we  have  had 
we  cannot  reasonably  be  asked  to  accept 
any  other. 

In  short,  we  ask  that  in  all  countries 
Socialists  should  carry  on  a  campaign  and 
produce  a  general  public  movement,  a 
movement  on  the  part  of  the  masses  to 
bring  the  Governments  to  give  up  all  War 
aim  of  an  Imperialist  character  and  to 
accept  the  peace  formula  of  the  Soviet 
explained  and  made  clear. 

We  accept  the  idea  of  an  exchange  of 
views  analogous  to  that  of  the  Dutch- 

278 


Appendix 

Scandanavian  Committee  of  Stockholm, 
the  exchange  of  views  based  on  the  action 
of  which  we  have  spoken  in  the  previous 
paragraph. 

We  believe  that  under  these  conditions 
great  results  could  be  achieved. 

THE  GENERAL  CONFERENCE. 

Lastly,  we  believe  that  these  prelimi- 
naries might  lead  to  the  drawing  up  of  a 
programme  for  a  General  Conference 
sufficiently  definite  to  prevent  any  mis- 
understandings, and  to  discourage  all 
diplomatic  manoeuvres  of  our  adversaries, 
and  to  keep  away  those  nominally  Socialist 
bodies  who  would  not  decide  to  co-operate 
sincerely  in  the  anti-Imperialist  cause  to 
which  the  International  would  convene 
them. 

And  we  wish  to  state  clearly  that  as 
soon  as  these  conditions  are  fulfilled  Belgian 
Socialists  will  be  glad  to  attend  such  a 
plenary  assembly,  which  would  then  be 
the  real  International. 

Before  closing,  we  would  say  a  word  on 
one  of  the  questions  submitted  in  the  sheet 

279 


Three    Aspects    of   the    Russian    Revolution 

which  we  have  received  from  the  Dutch- 
Scandinavian  Committee,  the  Flemish 
question. 


THE  INDEPENDENCE  OF  BELGIUM. 

With  regard  to  Belgium,  we  are  bound 
to  state  that  there  is  a  very  big  difference 
between  the  constant  assurances  that  we 
are  given  on  the  subject  of  the  political 
independence  of  the  country,  and  the 
manner  in  which  the  occupant  administers 
it  and  insists  on  changing  the  fundamental 
institutions. 

If  Germany's  intention  is  to  evacuate 
Belgium  and  to  respect  her  independence, 
we  cannot  understand  why  she  is  carrying 
out  a  policy  which  can  only  be  explained 
by  her  desire  to  remain.  It  is  notably 
in  such  a  spirit  that  she  is  trying  to  exploit 
the  Flemish  question,  to  set  the  Flemish 
and  the  Walloons  against  each  other,  and 
so  demoralize  the  nation. 

The  Flemish  people,  as  much  as  the 
Walloons,  wish  to  remain  Belgian,  in  an 
independent  Belgium.  They  do  not 
dream  of  accepting  from  the  hands  of  the 

280 


Appendix 

enemy  occupying  their  land  reforms  in  the 
German  interest. 

They  intend  the  necessary  linguistic 
changes  to  be  accomplished  by  the  Belgian 
Parliament,  and  to  be  the  expression  of 
the  collective  will  of  the  nation. 

s.  JEMILE  VANDERVELDE. 

signed      LOUIS  DE  BROUCK&RE. 


Printed  in  Ortat  Britain  by 

DJTWllf   BBOTH1RB.   LIMITED,   THX   GRE9HAM   PRESS,  WOKIKG  AND  LOHDOH 


War  and  Revolution  in  Asiatic 


BY  M.  PHILIPS  PRICE 

Demy  Svo.  About  los.  6d.  net. 

In  this  book  Mr.  M.  Philips  Price,  who  went  to  the  Near  East  in  1915  as 
the  correspondent  of  the  Manchester  Guardian,  gives  an  account  of  his 
experiences  and  observations  during  his  journeys  through  Northern  Persia, 
Armenia,  and  the  Caucasus.  The  first  two  chapters  tell  the  story  of  the 
War  on  the  Caucasus  Front  down  to  the  Fall  of  Erzerum.  Other  chapters 
consist  of  the  journal  of  his  travels  through  the  territories  occupied  by 
the  Russian  Army,  where  he  spent  many  months  in  organizing  relief 
for  the  destitute  native  population.  The  last  four  chapters  describe  the 
Revolution  in  the  Caucasus,  and  discuss  the  racial  problems  and  the 
political  future  of  the  countries  he  visited. 


Macedonia 


BY  TIH.  R.  GEORGEVITCH,  D.PHIL. 
Demy  %vo,  7/.  64.  net. 

In  spite  of  all  Bulgaria's  treachery  and  baseness  in  this  war,  part  of 
European  public  opinion,  even  unfortunately  in  justice-loving  England, 
still  takes  Bulgaria's  part  with  regard  to  Macedonia.  The  reason  for  this 
lies  in  pure  ignorance  of  the  fact  that  the  Macedonians  are  Serbs  as  to 
their  origin,  their  history,  their  language,  tradition,  national  character 
and  customs,  and,  last  but  not  least,  in  their  national  sentiment,  both  in 
the  past  and  present.  The  misleading  Bulgarian  impression  in  Macedonia 
is  a  purely  artificial  and  forced  product.  This  book  purposes  to  prove  by 
documentary  evidence  what  is  the  only  truth  concerning  Macedonia, 
viz.  that  it  is  Serbian. 

A   Dying  Empire 

BY   BOGUMIL   VOSNJAK 
WITH  A  PREFACE  BY  T.  P.  O'CONNOR,  M.P. 

Cretan  %vo.  4/.  6d.  net.     'Postege  $</. 

In  this  account  of  the  Dying  Empire  of  Austria  the  author  has  tiied 
to  describe  the  sociological  factors  in  the  breakdown  of  the  Hapsburg 
Empire,  and  to  show  that  in  the  fabric  of  a  "  Central  Europe  "  is  closely 
woven  the  idea  of  a  predominating  Pan-Germanism.  Either  Germany 
must  stretch  from  Hamburg  to  Trieste  and  Salonika,  or  Austria-Hungary 
must  be  dismembered.  There  is  no  alternative. 


BY   A.    M.   POOLEY 

L«te  Exhibitioner  of  Clare  College,  Cambridge.     Editor  of  "The  Secret 
Memoirs  of  Count  Hayashi,"  etc.,  etc. 

Demy  Svo.  los.  6d.  net. 

"Extremely  critical  and  of  exceptional  interest." — Daily  News. 
"  Is  arrestingly  candid  and  absorbingly  interesting."— Glasgow  Herald. 

Problems  of  the   Peace 

BY   WILLIAM   HARBUTT   DAWSON 

Author  of  "  The  Evolution  of  Modern  Germany " 
Demy  8vo.  js.  6J.  net. 

"  Mr.  Dawson's  volume  stands  out  conspicuously  from  a  multitude  of 
recent  publications  respecting  problems  of  the  peace.  '  It  is  not  heat, 
but  light,'  is  the  refrain  of  every  chap'er,  and  most  readers  will  admit 
that  he  has  helped  to  clear  up  some  .of  the  many  difficulties  involved 
in  the  problems  of  the  peace.'1 — Times. 

After -War    Problems 

BY  THE   LATE   EARL    OF   CROMER,   VISCOUNT 

HALDANE,     THE      BISHOP     OF     EXETkR, 

PROF.  ALFRED  MARSHALL,  AND  OTHERS 

EDITED  BY  WILLIAM  HARBUTT  DAWSON 
Demy  8vo.  THIRD  IMPRESSION,      js.  6d.  net.     Postage  6d. 

"Valuable,  clear,  sober,  and  judicial." — The  Times. 
"Will  be  very  helpful  to  thoughtful  persons." — Morning  Post. 
"  A  book  of  real  national  importance,  and  of  which  the  value  may  very 
well  prove  to  be  incalculable." — Daily  Telegraph. 

The   Choice  Before  Us 

BY  G.  LOWES    DICKINSON 

Demy  8r0.  SECOND  IMPRESSION.       6s.  net.     Postage  6d. 

"  There  are  many  pages  in  this  volume  which  express  admirably  the 
opinions  of  calm,  cleai  -thinking  men." — The  Times.  „ 

"A  noble  book  which  everyone  should  read." — Daily  News, 


Poland   Past  and   Present 

Crown  8vo.  BY  J.  H.  HARLEY.  4;.  6</.  net.  P»it*ze  $<t. 

"  We  can  recommend  the  history  of  this  wonderful  people  .  .  .  setting 
out  clearly  the  chief  points  of  a  romantic  story." — Morning  Post. 


Bohemia's  Case  for  Indepen- 
dence         BY  EDWARD  BENES,  D.LITT. 

v*^l*^*V.»  Lecturer  at  Prague  University,  etc.,  etc. 

WITH   AN  INTRODUCTIOK  BY  HENRY  WICKHAM  STEED 
Crown  8vo.  2/.  6J.  net. 

"  A  short  and  telling  volume,  which  ought  to  be  read  and  made  known 
widely." — New  Europe. 


The  Conscience  of  Europe- 
The  War  and   the  Future 

BY    PROF.    ALEXANDER    W.    RIMINGTON 

Crttvn  8vo.  $s.  6d.  net. 

"  A  remarkable  and  deeply  interesting  book,  showing  courage  and 
independence  of  thought  combined  with  keen  human  sympathies,  and 
which  should  make  a  wide  appeal."  —  M.  J.  E. 


Economic  Conditions  1815  &  1914 

BY  H.  R.  HODGES,  B.Sc.  (Econ.) 
Crotvn  8  vo.  zs.  6d.  net. 

"An  interesting  record  of  real  advance  in  social  organization."  —  The 
Challenge. 
"A  highly  instructive  and  interesting  comparison."  —  Observer, 


Towards  Industrial  Freedom 

BY  EDWARD   CARPENTER 

Crown  8vo.     ZND  IMPRESSION.     Paper,  zs.  6d.  net.     Cloth,  $s.  6J.  net. 

"  A  virile  and  practicable  discourse  that  should  be  in  the  hands  of  CTCT y 
trade  unionist." — Sheffield  Independent. 

The  Free  Press 

BY   HILAIRE    BELLOC 

Crown  Svo.  zs.  6d.  net.     Postage  \d. 

The  purpose  of  this  essay  is  to  discuss  the  evils  of  the  great  modern 
Capitalist  Press,  its  function  in  vitiating  and  misinforming  opinion,  and 
in  putting  power  into  ignoble  hands  ;  its  correction  by  the  formation  of 
small  independent  organs,  and  their  probably  increasing  effect. 

War  and  Civilization 

BY  THE  RT.  HON.  J.  M.  ROBERTSON,  M.P. 

SECOND  EDITION,  WITH  A  POSTSCRIPT. 
Crown  8vo.     Cloth.  zs.  6d.  net.     Postage  \d. 

"A  spirited  piece  of  international  polemic.  It  is  always  acute, 
moderate  and  well  informed." — Manchester  Guardian. 

The  Future  of  Constantinople 

By   LEONARD  S.  WOOLF 

Crown  8vo.  zs.  6d.  net.     Postage  \d. 

"  A  very  thorough  piece  of  work  and  is  one  of  the  essential  books." — 
Leicester  Pioneer. 

"An  admirable  little  book." — Common  Sense. 

Defence    AStudyin 

I^CICIICC      Militarism 
BY  J.   RAMSAY   MACDONALD,   M.P. 

Crown  8vo.  THIRD  IMPRESSION.        zs.  6d.  net.    Paper,  is.  net. 

"  I  am  convinced  that  Mr.  Macdonald's  is  the  wisest,  the  most  states- 
manlike, and  the  most  important  of  the  books  written  on  the  possibilities 
of  future  and  permanent  peace." — GPRALP  GOUGH  in  The  Herald. 


Towards  a  Lasting  Settlement 

By  G.  LOWES  DICKINSON,  H.  N.  BRAILSFORD,  J.  A.  HOB- 
SON,  VERNON  LEE,  PHILIP  SNOWDEN,  M.P.,  A.  MAUD 
ROYDEN,  H.  SIDEBOTHAM,  and  others.  Edited  by  CHARLES 
RODEN  BUXTON. 

SECOND  IMPRESSION.        Crown  8vo,  Cloth,  is.  6d.  net.    Postage  5d. 
"  The  essays  are  contributions  of  real  help  towards  the  solution  of  great 
and  inevitable  problems." — PROF.  GILBERT  MURRAY  in  The  Nation. 

Towards  International  Government  Byj.A.HOBsoN. 

THIRD  IMPRESSION.  Crown  8vo,  Cloth,  2s.  6d.  net.    Postage  $d. 

"Always  lucid,  cogent,  and  unflinching  in  his  argument,  and  .  .  . 
leads  us  step  by  step  towards  the  conclusion  that  .  .  .  the  boldest 
solution  is  safest  and  simplest." — Manchester  Guardian. 

The  Future  of  Democracy         By  H.  M.  HYNDMAN. 

Crown  8vo,  2s.  6d.  net.     Postage  5^. 
"  Well  worth  reading." — Manchester  Courier. 
"Written  with  all  his  old  force  and  lucidity." — Yorkshire  Post. 

The  Healing  of  Nations     By  EDWARD  CARPENTER. 

STH  EDITION.  Cr.  8vo,  Cloth,  2s.  6d.  net.  Paper,  2s.  net.  Postage  <\d. 
"  Profoundly  interesting.  Well  worth  most  careful  attention." — Observer. 
"A  wise  and  understanding  book." — T.  P.'s  Weekly. 

Above  the  Battle 

By  ROMAIN  ROLLAND.     TRANSLATED  BY  C.  K.  OGDEN,  M.A. 

THIRD  IMPRESSION.  Crown  8vo,  Cloth,  2s.  6d.  net.    Postage  $d. 

"  We  must  leave  unnoticed  many  fine  and  penetrating  thoughts  and 

many  stirring  passages  in  these  golden  pages.     In  them,  let  us  say,  once 

for  all,  speaks  the  finest  spirit  of  modern  France." — The  Times  Literary 

Supplement. 

The  War  and  the  Balkans 

By  NOEL  BUXTON,   M.P.,  and  CHARLES   RODEN   BUXTON. 
3RD  EDITION.    Cr.  8vo,  Cloth,  2s.  6d.  net.    Paper  is.  net.    Postage,  4^. 
"  Far  and  away  the  best  statement  that  has  yet  appeared  of  the  attitude 
of  the  Balkan  States." — Sir  EDWIN  PEARS  in  the  Daily  Chronicle, 


The  European  Anarchy 

By  G.  LOWES  DICKINSON,  Author  of  "  A  Modern  Symposium," 
etc.,  etc.    THIRD  IMPRESSION.    Cr.  8vo,  Cloth,  zs.  6d.  net.    Postage  4^. 
"  This  is  one  of  the  shrewdest  books  on  the  causes  of  the  war  that  we 
have  read." — The  Economist. 

The  Deeper  Causes  of  the   War 

By    EMILE    HOVELAQUE.       With    an    INTRODUCTION    by    SIR 
WALTER  RALEIGH. 

SECOND  IMPRESSION.        Crown  8vo,  Cloth,  2s.  6d.  net.    Postage  4^. 
"  This  is  one  of  the  most  thoughtful  and  suggestive  books  that  the  great 
war  has  inspired." — Aberdeen  Journal. 

The  United  States  and  the  War 

By  GILBERT  VIVIAN  SELDES.    Cr.  8vo,  25.  6d.  net.     Postage  $d. 
"  A  brilliant  and  successful  attempt  to  explain  why  it  took  America 
two  years  and  eight  months  to  discover  that  the  German  Government 
was  her  enemy." — The  Athenceum. 

The  American  League  to  Enforce  Peace 

By    C.    R.    ASHBEE.    With    an    INTRODUCTION  by  G.    LOWES 
DICKINSON.  Crown  8vo,  2s.  6d.  net.     Postage  $d. 

"  Provides    much    information    concerning    contemporary   American 
thought." — Aihenanint. 

The  Menace  of  Peace 

By  GEORGE  D.  HERRON.       Crown  8vo,  2s.  6d.  net.    Postage  4<f. 
"  He  says  some  magnificent  things  magnificently  " — New  Witness. 

Our  Ultimate  Aim  in  the  War       By  GEORGE  G. 

ARMSTRONG.  Crown  8vo,  Cloth,  2s.  6rf.  net.     Postage  $d. 

"  Strikes  a  note  to  which  the  best  of  his  countrymen  will  respond." — 
Times. 

The  Coming  Scrap  of  Paper  By  EDWARD  w. 

EDSALL.  Crown  8vo,  Cloth,  2s.  6d.  net.    Postage  4_rf. 

"  One  of  the  most  interesting  and  illuminative  of  recent   financial 
essays,  set  forth  with  skill  and  lucidity." — Financial  News. 

The  True  Cause  of  the  Commercial  Difficulties 
of  Great  Britain  By  CECIL  BALFOUR  PHIPSON. 

Edited  by  MARK  B.   F.   MAJOR  and  EDWARD  W.  EDSALL. 

Crown  8vo,  2s.  6d.  net.     Postage  3^. 
"The  argument  is  clearly  and  lucidly  stated." — Guardian. 

Perpetual  Peace     By  IMMANUEL  KANT. 

CHEAP  EDITION.  Crown  8vo,  25.  net.    Postage  4d. 

" '  Perpetual  Peace '  may  some  day  be  looked  upon  as  the  foundation 
of  a  new  social  system."— T.  P.'s  Weekly. 


The  Political  History  of  Japan  in  the  Mciji  Era 

By  PROF.  W.  W.  McLAREN.     Demy  8vo,  12$.  6d.  net.     Postage  6d. 
"  A  valuable  and  suggestive  book." — Saturday  Review. 

History  of  Germany  in  the  Nineteenth  Century 

By  HE1NRICH  VON  TREITSCHKE.  Translated  by  E.  and  C. 
PAUL.  With  INTRODUCTIONS  by  WILLIAM  HARBUTT  DAWSON. 
Six  Vols.  Price  I2s.  6rf.  net  per  vol.  (in  sets  only).  Postage  6d.  per  vol. 

Poland  and  the  Polish  Question     Impressions  and 
Afterthoughts     By  NINIAN  HILL. 
Demy  8vo,  with  Illustrations  and  a  Map,  IDS.  6d.  net.     Postage  5rf. 

Poland's  Case  for  Independence 

Demy  8vo,  75.  6d.  net.     Postage  4^. 

"A  book  .  .  .  rich  in  instruction  and   in   interest  for  all  classes  of 
readers." — Scotsman.  "  An  admirable  summary  of  the  country's 

distinguished  and  turbulent  past." — Pall  Mall  Gazette. 

History     of    Africa     South     of     the     Zambesi 

From  September  1505  to  September  1795.  In  Three  Volumes. 
With  Maps  and  Plates.  By  DR.  GEORGE  McCALL  THEAL. 
Vol.  I.,  THIRD  EDITION,  Revised  and  Enlarged.  (Vols.  II.  and 
III.,  REVISED  AND  ENLARGED  EDITION,  in  preparation.)  Demy  8vo, 
75.  6d.  net. 

History   of   South   Africa  from    1795  to   1872 

Five    Volumes.     With    15   Maps  and   Plans.     By  DR.   GEORGE 
McCALL  THEAL.    Vols.  I.  and  II.,  FOURTH  EDITION  ;  Vol.  III., 
THIRD  EDITION,  all  Enlarged  and  Rewritten  ;  Vols.  IV.  and  V.  are  in 
their  SECOND  EDITION.    Demy  8vo,  75.  6d.  net. 
SUPPLEMENTARY  VOLUME    (1873-1881)  in  preparation. 

History  of  the  Renaissance,  the  Protestant 
Revolution,  and  the  Catholic  Reformation  in 
Continental  Europe  By  EDWARD  M.  HULME. 

Demy  8vo,  589  pages,  with  8  Maps,  IDS.  net.     Postage  6d. 

The  French  Renascence     By  DR.  CHARLES  SAROLEA. 

Large  Crown  8vo,  Cloth,  with  Illustrations,  55.  net.     Postage  6d. 
"  This  is  the  work  of  a  philosopher,  a  jurist,  and  a  keen  observer." — Globe. 

A   Brief  History  of  the  French   Revolution 

By  F.  W.  AVELING,  M.A.,  B.Sc.     Illustrated.      Crown  8vo,  2s.  net. 
"A  concise  and  clear  sketch  of  that  terrible  drama." 

A  Short  History  of  English  Rural  Life 

From    the    Anglo-Saxon    Invasion    to    the    Present  Time.      By 

MONTAGUE  FORDHAM,  M.A.  (Cantab).  With  a  PREFACE  by 
SIR  CHARLES  BATHURST,  M.A.,  M.P. 

Large  Crown  8vo,  Cloth,  35.  6d.  net ;  Paper  25.  6d.  net.  Postage  4^. 

LONDON  :  GEORGE  ALLEN   £  UNWIN   LIMITED 


DATE  DUE 

BPU  UL 

^   i    S:    IS/ 

OAYLORD 

PRINTCOINU    •   » 

poult 

A     000805171     6 


