.  - ,.; ,?  ^^-^ 


%  - ''.,' 


/  /<? 


\^^^e,K.      K^r\. 


IS  THE 

RUSSIAN   REVOLUTION 

A 

BOURGEOIS  REVOLUTION? 


A 

KEEN 

ANALYSIS 

OF  SITUATION 

IN  SOVIET  RUSSIA 


Price,  10  Cents 


THE  VOICE  OF  LABOR 
2003  North  California  Avenue,  Chicago,  Illinois 


D 


^^^^ 


483 


ssKssaiesBBS 


MMKMhmaS 


The  fact  that  you  have  bought  this  pamphlet 
is  an  indication  that  you  are  interested  in  other 
things  than  those  usually  followed  by  the  average 
worker.  How  great  your  interest  is  we  do  not 
know,  but  we  seek  to  hold  your  attention  to  the 
extent  of  bringing  you  to  the  point  of  joining  the 
large  circle  of  workers  who  read  the  ''VOICE  OF 
LABOR."  If  you  want  to  know  what  is  REALLY 
going  on  you  must  read  the  'TQICE  OF  LABOR." 
We  invite  you  to  purchase  a  copy  from  the  nearest 
news-stand.  If  they  do  not  sell  it,  let  us  know, 
and  we  will  send  you  a  sample  copy  for  you  to 
pass  judgment  on. 


■f 


^-.-A 


s 

Q 
m 

5-t 

a> 

5e 


c3 


3 


CO 
U 

o 
H 

0) 


m 
a; 

bfl 
Q 


Is  The  Russian  Revolution 
A  Bourgeois  Revolution? 


In  1905-1906,  after  the  first  Russian  Revolution,  the 
question  as  to  the  social  character  and  the  part  to  be 
played  by  the  next  Russian  Revolution  was  of  great  im- 
portance in  the  process  of  self-determination  of  the  labor 
movement.  The  questions  asked  were:  "Will  it  be  a 
bourgeois  or  a  proletarian  revolution?  Which  class  will 
lead  it  if  it  is  to  be  a  bourgeois  revolution  ?  What  will  be 
the  relations  of  this  class  to  the  other  classes  ?" 

Even  the  first  revolution  had  settled  many  disputes  in 
spite  of  the  fact  that  it  had  not  reached  its  goal.  Although 
it  was  suppressed  before  it  could  decide  upon  vital  ques- 
tions, the  questions  of  power,  it  became  absolutely  clear 
that  the  bourgeoisie  was  a  counter-revolutionary  class 
which  sought  to  enter  into  an  agreement  with  the  old 
Czarist  regime  for  the  perpetuation  of  the  condition  of 
half  serfdom  in  order  to  subdue  the  proletariat.  Two 
cliasses  proved  to  be  revolutionary,  the  workers  and  the 
peasants.  The  workers  were  the  leaders,  the  main  driving 
force  of  the  revolution. 

During  the  decade  between  the  first  revolution  and  that 
of  1917,  the  disputes  over  the  character  of  the  revolution 
gave  place  to  definite  questions  dealing  with  the  conditions 
for  organizing  the  working  class  after  the  revolution,  the 
question  of  social  changes  as  a  result  of  the  first  revolu- 
tion, and  particularly  the  question  dealing  with  the 
changes  within  the  working  class  and  with  Stolypin's 
agrarian  policy.    The  March  and  October  revolutions,  four 


years  of  Soviet  rule  and  finally  our  new  economic  policy 
have  restored  the  question  of  the  character  of  our  revolu- 
tion to  the  order  of  the  day.  The  Mensheviks  and  their 
international  friends,  the  Social-Democrats  and  Centrists. 
are  madly  howling  over  the  new  economic  policy  of  the 
Soviet  government,  and  are  putting  the  following  question 
to  us :  *'Why  was  all  that  necessary  ?  Does  not  the  fact 
tha!;  you  Bolsheviki  are  compelled  to  restore  the  very 
capitalism  you  have  destroyed,  prove  that  it  was  a 
bourgeois  revolution  ?" 

It  is  necessary  to  answer  this  question  if  we  ourselves 
wish  to  grasp  the  meaning  of  this  four  years'  fight,  and 
the  significance  of  our  new  policy.  Are  we  actually  re- 
nouncing the  past  four  years  ?  Is  the  Russian  Revolution 
a  proletarian  one  or  is  it  a  bourgeois  revolution? 

First  of  all  we  must  establish  certain  facts.  We  desig- 
nate all  the  revolutions  from  the  Dutch  uprising  against 
Spanish  tyranny  up  to  the  English  and  French  revolu- 
tions, or  more  strictly  speaking,  up  to  the  three  French 
revolutions,  as  bourgeois  revolutions,  because  their  result 
was  bourgeois  rule,  which  meant  a  step  towards  its  uni- 
versal triumph,  and  to  the  bourgeoisie's  acquisition  of 
power  in  all  civilized  countries.  Not  one  of  these  revolu- 
tions was  purely  bourgeois ;  v/e  must  take  into  considera- 
tion the  classes  that  participated  in  them  and  the  goals 
aimed  at  by  these  classes.  The  large  landowning  class 
played  a  considerable  part  in  the  Netherlands  and  even 
in  the  English  revolution.  Cromwell  himself  was  a  large 
landowner;  he  was  backed  by  a  considerable  part  of  the 
big  English  landowners.  At  the  same  time,  beginning 
with  the  English  revolution  we  see  that  not  only  did  the 
craftsman,  the  industrial  worker  and  the  young  prole- 
tarian class  which  was  just  coming  into  existence,  par- 
ticipate in  the  revolutions,  but  we  even  notice  a  slrong 
tendency  to  exceed  the  bounds  set  by  the  growing  capi- 
talist system.  The  movements  of  Leweers,  Digors  and 
Chiliasten  were  proletarian  democratic  movements  which 


strove  towards  instituting  the  Socialist  order  and  that  of 
collective  ownership ;  they  sought  the  abolition  of  private 
property  and  capitalist  competition.  Considerable  masses 
participated  in  these  movements.  To  them  Socialism  was 
a  religion.  Even  at  that  time  Socialism  represented  a 
danger  to  the  young  capitalist  order,  and  the  bourgeoisie 
suppressed  it  with  all  the  cruelty  of  which  it  is  capable 
in  defending  its  interests.  Cromwell  well  understood  the 
conflict  between  capitalism  and  this  religious  Socialism. 
In  his  speeches  he  fought  against  the  latter  with  the  same 
arguments  which  the  bourgeoisie  used  against  revolution- 
ary Socialism  in  the  19th  century. 

During  the  French  revolution  and  parallel  with  its 
development,  the  Socialist  cUiTent  gained  strength  in  the 
depths  of  society;  it  was  then  represented  by  the  party 
of  the  "Enrages",  whose  history  has  not  yet  been  written, 
but  which  played  a  very  important  part  in  the  events  of 
1793  (the  literature  on  this  party  is  very  poor) .  Robes- 
pierre was  an  avowed  and  convinced  opponent  of  this 
movement.  In  the  pamphlets  of  the  Girondist,  Brissot, 
the  representative  of  the  commercial  bourgeoisie  of  south- 
ern France,  we  find  not  only  all  the  arguments  with  which 
the  bourgeoisie  later  fought  Socialism,  but  we  also  find 
the  mad,  raging  hatred  which  is  due  to  the  recognition  of 
the  power  of  the  Communists  in  the  French  revolution. 
These  were  backed  by  a  considerable  part  of  those  who 
saved  France  in  1793. 

One  of  the  reasons  why  the  petty-bourgeois  democrat 
Robespierre  was  overthrown,  was  that  he  had  lost  the 
working  masses  of  Paris  through  his  campaign  against 
the  "Enrages"  and  their  defenders  in  the  Paris  Commune, 
like  Chaumette.  For  the  heads  of  Chaumette  and  Leroux, 
Robespierre  paid  with  his  own  head.  After  he  had  lost 
connection  with  the  working  masses  ^he  could  no  longer 
instil  fear  into,  nor  be  of  any  use  to  the  Thermidorists  of 
the  young  bourgeoisie  of  the  French  Revolution,  which 
was  gaining  ground  in  the  war  against  the  feudal  world. 
When  the  head  of  Robespierre  fell  amid  joyous  cheers  of 


the  speculators  and  the  "Jeunesse  doree",  the  suburbs  of 
Paris  were  maliciously  silent. 

In  the  revolution  of  1789,  and  still  more  in  the  Revo- 
lution of  1848,  the  working  class  of  France  together  with 
the  artisans  who  joined  it,  was  already  a  growing  and 
threatening  power  which  clearly  understood  the  conflict 
of  proletarian  and  capitalist  interests.  These  masses  who 
were  not  yet  united  by  industries  on  a  large  scale  and  who 
did  not  yet  have  a  party  which  could  unite  them  by  an 
idea,  these  masses  who  fought  with  a  confused  idea  of 
the  Socialist  Republic,  were  already  the  driving  power 
and  the  leaders  of  the  revolution.  The  defeat  of  these 
masses  in  June  was  the  defeat  of  the  revolution.  The 
bourgeoisie  did  not  develop  the  revolution  after  their 
victory;  it  was  rather  the  workers  who  did  it.  The  bour- 
geoisie ended  it  and  flocked  to  the  standards  of  Napo- 
leon m. 

What  is  the  significance  of  this  historical  reminiscence  ? 

The  existence  of  the  bourgeoisie  is  a  necessary  condi- 
tion for  a  bourgeois  revolution=  In  all  bourgeois  revolu- 
tions, however,  the  working  class  stepped  into  the  histor- 
ical arena  together  with  the  bourgeoisie,  for  there  is  no 
bourgeoisie  without  a  working  class.  At  first  the  working 
class  moved  under  the  leadership  of  the  bourgeoisie. 
Then,  in  the  process  of  revolution,  it  became  conscious 
of  the  clash  of  interests  between  itself  and  the  bour- 
geoisie. It  therefore  attempted  to  exceed  the  bounds  of  the 
French  revolution,  the  aims  which  the  latter  set  in  the 
fight  for  the  working  class  and  in  the  struggle  for  vaguely 
formulated  Socialist  principles. 

In  1896  Eduard  Bernstein,  who  at  that  time  was  still 
considered  a  revolutionary  Marxist,  pointed  out  in  his 
preface  to  Heritier's  history  of  the  French  Revolution 
of  1848,  that,  due  to  the  bourgeois  character  of  the  revo- 
lution, the  working  class  should  not  have  put  any  demands 
which  exceeded  the  bounds  of  the  bourgeois  order.    This 


he  considered  the  great  error  committed  by  the  working 
class.    But  the  workers  did  not  reduce  their  demands  in 
the  bourgeois  revolutions.    They    understand  Bernstein 
well.    What  Bernstein  told  them  the  representatives  of 
the  bourgeoisie  socialism  are  always  telling  them.    The 
workers  could  not  withdraw  their  demands  because  they 
had  come  out  of  cellars  and  dogs'  kennels  and  dirty  work- 
shops.   They  were  suffering  and  consequently  could  not 
calmly  look  on  while  the  bourgeoisie  was  reaping  the  har- 
vest.   They  had  to  fight  for  their  own  interests  and  pur- 
sue their  own  aims,  because  they  felt  that  it  was  they 
who  had  overthrown  the  old  order  and  that  the  bour- 
geoisie- only  wanted  to  modify  their  slavery.    They  had 
to  go  still  further,  for  without  doing  so  they  would  have 
been  unable  to  defeat  the  old  order.    They  succeeded  in 
doing  so  only  because  they  had  exceeded  the  limits,  of 
bourgeois  interests.     Friedrich  Engels  was  right  when 
he  spoke  of  the  historical  law,  according  to  which  the 
revolutionary  class  puts  demands  to  the  leaders  of  a  rev- 
olution which  by  far  exceed  the  apparent  possibilities  of 
the  particular  moment,  thus  making  the  overthrow  of 
the  old  order  possible.    Rosa  Luxemburg  was  also  right 
in  her  statement  that  in  all  bourgeois  revolutions  it  was 
the  proletarian  communist  efforts  of  the  workers  that 
constituted  the  power  which  made  the  overthrow  of 
feudalism  possible. 

This  recognition  of  historical  tendencies  in  every  bour- 
geois revolution  is  a  necessary  condition  for  the  theoret- 
ical comprehension  of  the  fate  of  the  Russian  Revolution. 

In  1905,  when  disputes  over  the  character  of  the  Rus- 
sian Revolution  were  still  going  on,  Trotzky  rightly  point- 
ed out  that  whether  we  wanted  it  or  not,  the  working 
class  would  exceed  the  bourgeois  limits  of  the  revolution, 
because  it  would  have  to  seize  power,  even  though  it 
might  do  so  together  with  the  peasantry,  in  order  to  end 
the  bourgeois  revolution  and  in  order  to  overthrow  the 
Czarist  regime,  and  that  in  order  to  reach  a  practical 
solution  in  the  questions  of  unemployment  and  lockouts, 

10 


11 


it  would  have  to  base  and  answer  these  questions  upon 
its  own  interests,  that  is,  upon  Socialism.  At  that  time 
Karl  Kautsky,  who  now  speaks  like  a  Menshevik,  agreed 
with  Rosa  Luxemburg  that  the  Russian  Revolution  was 
at  the  same  time  a  bourgeois  and  non-bourgeois  or  prole- 
tarian revolution,  because,  although  it  established  the 
capitalist  order  on  the  land  by  leaving  the  land  in  the 
hands  of  the  peasants,  it  must  seek  to  establish  Socialism 
in  the  cities.  At  that  time  Kautsky  said  that  according 
to  its  position  in  history  the  Russian  Revolution  was  the 
transition  from  the  bourgeois  to  the  proletarian  revolu- 
tion. 

If  the  influence  of  the  Russian  Revolution  was  to  let 
loose  the  revolutionary  forces  in  Europe  (and  in  Western 
Europe  only  a  proletarian  revolution  is  possible)  the  Rus- 
sian Revolution  would  be  compelled  to  realize  Socialism 
in  its  own  peculiar  way. 

Ten  years  after  Kautsky  had  made  these  observations 
upon  the  driving  forces  of  the  revolution,  the  March 
revolution  took  place.  The  leaders  of  the  proletarian 
vanguard,  the  Bolsheviki,  were  well  aware  of  the  petty 
bourgeois  character  of  the  Russian  industries,  and  they 
therefore  consciously  attempted  to  limit  the  aims  for 
which  the  proletariat  fought  by  placing  upon  the  order 
of  the  day,  not  Socialism,  but  the  transition  measures 
towards  Socialism.  Lenin's  program  in  April,  1917,,  had 
for  its  aim  the  bringing  of  the  government  machine  into 
the  hands  of  the  workers'  and  the  peasants'  Soviets,  and 
the  nationalization  of  banks  without  doing  away^with 
private  property.  Even  after  the  workers  and  peasants 
had  seized  power  the  Soviet  government  made  no  attempt 
to  expropriate  the  bourgeoisie,  but  rather  to  develop  and 
organize  the  workers'  control  of  industry.  The  working 
class,  however,  proceeded  with  dynamic  force.  It  seized 
the  factories  and  nationalized  enterprises  in  the  provinces 
against  the  will  of  the  central  government.  This  it  did, 
not  out  of  ignorance  of  the  program  of  the  Bolshevik 
Party,  but  because  of  the  resistance  of  the  bourgeoisie 


12' 


which  attempted  to  sabotage  the  workers'  control  or  to 
hide  the  supplies  necessary  for  running  the  industries. 
The  workers  had  to  get  hold  of  the  bourgeoisie  by  the 
neck.  Even  if  there  had  been  no  economic  necessity  for 
this  move,  the  class  which  had  overthrown  the  bourgeoisie 
and  had  seized  power  would  not  have  permitted  the  bour- 
geoisie to  enjoy  the  possession  of  the  means  of  produc- 
tion undisturbed.  The  proletariat  ruled  in  the  country 
and  could  not  possibly  have  permitted  the  bourgeoisie  to 
rule  on  the  economic  field  and  live  accordingly. 

In  April,  1918,  in  a  fine  speech  by  Comrade  Lenin,  the 
Soviet  government  attempted  to  define  our  next  tasks 
and  to  point  out  the  way  which  we  now  designate  as  "The 
new  economic  policy".  It  attempted  to  conclude  agree- 
ments with  the  capitalists  and  to  transform  private  capi- 
talism into  capitalism  controlled  by  the  proletarian  state. 
Comrade  Lenin  said  that  we  must  learn  from  the  trust 
kings  how  to  reconstruct  our  industries.  At  the  same 
time  the  Soviet  government  had  to  act  in  just  the  opposite 
manner  in  the  country,  where  the  prerequisites  for  So- 
cialism were  not  present.  In  order  to  obtain  grain  it  had 
to  arm  the  workers  and  the  village  poor,  and  to  form 
village  committees  against  rent-profiteering.  Capitalism 
which  had  been  destroyed  by  the  war  had  not  left  us  suffi- 
cient means  for  the  exchange  of  manufactured  articles 
for  grain.  The  Soviet  government  was  not  yet  sufficiently 
fortified,  and  was  in  control  of  too  weak  a  machine  to  be 
able  to  get  grain  by  means  of  the  tax  in  kind.  The  peas- 
ants, who  had  thrown  off  ^the  yoke  of  the  large  landowners, 
the  Czar  and  the  bourgeoisie  with  the  aid  of  the  workers, 
wanted  no  restrictions  set  upon  their  freedom.  They 
desired  a  free  stateless  life,  with  no  obligations  to  the 
workers'  and  peasants'  government.  The  grain  producers 
were  willing  to  exchange  their  grain  only  for  the  greatest 
possible  part  of  those  goods  which  were  still  in  the  coun- 
try; this  would  have  injured  the  state,  the  working  class 
and  the  poor  villagers. 


13 


But  the  third  class,  the  bourgeoisie,  did  not  want  to 
hear  of  limitations  either.  It  refused  to  accept  the  com- 
promise with  the  Soviet  government,  as  offered  by  Lenin 
in  1918.  With  the  aid  of  the  world  bourgeoisie,  it  had  be- 
gun the  fight  for  life  against  Soviet  Russia.  During  the 
summer  of  1918  the  united  Russian  bourgeoisie  declared 
at  one  time  to  Lithuania,  another  time  to  Poland,  a  third 
tim.e  to  Esthonia,  then  to  the  Ukraine  and  Germany,  re- 
spectively, that  thanks  to  the  protection  of  German  im- 
perialism it  was  not  compelled  to  accept  the  compromise, 
with  the  Soviet  government.  After  the  Czecho-Slovak 
uprising,  particularly  after  the  Allies  had  defeated  Ger- 
many, the  Russian  bourgeoisie,  basing  its  hopes  upon  aid 
from  the  Allies,  started  the  most  bitter  struggle  against 
the  Soivet  government.  It  refused  to  lease  its  enterprises 
because  it  hoped  to  retain  them  as  its  property.  In  order 
to  make  it  possible,  therefore,  to  carry  out  the  new  eco- 
nomic policy,  it  Was  necessary  to  knock  the  bourgeoisie 
down,  not  only  in  law,  but  in  fact.  It  had  to  be  knocked 
on  the  head  in  a  two  years'  war. 

We  had  to  prove  to  the  bourgeoisie  and  to  world  capital 
that  the  Russian  industries  belonged  to  the  proletarian 
state  and  not  the  bourgeoisie.  We  had  to  do  this  before 
we  could  make  use  of  the  bourgeoisie  in  the  further  de- 
velopment of  production.  The  war  inevitably  brought 
about  a  complete  nationalization.  This  nationalization 
was  brought  about  not  only  by  the  necessity  of  destroying 
the  ruling  class  and  ending  its  political  power,  which  was 
based  upon  economic  power;  we  had  to  nationalize  for 
other  reasons  also.  We  had  to  nationalize  because  it 
would  otherwise  have  been  impossible  to  carry  on  the 
war  begun  by  the  bourgeoisie.  Our  unlimited  centraliza- 
tion was  nothing  more  than  the  stripping  of  the  whole 
country  in  order  to  obtain  all  the  industrial  products  nec- 
essary for  carrying  on  war.  As  Comrade  Lenin  rightly 
states  in  his  pamphlet  on  the  tax  in  kind,  the  military 
measures  led  to  military  Communism  in  the  cities,  and  to 
requisitioning  in  the  country,  that  is,  to  grain-plundering 


14 


^ 
« 


I— H 

o 

bo 


be. 


O 


0) 


« 


15 


for  the  support  of  the  army  and  the  cities.  Was  there 
any  other  possibility  of  getting  a  sufficient  amount  of 
metal  and  of  grain  which  we  needed  for  the  war?  We 
could  not  possibly  have  left  our  limited  stores  of  manu- 
factured goods  to  the  discretion  of  the  speculators.  And 
how  could  we  possibly  have  left  grain  to  be  taken  care  of 
by  the  tax  in  kind,  when  we  lacked  the  necessary  govern- 
ment apparatus  for  computing  this  tax  correctly?  The 
grain  stores  of  Central  Russia  (until  1919  Siberia  and  the 
Ukraine  did  not  belong  to  us)  were  so  small  that  it  was 
not  possible  to  obtain  any  surplus  whatever;  moreover, 
the  peasants  could  receive  nothing  in  return  for  this  sur- 
plus on  the  free  market,  if  there  was  any,  because  all  the 
manufactured  goods  were  confiscated. 

Outside  of  the  political,  strategic  and  economic  necessity 
for  the  policy  of  war  Communism,  there  was  another 
social-psychological  factor.  If  even  at  the  beginning  of 
the  revolution  the  victor  class  could  not  leave  the  material 
sources  in  the  hands  of  their  enemy  and  thus  enable  the 
bourgeoisie  to  lead  a  life  of  luxury  in  a  legal  manner,  how 
then  could  the  proletariat  have  possibly  done  this  at  a  time 
when  Russia  was  one  big  battlefield,  when  the  workers 
and  peasants  had  to  undergo  so  much  suffering  in  order 
to  be  victorious  in  their  fight  against  the  bourgeoisie? 
Was  it  possible,  at  a  time  when  the  hungry  and  freezing 
women  workers  were  sewing  coats  for  the  army  day  and 
night  and  under  poor  light,  to  permit  beautifully  lit  and 
rich  displays  in  the  stores  to  mock  the  suffering  fighters 
by  showing  them  how  well  the  bourgeoisie  lived  and  en- 
joyed life  ?  This  was  impossible !  The  Soviet  government 
had  to  institute  the  Spartan  manner  of  living,  because  it 
was  the  only  one  which  corresponded  to  the  gray  soldier 
coat  of  Soviet  Russia. 

War  Communism  was  a  contradiction  to  the  structure 
of  Russia  and  its  economic  relations.  War  Communism 
was  a  contradiction  as  far  as  the  land  was  concerned ;  in 
the  cities,  however,  the  possibility  of  success  was  not  alto- 


16 


gether  excluded.    If  the  world  revolution  had  come  as 
early  as  1910,  before  the  disarming  of  the  European  work- 
ing class  took  place,  or  even  in  1920,  during  our  advance 
towards  Warsaw,  the  reconstruction  of  the  Russian  large 
industries  as  a  whole  on  the  basis  of  state  ownership  and 
accordmg  to  our  economic  plans  would  not  have  been 
historically  impossible.     The  Soviet  government  could 
then  have  thought  of  retaining  the  large  industries  as  a 
whole  in  its  own  hands,  because  it  could  have  received 
the  necessary  machines  from  the  European  workers.  Even 
in  case  the  world  revolution  had  not  been  victorious  on  a 
European  scale,  even  if  we  had  only  conquered  Poland 
and  then  stood  armed  at  the  gates  of  Germany,  it  would 
not  have  been  altogether  impossible  to  force  the  bour- 
geoisie to  accept  a  compromise  with  us  after  we  would 
have  gotten  the  means  of  production  from  the  world  bour- 
geoisie for  our  industries  in  European  Russia,  in  return 
for  concessions  in  the  bordering  regions  of  Russia, — Sibe- 
ria, Caucasus  and  Turkestan — and  for  the  right  to  develop 
production  in  these  distant  regions  on  the  basis  of  con- 
cessions. 

What  would  then  have  been  the  social  relations  in  Rus- 
sia under  such  circumstances?     All  the  industries  and 
means  of  transportation  would  have  been  in  the  hands  of 
the  workers.    The  land  would  have  been  in  the  hands  of 
the  peasants.    The  reconstructed  industries  would  have 
made  it  possible  for  the  proletariat  to  relinquish  the  requi- 
sitions in  the  country,  and  to  receive  grain  partly  through 
the  tax  in  kind  and  partly  by  exchanging  goods  with  the 
state  industries.    This  would  have  been  no  Communism, 
but  it  would  have  been  the  most  significant  step  in  the 
transition  towards  Socialism ;  it  would  have  led  the  way 
towards  great  progress  in  electrification,  and  towards 
creating  the  necessary  conditions  for  the  advante  of  the 
peasantry  towards  a  higher  collectivistic  system  of  pro- 
duction. 


17 


In -this  we  did  not  succeed.    The  long-drawn-out  civil 
war  has  weakened  us  economically.    Now  that  it  is  at  an 
end  we  cannot  proceed  in  industrial  production,  although 
our  compromise  with  the  world  bourgeoisie  is  advan- 
tageous to  us.    The  uncertainty  of  our  foreigns  relations 
gave  the  bourgeoisie  the  opportunity  of  getting  greater 
concessions  from  us  and  of  starting  the  negotiations  for 
concessions  under  conditions  which  were  less  favorable 
to  us.    We  must  therefore  first  permit  the  restoration  of 
the  small  and  middle  sized  industries  on  the  basis  of  lease. 
This  will  of  course  restore  a  part  of  the  Russian  bour- 
geoisie.   We  are  compelled  to  grant  concessions  under  less 
favorable  conditions.    We  must  grant  concessions  in  Cen- 
tral Russia ;  we  must  permit  foreign  capital  to  start  those 
factories  running  which  are  already  there,  instead  of  de- 
veloping those  productive  sources  which  have  not  yet 
been  used.     Our  present  task  is  to  retain  the  main  in- 
dustrial undertakings  in  the  hands  of  the  workers'  gov- 
ernment.    We  are  consciously  preparing  ourselves  for 
co-operating  with  the  bourgeoisie;  this  is  undoubtedly 
dangerous  to  the  existence  of  the  Soviet  government,  be- 
cause the  latter  loses  the  monopoly  on  industrial  produc- 
tion as  against  the  peasantry. 

.:  Does  not  this  signify  the  decisive  victory  of  Capitalism? 
May  we  not  then  speak  of  our  revolution  as  having  lost 
its  revolutionary  character?  Were  all  our  efforts  and  the 
whole  three  years'  struggle  a  futile  sacrifice? 

We  shall  begin  with  this  last  question.  The  whole 
course  of  development  has  shown  that  the  bourgeoisie 
would  not  have  had  to  become  our  lessees,  if  we  had  not 
beaten  them  on  the  economic  field,  if  we  had  not  expropri- 
ated them,  because  they  were  owners  of  the  means  of 
production.  If  we  had  not  beaten  them  there  would  be 
no  talk  of  concessions.  But  if,  as  we  have  said,  our  eco- 
nomic policy  of  1920  was  necessary  for  our  victory,  it 
was  also  a  necessary  condition  for  our  new  economic 
policy. 

18  - 


,  \  V^  '=°""*''^'  °"  Po'i'^y  "f  requisitioning  could 
only  have  been  a  transition  policy.  Even  in  case  th?  wor W 
proletariat  had  been  victorious  we  would  have  rehn 
quished  It  On  the  industrial  field  our  present  concessions 
are  only  temporary  transition  concessions;  by  this  we 
certamly  do  not  mean  that  at  the  end  of  a  year  we  shlu 
agam  confiscate  the  newly  accumulated  goods  Our  eco 
nomic  policy  is  based  upon  a  longer  ceriod  nf  h„o  k  I 
It  IS  a  transition  Policy 'ieverthelfss.^Ouf  goal  TeSain 
the  same-the  industries  in  the  hands  of  fhe  woSfer"  • 
government  But  just  at  present  the  government  indus- 
tnes  constitute  only  a  part  of  the  total  industries;  they 
only  form  a  narrow  foundation  for  the  proletarian  gov- 
r.TT;  What  does  that  mean?  It  means  that  we  have 
retreated;  that  we  are  holding  those  positions  only  which 
are  necessary  to  maintain  the  power  of  the  workers  and 
peasants. 

n.^rK^fjrl''  ^-^'^.f '  ^^^«l"t^«^  i«  ^  non-Socialist 
one?  _  No!  It  only  signifies  that  the  victorious  workins: 
class  IS  not  able  to  carry  out  its  program  completely,  not 
even  that  program  which  in  Russia,  a  petty-bourgeois 
country,  seems  theoretically  possible.  But  the  class 
which  must  retreat  because  of  the  great  resistance  of 
the  other  classes,  in  our  case  because  of  the  resistance 
of  world  capitalism  which  is  not  yet  overthrown,  does 
not  cease  to  be  the  victorious  class,  the  ruling  class 
When  the  Czarist  regime,  which  was  a  government  of 
large  landowners,  was  compelled  to  make  concessions  to 
capitalism,  so  that  the  bourgeoisie  became  the  ruling  eco- 
nomic class,  Czarism  itself  did  not  cease  to  exist  and  the 
large  landowning  class  did  not  cease  to  be  the  ruling 
political  class;  neither  did  Russia  cease  to  be  a  country 
of  half-serfdom.  Should  the  bourgeoisie  of  Europe  at- 
tempt to  hinder  the  revolution  by  submitting  to  state 
capitalism  and  even  to  workers'  control,  it  will  not  cease 
to  be  the  ruling  class.  We  now  come  to  the  last  question. 
It  is  not  a  question  of  the  character  of  our  revolution. 
The  revolution  was  consummated  by  the  working  class 

19 


and  will  go  down  in  the  annals  of  history  as  a  Socialist 
revolution,  even  though  the  Russian  working  class  may 
temporarily  be  defeated.  We  are  rather  speaking  of  the 
outcome,  the  result  of  the  revolution. 

Will  the  Bolsheviki  retain  their  power  under  the  con- 
ditions of  the  partial  restoration  of  capitalism  and  the 
production  of  goods  by  the  peasants  ?  Our  enemies  point 
out  that  economic  relations  determine  the  political  ones, 
and  that  economic  concessions  like  the  ones  we  grant  to 
the  bourgeoisie,  must  lead  to  political  concessions. 

This  so-called  Marxian  ABC  has  nothing  in  common 
with  Marxism,  because  it  is  abstract  and  considers 
neither  time  nor  space.  Should  world  capitalism  con- 
stantly gain  power  in  the  course  of  many  years,  and  the 
revolution  constantly  weaken,  then  the  working  class 
must  in  the  long  run  be  defeated.  But  when  a  large  land- 
owning class  in  Russia  made  economic  concessions  to  the 
bourgeoisie,  it  nevertheless  continued  in  power  for  quite 
a  long  time.  It  is  true  that  the  economic  concessions 
were  followed  by  political  concessions  and  finally  by  the 
capitulation  of  the  large  landowning  class.  But  the  rea- 
son for  this  lies  in  the  fact  that  the  large  landowning 
class  was  the  end  of  a  decaying  branch  of  development; 
it  was  a  dying  class.  From  this  point  of  view  the  bour- 
geoisie is  the  historically  deteriorating,  dying  class.  That 
is  why  the  working  class  of  Russia  can  refuse  to  make 
political  concessions  to  the  bourgeoisie;  since  it  is  justified 
in  hoping  that  its  power  will  grow  on  a  national  and  in- 
ternational scale  more  quickly  than  will  the  power  of  the 
Russian  bourgeoisie. 

The  history  of  the  Russian  revolution  establishes  .the 
fact  that  it  was  the  first  Socialist  and  the  first  proletarian 
revolution.  It  is  a  proletarian  revolution  in  a  petty  bour- 
gaois  country.  For  this  reason  it  will  distinguish  itself 
from  the  proletarian  revolutions  in  countries  like  Eng- 
land and  America  by  the  fact  that  after  a  long  struggle, 
followed  by  the  seizure  of  power,  the  working  class  of 


20 


these  countries  will  be  able  to  carry  out  their  programs 
much  more  quickly  than  we  have  been.  Ours  is  a  prole'- 
tarian  revolution  which  under  unfavorable  inner  and  outer 
conditions  advances  like  every  other  revolution.  But  it 
is  a  proletarian,  a  Socialist  revolution;  the  tradition  of 
October  is  the  program  of  the  world  revolution. 

October  is  not  the  anniversary  of  the  Comedy  of  Errors 
in  which,  as  the  Mensheviki  claim,  the  working  class  un- 
consciously became  the  tool  of  another  class.  It  is  the 
anniversary  of  the  beginning  of  the  great  international 
proletarian  revolution.  Even  now  when  we  are  fighting 
in  our  defensive  positions  we  count  the  sacrifices  of  our 
struggle  and  can  say  with  absolute  conviction  and  ease, 
"We  followed  the  right  in  October  and  the  victory  is 
ours." 


^^^% 


21 


The  Author 


Radek  is  a  member  of 
the  Centra]  Executive 
Committee  of  the  Rus- 
sian Communist  Party 
and  of  the  Third  Interna- 
tional. Still  a  young  man, 
he  is  a  seasoned  veteran 
in  the  labor  movement 
and  one  of  the  most  pow- 
erful and  striking  figures 
in  the  Russian  revolu- 
tion. He  was  born  in  Ga- 
licia.  Radek's  specialty 
is  the  international 
phases  of  the  Communist 
movement  and  a  dreaded 
opponent  in  debate.  A 
favorite  pastime  of  his 
is  to  show  delegates  from 
various  countries  how  much  more  he  knows  about  their 
own  labor  movements  than  they  do.  He  has,  as  usual, 
command  of  several  languages.  As  a  speaker  he  is  par- 
ticularly forceful,  although  not  eloquent.  I  considered 
it  a  real  compliment  to  him  when  a  couple  of  interpreters 
who  were  translating  for  the  English  section  complained 
that  they  had  to  take  down  almost  verbatim  what  he  said, 
whereas  they  could  let  other  speakers  ramble  along  for 
ten.  minutes  at  a  time  without  making  any  notes. 

WILLIAM  Z.  FOSTER. 


R&dek. 


22 


plll!l!l!llllllllllllllllllllllll!lllll!illllllillll!illl!llllllllllliill!ll!l!llllllililillli!lll!lll!l!l^ 

i  "At  Ramikovsky  in  Soviet  Russia  the  people  are  1 

1  eating  their  dead.     It  is  dangerous  to  bury  the  i 

M  famine  victims  in  the  presence  of  the  people,  and  | 

1  guards  are  kept  over  them  until  they  are  in  a  state  1 

1  that  makes  eating  impossible."  1 

1  Blame  the  Famine !    Blame  the  Blockade !  1 

=  Blame  the  Coimter-Revolution !  M 


YOUR    DOLLARS 
WILL  SAVE 

LIVES! 

Send  Dollars  So  That  No  Blame  Rests  Upon  You ! 

A.  B.  MARTIN,  National  Secretary 
201  West  13th  Street        -        -        New  York  City 


rriilllllllllllilllllll 


lillll!lillllilllillli!lll!l!l!llllll!!lllli!lll!l!illll!lllllllllll!llllll!illlllilllll!llllllill!^ 


THE 


VOICE  of  LABOR 

A  militant  labor  weekly  that  aims  to  serve 

the  militant  members  of  organized  labor 

SUBSCRIPTION  $2.00  PER  YEAR 


■SlSDlS'iO'r 

THE  VOICE  OF  LABOR 

2003  N.  California  Avenue,  Chicago,  Dl. 


