127 164 






THE CATASTROPHE 





From a photograph by Arnold Gentho, Nctv York 

ALEXANDER F. KERENSKY 




THE CATASTROPHE 


KERENSKY’S OWN STORY 

OF THE 

RUSSIAN REVOLUTION 

BY 

ALEXANDER F. KERENSKY 



D. APPLETON AND COMPANY 
NEW YORK : 1927 : LONDON 


COPYRIGHT, I 927 ^ BY 
I>. APPLETON 8c COJVCT>-A.ISnr 


Copyright, 1927, by The New York Times Company 
PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 



INTRODUCTION 


The subject of this book is an historical episode but 
the book itself is not history. It is simply the story of 
an eyewitness, who accidentally found himself in the 
center of events marking the turning point in the his- 
tory of the biggest nation on the European continent. 

A correct conception of present developments in 
Russia is impossible without some understanding of the 
inner substance of the Russian Revolution of March, 
1917, i.e., of the period between the fall of the 
monarchy and the establishment of Bolshevist abso- 
lutism. 

It would be strange and ludicrous, however, to de- 
mand from me, a close participant of those events, that 
measure of historical objectivity and impartiality 
which we have the right to expect from the scientific 
historian describing the deeds of others. 

The participant in historical events does not per- 
ceive clearly the consequences of his own actions, but 
merely grasps, more or less, the significance of these 
consequences. He does know well, however, the 
psychologic motives which prompt him to this or that 
practical dedsion. On the other hand, the historian 
finds it extremely difficult to penetrate into the inner 
spiritual laboratory of the actors of an historical 
drama — into those recesses of the soul where these 
events matured. He does see well the consequences of 
the actions of other men. By viewing these actions 
from the vantage point of time he acquires the privi- 
lege of objectivity. 


[v] 



INTRODUCTION 


To be sure, any participant of an historical drama 
can by the force of hindsight advance the portrayal of 
the conduct and actions of his contemporaries and 
those of his own to a point of view approximating that 
from which the events will be seen ten, twenty or thirty 
years hence. But such historical narration cannot 
really pretend to be history, because the writing of his- 
tory requires the maturing through a process of many 
decades of the events described. 

Nevertheless epochs close to periods particularly 
rich in historicity (as measured by years and not by 
substance) bring forth many “objective histories” 
from the pens of falsifiers. In Russia we have had 
our full quota of these after March, 1917. 

I make bold to believe that this book will not add 
to the number of such works, for I have not tried to 
write history but have merely sought to add some raw 
material for history. 

My unhistorical objectivity consists precisely and 
only in the fact that I present the events and psychology 
of the March Revolution as they really were, conceal- 
ing nothing and refraining from falling under the in- 
fluence of the political and psychologic attitudes of the 
present moment. 

iMy task here consists in portraying the events of the 
Russian Revolution as a whole, i.e., as they really 
were, as they presented themselves to me then and not 
as they seem now. This is the only historicity of 
which the participant of historical events is capable: 
to reveal the true psychology of his epoch and to re- 
store the motivization of his actions. 

Having stood in the very center of the events that 
changed the course of Russian history and occupied in 
this center the mathematical point of centricity, I saw 

[vi] 



INTRODUCTION 


the Revolution more as a whole than in its details, and 
experienced the Revolution as a single act of national 
struggle for the emancipation and salvation of Russia, 
rather than as a series of separate episodes of the 
inner struggle of parties and classes. 

I hope that the reader who will have the patience 
to read this book through to the end will realize that 
Russia’s tragedy of 1917 is not to he explained by the 
erroneous conception prevalent abroad that the Rus- 
sian people are unfit for liberty and incapable of demo- 
cratic, cultured self-government. 

The reader will see that the triumph of the Bolshe- 
vist counter-revolution was not due to the fact that 
ideology of Bolshevism, essentially Western in its 
origin, corresponds to the “savage, Asiatic character 
of the Russian people.” 

He will see that in the tragic moment of the struggle 
for the salvation of Russia from the double pressure 
of the Germans at the front and the Bolsheviki in the 
rear there was in the social consciousness of Russia 
sufficient force of sacrificial patriotism, and that Russia 
alone was not responsible for coming out of the war a 
vanquished victor. 

In short, the reader will perceive how the entire 
process of the inner struggle in Russia, in 1917, against 
the consequences of the fall of the monarchy was in- 
separably bound with the continuing struggle at the 
front for the very existence of Russia as an inde- 
pendent nation. 

The French Revolution of 1789 came before the 
outbreak of the Revolutionary and Napoleonic wars. 
In Germany, in 1918, the monarchy fell after the War. 
In Russia the Revolution came in the midst of war, at 
its most acute and critical moment. 

[vii] 



INTRODUCTION 


Russia’s “guilt” consisted in the fact that all the con- 
sequences — psychologic, political and economic — of 
war tension and exhaustion manifested themselves long 
before they appeared in the West. And the West, 
having conquered its war and post-war difficulties, 
failed to understand and could not understand the 
meaning and substance of the extremely painful and 
complex process of the dissolution of the old social 
fabric in Russia, a process which was experienced in 
milder form after the War by all European belligerent 
countries. 

For the sake of her victory, Germany in 1917 sent 
us Lenin and helped to poison Russia with Bolshevism. 
For the sake of allied victory, and with equal zeal, 
some of the Allies undermined the national, revolu- 
tionary Provisional Government of Russia. The Ger- 
mans believed that all was permissible in war, while 
the Allies acted on the supposition that they could do 
anything they liked in Russia after the disappearance 
of the Czarist government. 

This attitude may perhaps have been quite natural 
from the point of view of the interests of Germany or, 
let us say, England. But the struggle for the liberty 
and independence of Russia which we were then waging 
was not thereby made easier. 

The key to an understanding of the grave difficulties 
experienced by Russia during the period of the Revolu- 
tion and which she is experiencing to this day must be 
sought in the complex and at times ambiguous inter- 
national situation as it existed during the war. 

It is nonsense to say, as do some, that Russia was 
unfit for liberty and that by her entire past she was 
prepared for the barbarism of Bolshevism. 

The Russia of the Czarist epoch was, indeed, a back- 

[viii] 



INTRODUCTION 


ward country politically. This is an undeniable truth. 
But her national culture, her social order, her economic 
development, her spiritual ideals were on a very high 
plane of development, in which there was no room for 
the zoologic experiments of Lenin. 

Moreover, beginning with the period of the Russo- 
Japanese War and the liberation movement of 1905, 
after the establishment of a representative legislative 
assembly, Russia appeared to be maturing also politi- 
cally. Before the World War there was no longer any 
doubt that the transition of Russia from a semi-consti- 
tutional absolutism to a parliamentary democracy was 
only a question of a few years. 

The War interrupted 1 the sound political evolution 
of Russia. 

The Bolshevist reaction, born of the blood and 
horrors of war, threw Russia back a century. 

In the struggle for a sound and free Russia, the Rus- 
sian people will, however, win back their rightful place 
in the family of nations. 

I may add one more point. In my narrative of the 
events of 1917 I am compelled to speak of myself to a 
greater extent than I desired. It was impossible to 
avoid this in speaking of the main acts of the Revolu- 
tion. However, throughout the period of its activity 
the Provisional Government was at all times the 
the genuine instrument of expression of the over-* 
whelming majority of the organized political forces 
of the country. For this reason the names of the lead- 
ers of the first Russian republican government are but 
the pseudonyms of that Russia which fought stub- 
bornly for her national existence on the basis of liberty 
and independence. 

In conclusion, I wish to say that the appearance of 

[ix] 



INTRODUCTION 


this book in English is due to the very kind and 
thoughtful cooperation given me by my friends, Mr. 
Joseph Shaplen and Mr. A. J. Sack, to whom I feel 
deeply indebted. 


New York. 


Alexander Kerensky. 



CONTENTS 


PAGE 


Introduction v 

CHAPTER 

Q ) The Four Days That Ended the 

Russian Monarchy .... i 

(Ily Before the Crash 77 

III. Within the Provisional Govern- 

ment 109 

IV. The Government Crisis . . . 126 

V. Restoration of the Front . . 142 

Vjp D issolution of the Army . . . 167 

VII. Gutchkoff 175 

VIII. First Visits to the Army . . . 193 

IX. The Offensive 207 

X. The Battle 221 

XI. The Nation’s Victory .... 245 

(Xlj> The Ex-Czar and His Family . . 258 

XIII. The Moscow Conference . . . 279 

XIV. The Conspirators on the Right . 287 

XV. Lavre Korniloff 297 

XVI. The Conspirators Take the Offen- 
sive 3° 2 

XVl V. The Drive against the Provi- 
sional Government . . . . 317 

XVIIE Gatchina 3 2 4 

XIX> Conclusion 37 1 

[xi] 




THE CATASTROPHE 


CHAPTER 1 

THE FOUR DAYS THAT ENDED THE RUSSIAN MONARCHY 

O N Monday, March 12, 1917, at about eight 
o’clock in the morning, I was awakened by a 
voice saying: “Get up! Nekrassoff is on the 
telephone. He says the Duma has been dissolved, the 
Volinsk Regiment has mutinied and is leaving its bar- 
racks. You are wanted at the Duma at once.” 

Eight o’clock was an early hour for me, as I was in 
the habit of working until three or four o’clock in the 
morning. The political situation had grown ominously 
stormy during the preceding days and several minutes 
passed before I grasped the full significance of the 
news transmitted by Nekrassoff. It came to me with a 
jolt, but I soon perceived, or rather felt, that the deci- 
sive hour had struck. 

I jumped up, dressed quickly and hurried to the 
Duma — a five-minute walk. 

My first thought was to keep the Duma in session 
and to establish close contact between the Duma and 
the army and the people. 

I am not sure whether I asked my wife to telephone 
to Sokoloff, a friend who lived near the barracks, or 
whether I sent a message by some one I met on my 
way to the Duma, but I did my best to get in touch with 
the Volinsk Regiment, which had mutinied without any 
apparent plan or purpose. I tried to get the regiment 



THE CATASTROPHE 


and other insurgents who had flocked around it to as- 
semble at the Duma. Later Miliukoff told me that, 
passing the barracks at about nine o’clock that morn- 
ing, he had seen some of our political friends calling 
upon the Volinsk Regiment as it was pouring out of 
the barracks to join us at the Duma. 

j The stage had long been set for the final crash, 
but, as is usually the case in such events, no one ex- 
pected it to come precisely on the morning of March 
twelfth.} How could I, for instance, have guessed as 
I rushed out of my apartment in what a different posi- 
tion I would be when I returned to it ? How could I 
have imagined that I would never return to my home 
again but for two or three hours ! 

At about half past eight X arrived at the small side 
entrance (the library entrance) of the Tauride Palace, 
seat of the Duma, and here I was swept up by the 
whirlwind in which I was to live for eight months. 
From that moment on I lived in the center of those 
amazing events, so momentous and so terrible, in the 
very heart of the tempest which in the end was to cast 
me out, in exile, to a distant foreign shore. 

As I recall the events of that day — Russia standing 
at the parting of the ways — I feel again the tense anx- 
iety which animated me then. As I approached the 
Duma, every step seemed to bring me closer to the 
quivering forces of newly awakened life, and when 
the aged doorkeeper, as usual, closed the door of the 
palace behind me I felt this time as if he were barring 
behind me forever the way back to the old Russia, the 
Russia that had still existed the day before and even 
in the early morning of that glorious, awe-inspiring 
Monday. 

The door closed. I threw off my overcoat. There 
was no more day or night, morning or evening. Only 

[ 2 ] 



DAYS THAT ENDED RUSSIAN MONARCHY 


by the ebb and flow of the crowds, by the coming and 
going of the human tides could we feel that night had 
come or the day returned. For five days we hardly 
ate anything, and none of us slept at all. But we did 
not feel the need of food or sleep. We had suddenly 
become endowed with extraordinary mental clarity. 
We were able to grasp and understand everything in a 
flash. Nothing escaped our minds and nothing seemed 
to interfere with anything else in the adjustment and 
readjustment of our perceptions and ideas. After- 
wards, looking back at these events from a distance, 
one could scarcely believe that all this chaos of hap- 
penings had been crowded into four days, and it was 
difficult to understand how our group in the Duma, 
without sleep or food, could have dealt with such a 
kaleidoscopic complexity of affairs. 

\ It was an extraordinary time, an inspired time, a 
time of bold daring and great suffering. It was a time 
unique in the pages of history.! All the small daily 
preoccupations of private life and all party interests 
vanished from our consciousness. One common devo- 
tion and anxiety united us. We had one common in- 
spiration— Russia 1 Russia in peril, struggling through 
blood and chaos, Russia betrayed by the old regime, 
Russia a prey to the blind, raging, hungry mob. Be- 
tween these two gulfs — on the one hand the decaying, 
tottering government and, on the other, the anarchic 
sweep of the people in revolt — a new light appeared. 
Russia became conscious of a new purpose, a new will. 
Inside the old walls of the Tauride Palace this devotion 
to the state and the nation burst forth in clear form, 
expressed in a tremendous effort and determination to 
save the country from anarchy and to shape the life of 
the people along new lines of law, freedom and social 
justice.^ 


[ 3 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


Representatives of nearly all classes rallied around 
the Duma in those first days of the Revolution. In 
those first days of the Revolution the Duma became the 
symbol of the state and the nation] By a determined, 
united effort a new authority and the rudiments of a 
new national structure were set up. I saw new forms 
of government shaped by men who the day before 
would have turned in horror from what they did that 
day with their own hands. They did it because 
something inexplicable, mysterious, miraculous had 
happened — that which we are accustomed to call revo- 
lution. This something lit up the souls of men with a 
purifying fire and filled them with love and readiness 
for boundless self-sacrifice. 

‘We forgot everything that was merely personal, all 
that was a matter of class or caste, and became for the 
moment simply men conscious of our common human- 
ity] It was a moment when every man came into touch 
with what is universal and eternally human. It was 
most exhilarating to see about me these men, so trans- 
formed, working together with sublime devotion for 
the common good. Historians, sociologists and theo- 
rists of all kinds will describe learnedly and wisely the 
events of March 12, 1917, in Russia, in Petrograd, in 
the Tauride Palace. They will find scientific, historical 
(and very prosaic) explanations to account for the 
performance of every actor in the first scene of this 
great tragedy of death and rebirth. They may label 
the drama and the actors in any way they please, but 
they will have said nothing that is essential if they 
forget to say that the Revolution was a miracle, an act 
of creation performed by the will of humanity, an epic 
sweep towards the eternal and universal ideal. 

I, who witnessed and participated in all these events, 
can testify that the so-called bourgeoisie, the members 

[ 4 ] 



DAYS THAT ENDED RUSSIAN MONARCHY 

of the Temporary Committee of the Duma and, later, 
of the Provisional Government, who were at the center 
of affairs in those first days of the Revolution, showed 
not less but, if possible, more idealism and sacrifice 
than the representatives of the democracy, especially 
the so-called “revolutionary democracy.” 1 1 can testify 
that in those great days the bourgeoisie was the very 
one who stood fearlessly for the salvation of the nation 
against the narrow, selfish interests of its class. The 
representatives of the bourgeoisie made their renuncia- 
tion joyfully as the greatest, holiest and happiest act 
of their lives .* 

As a matter of fact this government was neither 
bourgeois nor of any special class, but genuinely rep- 
resentative of the whole people. It was . dominated 
solely by the consciousness of the ideal of liberty and 
social service, which is the essential thing in a revolu- 
tion. Later everything changed. The same people 
who had been associated fraternally in the government 
could hardly recognize their own actions of two or 
three months before. The deeds they had been proud 
of they apologized for as mistakes and tried to lay the 
responsibility for them upon others. They gradually 
returned to their former week-day state of mind. ( The 
common task of national regeneration, begun with a 
universal, heroic, creative impulse in those great days 
when men’s souls became transfigured and were raised 
above themselves, “was gradually forgotten and those 
who had shown themselves heroes and social prophets 
became more and more concerned about their private 
interests^ One side began to think in wrathful misgiv- 
ing: “We conceded too much.” The other side, re- 
lying on the blind, elemental force of the masses, 
cried: “We took too little.” ? They could not under- 
stand that precisely in that first hour of the Revolution, 

[ 5 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


in the hour of common inspiration and common effort, 
they had unconsciously seen things in their true pro- 
portions and realized what was necessary for the whole 
nation.1 

The power of the Revolution lay not in the material 
forces at its command but in the common will, in the 
solidarity of the whole people. This common will 
recreated the life of the nation and filled it with a new 
spirit. The principles which Russian culture and civi- 
lization had been evolving and accumulating for cen- 
turies assumed concrete form — those principles for 
which the whole Russian intelligentsia, the whole Rus- 
sian people had fought for decades. It was not phys- 
ical’ force, still less the organized force of the revolu- 
tionary democracy or of any party which overthrew 
the autocracy and the dynasty. jThe revolutionary 
democracy appeared as an organized force only when 
the first stage of the Revolution was. over. This is an 
indisputable fact which history will establish beyond 
contradictions 

I assert emphatically that no one class can claim to 
be the author of the great Russian Revolution, nor 
arrogate to itself alone the honor of bringing about 
that upheaval. The Russian proletariat (especially 
the proletariat of Petrograd) is peculiarly unjustified 
in making this claim. I On March eleventh, the day be- 
fore the crash, the so-called Information Bureau of 
the Parties of the Left ( i.e ., the Social-Revolutionaries, 
Social-Democrats, Bolsheviki, Populist-Socialists and 
Labor party) held its regular meeting between 6 and 
7 p.M. in my apartment. At that meeting men who 
a few days later became the most uncompromising 
revolutionaries asserted emphatically that the revolu- 
tionary movement was losing strength i that the work- 
ers were quite passive in their attitude towards the 

[ 6 ] 



DAYS THAT ENDED RUSSIAN MONARCHY 


demonstrations of the soldiers; that these demonstra- 
tions were unorganized and without purpose or direc- 
tion ; that it was impossible to look for a revolution of 
any kind in the near future, and that we should con- 
centrate our efforts on propaganda alone as a means of 
preparing a serious revolutionary movement later on. 
Such was the attitude and the opinion of the spokes- 
men of the most extreme revolutionary elements only 
the day before the outbreak of the Revolution./ 

| In the same way, the bourgeois majority of the 
Duma, on the day before the Revolution, was still 
seeking a loyal compromise out of the impasse into 
which Russia had been driven by a government that 
had lost its head together with its sense of duty to the 
nation.f But the next day, when the dissolution of the 
Duma and the spontaneous uprising of the Petrograd 
garrison showed clearly the abyss to which Russia had 
been brought by the Czarist regime, all doubt concern- 
ing the reality of the situation vanished, people ceased 
to judge by their usual standards, and the Revolution 
became a fact as a result of the joint effort of all the 
sound political forces of the nation. gjE cannot em- 
phasize any too often that the great Russian Revolu- 
tion was accomplished by the whole people, that the 
achievement belongs to the nation as a whole, that all_ 
had a share in it and none can lay exclusive claim to it. 

But let us resume our narrative : 

I ran down the long, deserted corridor and at last 
found some deputies in the Catherine Hall. I remem- 
ber that Nekrassoff, Efremoff, Vershinin and some one 
else were there. From them I learned that Rodzianko, 
President of the Duma, had received an order from 
Nicholas.II dissolving the Duma at midnight on March 
twelfth ;[that he sent an urgent telegram to the Czar 
at General Headquarters at Mohileff, and to the gen- 

[ 7 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


erals in command of the various fronts, saying that the 
revolt in Petrograd was spreading, ithat, in addition 
to the Volinsk Regiment, the Engineer Battalion of the 
Guards had mutinied, that the Preobrajensk Regiment 
was restive and was about to come out into the streets, 
etc. 

I rushed to the telephone and urged some friends 
to go to the barracks of the insurgent regiments and 
direct the troops to the Duma. The deputies were 
rapidly filling the lobbies, although the so-called “un- 
official” session of the Duma was not to convene be- 
fore two o’clock in the afternoon. The meeting of 
the council of party leaders was to begin only at noon. 
There was an atmosphere of increasing tension. 

During the preceding days the deputies had come to 
look to us of the Left wing for reliable information 
as to the state of mind of the masses and the develop- 
ments in the city. We had succeeded fairly well in 
establishing a scouting and news-gathering organiza- 
tion all over the capital. Every ten or fifteen minutes 
reports came to me by telephone. On my appearance 
in the chambers of the deputies of the Right and 
Moderate parties, where an atmosphere of alarm pre- 
vailed, I was surrounded and bombarded with ques- 
tions as to what was going on, what was likely to hap- 
pen and what would become of us.| I replied frankly 
that the decisive hour had struck, that there was a 
revolution in the city, that the troops were on their 
way to the Duma and that it was our duty as the rep- 
resentatives of the people to receive them and make 
common cause with the army and the populace in re- 
volt.! 

The news that the troops were well under way to 
the Tauride Palace at first alarmed the deputies, but 
the fear and anxiety disappeared in the thrill of ex- 

[ 8 ] 



DAYS THAT ENDED RUSSIAN MONARCHY 

pectation of their arrival. We of the opposition spoke 
to the leading members of the Duma, all of whom soon 
joined us, and we insisted that the Duma go im- 
mediately into official session, in defiance of the im- 
perial order of dissolution. ,We demanded that the 
Duma take into its hands the direction of events and, 
if necessary, proclaim itself the supreme authority in 
the land. These proposals would have met with in- 
dignation the day before from the loyal majority of 
the Duma, but now they were received quite calmly^ 
and, by some members, even with evident sympathy 4 
New voices were constantly added in approval. 

(Meanwhile developments in the city were gathering 
explosive momentumi One regiment after another had 
come out into the streets without the officers. Some of 
the officers had been arrested and there were even 
isolated cases of murder. Others had slipped away, 
deserting their units in view of the obvious mistrust 
and ugly temper of the soldiers. Everywhere the 
population was making common cause with the troops. 
Masses of workmen were pouring into the center of 
the city from the suburbs, and there was lively firing 
in many quarters. Soon news was brought to us of 
skirmishes with the police. The government machine 
guns were firing on the people from roofs and belfries. 
The throngs of soldiers and civilians in the streets gave 
no indication, however, of being moved by any clear 
aim or purpose, s Animated by revolutionary indigna- 
tion and dazed by the dramatic spectacle of which they 
were such a conspicuous part, the multitudes t had to 
be given an aim and a point of concentration.* It was 
difficult to see as yet what would become of the move- 
ment. ; 5lt was quite clear, on the other hand, that the 
government intended to take advantage of the grow- 
ing chaos and anarchy for its own dark purposes.' Of 

[ 9 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 

this there could no longer he any doubt. The hunger 
riots of the preceding days, the military disintegra- 
tion, the alleged need of dissolving the “disloyal” 
Duma — all this was obviously intended by the govern- 
ment to serve as proof that the position of the coun- 
try and of the government was desperate and that it 
had become impossible to continue the war. This was 
the path along which the government was moving and 
this was clearly its aim — a separate peace. 

The dissolution of the Duma coming as the 
autocracy’s reply to the numerous attempts of the 
majority to find a loyal way out of the crisis was so 
striking and eloquent a move that the loyalists no 
longer had a single plank to stand upon.! They were 
prepared for a dramatic change and only needed to be 
encouraged. With each passing moment the deputies 
were becoming increasingly aware of the fact that the 
Duma was the only center of authority commanding 
respect and that it was essential to take a final, de- 
cisive, irrevocable step. 

The anxiety and alarm concerning the populace 
gradually subsided and the deputies began to go more 
frequently to the windows of the palace, scanning the 
empty streets which now seemed to have taken on an 
air of portentous mystery. Would the troops come to 
the Duma? Would there be an outlet to the grow- 
ing tension which was rapidy becoming intolerable? 

“Where are your troops? Are they coming?” 
many of the deputies asked pe in a tone of anger and 
irritation. “My troops 1” lit had seemed in the last 
few days as if every one in the Duma had begun to 
look to me and to my closest associates as the center 
upon which the whole course of events depended! 
Soon the atmosphere within the Tauride Palace began 
to change, as inside the Duma the relative strength 

C ] 



DAYS THAT ENDED RUSSIAN MONARCHY 

and disposition of the various parties had changed by 
the pressure of events outside. Realizing this the 
deputies of the Right and Moderate parties began to 
approach the future leaders, men whom they had 
hardly deigned to notice the day before. “My troops !” 
Most of the deputies called them mine. Perhaps it 
was because I had unbounded confidence that the 
troops would come. 1 1 was waiting to lead them into 
the Duma and by doing so to bring about the union 
of the mutinous soldiers and the representatives of the 
people, in which alone lay salvation. J I kept on tel- 
ephoning, running to the windows, sending messengers 
into the street to see whether the troops were coming. 
Still they did not come. Time was passing with ter- 
rible speed. 

The council of party leaders met long before the 
appointed hour to consider the situation and to work 
out a plan of action to be submitted for approval to 
the unofficial meeting of the Duma. Those of us who 
met in the council laid aside all differences of party, 
class and age. We were dominated by one thing only: 
the realization that Russia was on the brink of ruin 
and that we must do our best to save her. Rodzianko, 
very iexcited, opened the meeting and informed us of 
the steps he had taken within the last forty-eight hours. 
He read the telegrams he had sent to the Czar the 
day before and told us of his telephonic conversation 
with the Czar’s ministers. What was to be done? 
How were we to determine what was really happening 
outside the Duma walls and what should be our at- 
titude towards these events? The Duma majority had 
a great deal to forget before it could range itself on 
the side of the Revolution, jembark upon an open con- 
flict with the Czarist power and raise its hand against 
the traditional authority^ 

[n] 



THE CATASTROPHE 

We, representatives of the opposition, Nekrassoff, 
Efremoff, Tcheidze and I, now officially proposed what 
might be termed the revolutionary course. We de- 
manded that the Duma go immediately into official ses- 
sion, taking no notice whatever of the order of dissolu- 
tion. \ Some wavered. iThe majority and Rodzianko 
did not agree with us) Argument, persuasion and pas- 
sionate appeals were in vain. The majority still be- 
lieved too much in the past. The crimes and follies of 
the government had not yet succeeded in rooting 
this faith out of their souls. The council rejected our 
proposal, deciding that the Duma convene in “un- 
official” session. - Politically and psychologically this 
meant that there was to be a private meeting of a 
group of private individuals, many of them men of 
great influence and authority, but still only private in- 
dividuals !i The meeting was not one of a state in- 
stitution and it had no formal authority for which it 
could claim general recognition. 

|This refusal to continue in session formally was per- 
haps the greatest mistake of the Duma^ It meant com- 
mitting suicide at the very moment when its authority 
was supreme in the country and it might have played 
a decisive and fruitful part had it acted officially. This 
refusal revealed the characteristic weakness of a Duma 
composed in its majority of the representatives of the 
upper classes, and which inevitably gave a distorted 
reflection of the country’s opinions and state of mind* 
And so the Imperial Duma, born as a result of Stoly- 
pin’s counter-revolutionary coup d’etat of 1907, which 
destroyed the more democratic electoral law of 1905, 
wrote its own death warrant at the moment of the 
revolutionary renaissance of the people. The ma- 
jority deliberately put the Duma on a level with other 
self-appointed organizations, like the Council of Work- 

[xz] 



DAYS THAT ENDED RUSSIAN MONARCHY 

men’s and Soldiers’ Deputies, which was just then mak- 
ing its appearance. Later there were efforts to revive 
the Duma as an official institution, but these came too 
late. fThe Duma died on the morning of March 
twelfth, the day when its strength and influence were 
at the highest] 

Next day, March thirteenth, there were already two 
centers of authority, both of which owed their exist- 
ence to the Revolution : the Duma in unofficial session, 
with its Temporary Committee, named as a provisional 
body to direct events, and the Council or Soviet of 
Workmen's, and Soldiers’ Deputies, with its Executive 
Committee^ 

I cannot now remember all the discussions that took 
'place that day in the council of party leaders and 
^afterwards at the “unofficial” sitting of the Duma. I 
remember that the Duma, which met between noon and 
jtwo o’clock in the afternoon, decided to form a Tem- 
porary Committee invested with unlimited powers. 
The members of the committee were Rodzianko, Shul- 
gin, Miliukoff, Tcheidze, Nekrassoff, Karauloff, Dmi- 
triukoff, Rjevsky, Shidloffsky, Y. Lvoff, Engelhardt, 
Shingarioff and myself. All parties were represented, 
except the extreme Right and Government National- 
ists. These members of the Right wing, who not long 
before had behaved with contemptuous arrogance in 
the Duma, suddenly disappeared from the scene. 
Nominees of the government and some of them its 
-paid agents, these outcasts of the nation melted away 
like wax in the sun, in the first rays of freedom dawn- 
ing upon Russia. 

The meetings in the Tauride Palace come back 
to me in a kind of mist. We were all in a curious state 
of mind, which cannot be understood by any one who 
has not experienced it. We were in a dream, a terrible 

[ 13 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


and beautiful dream and, as one does in a dream, we 
performed our parts accurately, without wavering. | It 
was not so much my reason which perceived what 
was happening, as my whole being, which felt and 
grasped instinctively that the great moment had come.' 

I was much disturbed by the delay in the arrival of 
the people and soldiers before the Duma, and when at 
last, as I was passing through Catherine Hall, some 
one called to me from the main entrance of the palace, 
saying, “The soldiers are coming!” I flew to a window 
to convince myself that it was actually so. I had no 
thought of what I would do next. I think it was just 
after I p.m. From the window I saw soldiers, sur- 
rounded by a throng of civilians, lining up on the op- 
posite side of the street. They were forming their 
ranks rather undecidedly, evidently finding it difficult to 
proceed outside their normal surroundings and with- 
out the guidance of their regular officers. 1 1 gazed at 
them for a moment through the window and then, 
just as I was, in the black jacket which I wore during 
the entire Revolution, without hat or overcoat, I ran 
out through the main entrance to the soldiers for whom 
we had waited and wished so long. Behind me was a 
group of deputies. Startled attendants stood on the 
porch, and there was a sentinel at the entrance. I ran 
to the center gate that led from the garden into the 
street and welcomed the troops and the people in the 
name of the Duma and in my own behalf. They 
rushed towards mg in confusion, surrounded me in a 
mass and listened. 1 ? 

Almost at the same moment Tcheidze, Skobeleff and 
other deputies came up behind me at the palace gate. 
Tcheidze also spoke some words of greeting, and then 
I addressed the troops and asked them to follow me 
into the Duma, to replace the guard and take over 

[ 14 ] 



DAYS THAT ENDED RUSSIAN MONARCHY 

the defense of the building from the Czarist troopsE. 
The whole throng pushed after me towards the main 
entrance. Somehow the soldiers separated themselves 
from the throng and, drawing up in disciplined form, 
followed me. We proceeded with some anxiety to the 
guardroom, on the left side entrance of the Duma, not 
at all sure that we would not have to fight the regular 
watch on duty, of whose possible unfriendly sentiments 
I warned the soldiers. We went off to “take” the 
guardroom. However, it turned out that the guards 
were not there. They had left before we came. I 
explained to a noncommissioned officer where and how 
sentries should be placed and returned to the main 
hall of the Duma, which by this time was filled to 
capacity by deputies, soldiers and civilians. In the 
evening a detachment of troops from the Preobrajensk 
Regiment undertook the task of guarding the arrested 
ministers and dignitaries of the old regime who had 
meanwhile been brought to the Duma. The troops 
performed their task with excellent discipline and re- 
markable tact. 

On my return from the guardroom I again stopped 
to address the throng which remained outside the en- 
trance. The mood of the people, who had come from 
all parts of the city, was very significant. I They evi- 
dently had not the least doubt that they were in the 
midst of a revolution. Boldly they raised the ques- 
tion as to how to deal with the representatives and 
supporters of the old regime, suggesting severe meas- 
ures[ ,rMy advice was asked and I said that those who 
were particularly dangerous should be arrested forth- 
with, but that under no circumstances should the peo- 
ple take the law into their own hands, and that blood- 
shed should be avoided] They asked who should be 
arrested and I named first Scheglovitoff, former min- 

Ci5] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


ister of justice and president of the Imperial Council. 
I ordered Scheglovitoff brought directly to me. It 
developed that som,e men of the Preobrajensk or 
Volinsk regiments had already gone with some others, 
at about eleven o’clock in the morning, to seize Pro- 
topopoff, the Minister of the Interior. He had man- 
aged to get away in time, however. But everywhere 
in town dangerous men of the old regime were being 
arrested. 

After 3 P.M. the Duma was unrecognizable. The 
building was filled with civilians and troops, prin- 
cipally privates. 1 , From every direction people were 
coming to us for advice and instructions. The Tem- 
porary Committee of the Duma, which had just been 
established, was compelled immediately to assume the 
functions of executive authority. At midnight, March 
thirteenth, there was no more wavering on the part of 
the committee. It became for the time being the 
sovereign power of Russia, and Rodzianko agreed to 
head it as such. 

I think it was about 3 P.M. when some one had come 
to ask me about arranging quarters in the Tauride 
Palace for the Soviet of Workmen’s and Soldiers’ 
Deputies, then just founded. With the consent of 
the Duma, the Soviet was given Room 13, the meet- 
ing place of the budget commission of the Duma. 'The 
Soviet then set to work organizing the Petrograd gar- 
rison and proletariat.! At the same time Tcheidze and 
I signed a permit for the publication of the first revolu- 
tionary newspaper, The Bulletin of the Duma Re- 
porters, for all the printers in the city were on strike 
and the capital, deprived of newspapers, had no proper 
idea of what was happening. I remember I laughed 
when a Duma reporter asked me to sign the permit. 

“Why are you laughing, Alexander Feodorovitch?” 

[16] 



DAYS THAT ENDED RUSSIAN MONARCHY 


asked one of the reporters. “Don’t you know what a 
great power you are now in Russia 1” At the time I 
took this as a joke. 

Later (about 4 p.M., I think), when the Temporary 
Committee was meeting in Rodzianko’s room, some 
one came in to announce that Scheglovitoff had been 
brought in under arrest. The news made a great im- 
pression in the Duma, both on the public and the 
deputies. Scheglovitoff, the all-powerful Czarist 
grandee, under arrest ! The deputies got quite excited 
about it. The Moderates pressed Rodzianko not to 
permit the arrest. “We must let him go,” they in- 
sisted. “We cannot arrest the President of the Im- 
perial Council in the very halls of the Duma. What 
about the immunity of members of legislative bodies?” 
They turned to me. I replied that I could not release 
Scheglovitoff. “What!” they cried with indignation. 
“You want to turn the Duma into a prison?” This 
was indeed a strong argument, but what could one 
do? ^To release Scheglovitoff would have meant hand- 
ing him over to the mob to be lynched. Besides, it 
would have given rise to a profound distrust of the 
Duma among the masses. Such a step was quite im- 
possible. It would have been sheer madness. ? 

I went out to see Scheglovitoff and found him in 
charge of a hastily improvised guard, surrounded by a 
group of people. Rodzianko was already there to- 
gether with a number of deputies. I saw Rodzianko 
greet Scheglovitoff amicably and invite him into his 
rooms as “our guest.” I interposed myself between 
Rodzianko and Scheglovitoff and said to the former: 
“No, Michael Yladimirovitch, Mr. Scheglovitoff is not 
a guest here, and I refuse to have him released.” 
Turning to the President of the Imperial Council I 
asked: “Are you Ivan Grigorievitch Scheglovitoff?” 

[ 17 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


“Yes.” “I must request you to follow me. You are 
a prisoner. Have no fear. I guarantee your safety.” 
Every one obeyed and fell back. Rodzianko and his 
friends, somewhat confused, returned to his rooms, 
while I led Scheglovitoff to the ministerial chambers, 
known as the Government Pavilion. 

The Government Pavilion was a separate building, 
consisting of several comfortable rooms, connected by 
a glass-roofed passage with the main hall of the 
Duma, the hall where the Duma held its sittings. 
These rooms were used by the ministers when they 
came to the Duma. The Pavilion being outside the 
Duma proper was under control of the government. 
It had its own staff of servants, independent of the 
Duma. The deputies had no unrestricted right of 
entry to it. By using it as a place of incarceration we 
avoided turning the Duma into a prison. The govern- 
ment leaders and dignitaries were thus imprisoned in 
their own apartments. Scheglovitoff was the first pris- 
oner, but he was followed soon by a whole galaxy of 
shining lights of the old bureaucratic world. They 
were brought in on foot and in carriages from all parts 
of the capital, and they found temporary lodging in 
these comfortable rooms where so recently they had 
waited in majestic seclusion for their turns to appear 
before the Duma, which they so despised, and where 
they had so often cynically spoken of it as a “pack of 
troublesome chatterboxes.” 

^By sundown, March thirteenth, all Petrogrjid was 
already in the hands of the revolutionary troop! The 
old government machinery had ceased to function. 
Some of the ministries and government buildings were 
already occupied by the revolutionists. Others, such 
as the office of the secret police, the police stations, 
the law courts, etc., were on fire. In the Duma we 

[18] 



DAYS THAT ENDED RUSSIAN MONARCHY 

had created a central authority to control the troops 
and head the revolt. At times the multitude seemed 
about to swamp the Duma. Then again it would re- 
cede and give us respite. The Tauride Palace groaned, 
shook and seemed about to collapse under the pres- 
sure of the mighty human wave. From the outside the 
palace looked more like an armed camp than a legisla- 
tive institution. Boxes of ammunition, hand grenades, 
stacks of rifles and machine guns had been sent from all 
quarters and stored in the palace yard and garden. 
Every available corner was occupied by soldiers, al- 
though, alas, there were few officers among them. 

During all those first days of the Revolution I did 
not go into the streets and so I never saw the city in 
insurrection. Only once, on the night of March fif- 
teenth, I hurried home for a few hours before dawn. 
I saw patrols at street corners and excited groups of 
people who had evidently been up all night, the watch 
bivouacs around the Duma and the burning head- 
quarters of the gendarmerie to which I had once been 
brought from prison for examination. 

In those days my work did not take me outside the 
walls of the Tauride Palace. Here we were like the 
general staff of an army in battle. We did not see the 
battlefield nor hear the groans of the wounded and 
the dying. We saw everything through reports, tel- 
ephone messages and eyewitness accounts. We did not 
see the details of the operations, but we had before us 
the whole picture of events. We tried to direct the 
movement to a definite goal, to give it form, and sys- 
tematize the revolutionary forces. 

Looking back, I can disentangle the events of the 
first hours of the upheaval and determine the time of 
most of the individual episodes. But at that time 
everything seemed to weld into one ecstasy of intense, 

[ 19 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 

continuous and uninterrupted action. Reports came 
to us in bewildering succession. They seemed to flow 
into our midst as if into a magic circle. Hundreds 
came to demand instructions and ask to be given work 
to do. They wanted attention, they gave advice, they 
got excited and shouted. Sometimes they raved or 
became ecstatic. We had to keep our heads, for we 
could not afford to lose a minute nor appear to lack 
confidence. We had to decide in a moment what to 
answer, what orders to issue, when to dissuade, where 
to send these soldiers or that armored car, what to do 
with certain troop detachments, and where to send 
reenforcements; how to find room for the hundreds 
under arrest, how to make use of the people who were 
ready for the revolutionary struggle and, finally, how 
to feed and house the thousands of people working 
at the Duma.j There were innumerable minor ques- 
tions and petty details to be settled. iAnd at the same 
time we had to think of organizing our forces, of find- 
ing a program acceptable to all parties by devising com- 
promises, of following the course of events outside of 
Petrograd, particularly at General Headquarters and 
around the Czar. • 

It was almost impossible to tackle the fundamental 
questions during the daytime in the chaos of men, re- 
ports and events. We had to wait for the night, when 
the wave ebbed and the halls and lobbies of the palace 
grew empty. As soon as silence and calm were restored, 
endless discussions and passionate, nerve-wracking dis- 
putes ensued in the rooms of the Temporary Commit- 
tee of the Duma. ] There, in the silence of the night, 
we began to sketch the outlines of the New Russia; 

Besides all this work, I had on my hands the Gov- 
ernment Pavilion with its ever growing number of 
dignitaries. I Order had to be established there and a 
120 } 



DAYS THAT ENDED RUSSIAN MONARCHY 

stern watch kept, so that the Revolution might not be 
disgraced by vengeful bloodshed.! I had to be every- 
where. I was summoned and sent for from all sides. 
As in a trance, regardless of day or night, now push- 
ing through a wall of human beings, now passing 
through the silent twilight of the empty corridors, I 
rushed about the Duma. Sometimes I almost lost 
consciousness for fifteen or twenty minutes, until a 
glass of brandy was forced down my throat and I was 
made to drink a cup of black coffee. Sometimes one 
of my intimate friends would catch me on the run, or 
seize me in the midst of a conversation, and make me 
swallow something hastily. Every one who was at the 
center of these great events had much the same ex- 
perience. 

I shall never forget the atmosphere in the Tauride 
Palace in those tense, critical days. Every one was 
animated by the spirit of unity, fraternity, mutual 
confidence and self-sacrifice, welding all of us into a 
single fighting bodyj Afterwards, when the Revolu- 
tion had conquered, when our victory had become se- 
cure, more and more among us turned out to be men 
with personal ambitions, men with an eye to the main 
chance, or mere adventurers. But during those first 
two days and the first night all of us at the Duma were 
running grave risks. If it took courage and determina- 
tion to run to the Duma through the rifle and machine 
gun fire in the streets, much strength of mind was 
needed by those men who had spent their lives in the 
customs and traditions of old Russia to turn whole- 
heartedly to the Revolution, lit must have cost them 
a great deal to break with their whole past and stand 
out against everything for which they had lived the 
day before and without which they thought the country 
could not’ endure. For they turned against the Czar, 

[ 21 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


demanded his abdication and summoned and frater- 
nized with the mutinous troops. This was very pain- 
ful for them, and I saw clearly the profound suffering 
and genuine tears of those men who were burning all 
that they had worshiped, for the sake of the salva- 
tion of Russia.] 

I think it would be well for men of different views 
to do each other justice, and I feel obliged to say that 
men like Gutchkoff, Shulgin and Rodzianko showed 
the courage of true patriots and a genuine revolution- 
ary spirit in those critical days. They really fought 
for the Revolution, and they probably felt things more 
intensely, suffered more anxiety for Russia and viewed 
with more pain the terrible situation that preceded the 
Revolution than many of the revolutionary proletariat 
who afterwards arrogated to themselves all the honor 
of and responsibility for the Revolution. These men 
felt more profoundly and suffered more because dur- 
ing the period preceding the Revolution they had 
known more about the affairs of state and what was 
going on in the army, at court and in the ministries, 
and had seen what others only surmised — the abyss 
opening before the country. I have no hesitation in 
repeating that they felt these things more profoundly 
than the men who afterwards claimed to have brought 
about the Revolution. 

|As a matter of fact the Petrograd Council of Work- 
men’s and Soldiers’ Deputies was not yet completely 
organized at this time, and while the Duma was act- 
ing as a national center for all Russia, the proletariat, 
was only just beginning to form its organizations,' 
The Temporary Committee of the Duma com- 
municated with the Czar and the army, gave orders 
to the railways, sent out that first telegram about the 
events in Petrograd, which, like an electric current, 

[22] 



DAYS THAT ENDED RUSSIAN MONARCHY 


united all Russia with the revolutionary capital. The 
Temporary Committee of the Duma did all this with- 
out any special pressure from the “revolutionary de- 
mocracy.” It set the Revolution going simply because 
the time was ripe for itl. We must remember, too, that 
information about the Duma proceedings constituted 
the first news of the Revolution that reached the army 
at the front and that the success of the upheaval was 
due, to a very large extent, to the fact that the whole 
army in the field, with nearly all its officers, at once 
recognized and welcomed the Revolution. /The men 
who were on the fighting line (with the possible ex- 
ception of the Baltic Fleet) realized more clearly than 
any one else that Russia stood on the brink of a 
catastrophe and it was with them that the authority 
of the Duma stood highest./ 

] Those leaders of the Soviet who had suddenly risen 
to their positions simply because they had taken part 
in the revolution of 1905 perceived the dominating 
role of the Duma so clearly that they immediately de- 
cided that t this 19x7 Revolution was a “bourgeois” 
movement.* They declared dogmatically that, accord- 
ing to kll the rules of “scientific” socialism, the revolu- 
tionary democracy must not enter this bourgeois 
government^ These would-be leaders were far from 
knowing the real state of affairs. { Not only did they 
take it for granted that the bourgeois government 
would have monarchist tendencies, but they thought it 
was strong enough to put them into practice and, there- 
fore, hastened to take what measures they could to pre- 
vent this.? So, the leading members of the first Execu* 
tive Committee of the Soviet quite seriously introduced 
the following amazing clause into the manifesto which 
they outlined for the new government: 

“The government binds, itself to abstain from all 

[ 23 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 

acts defining in advance the form of the future Russian 
government.” 

? As far as I remember, the Temporary Committee 
of the Duma did not accept this clause and it did not 
appear in the final draft of the first manifesto of the 
Provisional Government. What scant power the 
Soviet leaders must have attributed to the revolution- 
ary democracy, which they claimed to represent, since, 
instead of demanding the immediate proclamation of 
a republic in Russia, they made this feeble effort to 
limit the power of those whom they considered masters 
of the situation ! I 

The events as viewed from our vantage point in the 
Duma showed that the Revolution was victorious, but 
we were not quite certain what forces the old govern- 
ment still may have had at its disposal. We did not 
even know where the government was, what it was 
doing and what strength it had outside of Petrograd. 
We heard that that same evening the government was 
to meet at the Maryinsky Palace. We sent a detach- 
ment of soldiers with armored cars to the palace to 
arrest the government, but our messengers returned 
about midnight saying that they had been fired upon 
by machine guns in Morsakaya street and that they 
had not been able to make their way to the palace. 
Afterwards it was rumored that the government was 
sitting at the Admiralty, under the protection of troops 
and artillery from Gatchina. There was a report that 
loyal troops were approaching from Finland, and we 
hastily organized a defense on the Viborg side of the 
capital, along the tracks of the Finland railway. 

We knew nothing of what was being done at Gen- 
eral Headquarters, where the Czar was. It developed 
that he had sent General Ivanoff, the hero of the first 
campaign in Galicia, with an army to take Petrograd 

[ 24 ] 



DAYS THAT ENDED RUSSIAN MONARCHY 


and restore order there. This detachment arrived at 
Tsarskoye Selo at dawn on March fourteenth, and 
there it simply melted away in the fire of the Revolu- 
tion. The general himself, however, succeeded in mak- 
ing his escape in time. 

, It appeared necessary to organize a serious defense 
for emergencies and to take charge of the troops of 
the Petrograd garrison. But on the first day we had 
scarcely any officers or any one with sufficient technical 
experience at our disposal. I think it was only on the 
evening of March thirteenth or fourteenth that Gutch- 
koff began issuing orders. But on the evening of 
March twelfth the Temporary Committee of the 
Duma organized a military commission which at first 
consisted of civilians with some knowledge of mili- 
tary affairs, a sprinkling of officers and privates and 
myself. Later Engelhardt, a colonel of the General 
Staff and a conservative member of the Duma, was ap- 
pointed head of the commission. By a strange irony 
of fate this military commission that was directing the 
struggle against Protopopoff’s police was quartered 
in the same room which was so recently the abode of 
Protopopoff, who had worked and temporarily lived 
there as vice-president of the Duma, before his ap- 
pointment as minister of the interior in 1916. 
f Our military difficulties were further complicated by 
the fact that the masses of soldiers at our disposal were 
almost entirely without officers in those critical daysj 
I remember how impatiently all of us in the Duma 
awaited the arrival of officers and members of the 
higher command, for we realized that the breach be- 
tween the men and the officers of the Petrograd gar- 
rison was a great misfortune for the army. On the 
evening of March twelfth the First Reserve Infantry 
Regiment marched up to the Duma. It was the first 

[ 25 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


regiment to arrive with its personnel complete, headed 
by its colonel and officers. The bad effect produced on 
the entire army by the unfortunate and only too ob- 
vious enstrangement between the officers and soldiers 
of the Petrograd garrison will become more evident 
later in my narrative. ! One may say, with reasonable 
certainty, that if the officers in Petrograd had placed 
themselves at the head of the movement immediately, 
as did the officers at the front, the Russian Revolution 
would have escaped many calamities! 

But in the first days of the Revolution the Petrograd 
officers were not to be seen. Nevertheless, we man- 
aged somehow to deal with the military questions be- 
fore us, although we were quite aware that we could 
not resist any serious attack and that two or three well 
disciplined regiments would have sufficed to dispose 
of us. | But during those days the old regime did not 
command a single soldier who would have fixed his 
bayonet against the people, against the Duma or the 
Soviet. In this lay our strength, the strength of our 
spirit and our authority. It rested upon the common 
will, common love and common hate}, 

The temporary absence of the officers made it easier 
for the Soviet to penetrate into the barracks. The 
Soviet leaders quickly grasped the advantage of sub- 
ordinating to their influence the 150,000 men of the 
Petrograd garrison. One must do them justice and 
say that they made full and even excessive use of this 
advantage. 

The Executive Cbmmittee of the Soviet formed 
its so-called military section on the night of March 
thirteenth.* This military section soon established 
close contact with the garrison in all parts of the 
capital, and during the first two months of the Revolu- 
tion, while Gutchkoff was war minister and Korniloff 

[»«] 



DAYS THAT ENDED RUSSIAN MONARCHY 

military commander of the city, it competed success- 
fully with the official military authorities. 

On March twelfth, in the evening, the Temporary 
Committee of the Duma sent Bublikoff, a deputy, with 
a detachment of revolutionists to capture the central 
railway-telegraph station. This was a timely and very 
important move, which immediately gave the Duma 
control of the entire railway system and made it im- 
possible to dispatch trains without the approval of 
Bublikoff, who had been appointed Duma commissioner 
in charge of communications. Bublikoff also tel- 
egraphed the first news of the Revolution to all parts 
of Russia, and it spread immediately throughout the 
whole country and the army. The railway men ac- 
cepted the Revolution without hesitation and with 
great enthusiasm. At the same time, they showed ex- 
cellent discipline and it was due to their efforts that 
military trains were kept going regularly and general 
traffic suffered no interruption. 

In short, by the night of March thirteenth, we had 
made such great strides that a return to the past was 
no longer possible. A compromise or amicable solu- 
tion of the conflict between the old regime and the 
people had already become out of the question.! The 
Temporary Committee of the Duma, was. competing 
with the old government for supreme authority, al- 
though the Duma as a whole was slow to realize what 
had happened. It had not yet decided to recognize 
formally the decisive rupture between the people and 
the old regime. There were lingering hopes that the 
old government would finally realize the situation and 
call to power men who had the confidence of the peo- 
ple, etc. But as events succeeded each other with light- 
ning rapidity it became impossible and intolerable to 
remain undecided any longer. 

[27] 



THE CATASTROPHE 

All that night we argued and disputed in the room 
of the president of the Duma, and every piece of news, 
every fresh rumor was greedily seized upon. / In the 
formation of the Soviet we perceived a most important 
development. In a short time another body might 
proclaim itself the supreme authority of the Revolu- 
tion.^ The man who wavered longest was Rodzianko. 
We all tried to convince him and at last he asked us 
to give him time to think it over. It was just before 
midnight. After some deliberation Rodzianko re- 
turned to the Temporary Committee and declared that 
he was willing to remain president of the committee 
provided it assumed the functions of a provisional gov- 
ernment until the formation of a new government. » So 
that when the clock struck midnight on March thir- 
teenth Russia already possessed the embryo of a new 
national states It was a representative body, though 
chosen from a Duma elected mainly by the upper 
classes, and it based its authority on the will of the 
people, as far as this had been expressed through the 
limited electorate of the Duma| 

;The fourth Duma laid the foundations of the new 
power in Russia} This is an undeniable, historical fact 
and shows the strength of the mere idea of represen- 
tative government. Of course it would have been a 
hundred times better for the Duma, and especially for 
the country, had the new national authority been born 
on the preceding afternoon at a solemn, official session 
of the Duma. But unfortunately most of the deputies 
had not, and could not have been expected to have, 
sufficient revolutionary audacity to take control of the 
march of events at once, and by strong and deliberate 
action create a single All-Russian center for the popu- 
lar movement. 

On the night of March thirteenth, after Rodzianko 

[28] 



DAYS THAT ENDED RUSSIAN MONARCHY 


had given his affirmative answer, we drew up a procla- 
mation to the people announcing the formation of the 
new provisional authority. We also delegated certain 
deputies as commissars of the Duma, to take charge of 
all the ministries and central government offices. 

The same evening the first session of the Soviet was 
held in Room 13. Of course, the representatives of 
the workmen and soldiers had been chosen more or less 
casually, as it was quite impossible to organize a reg- 
ular election in a few hours. | The Soviet elected a 
temporary executive committee, of which Tcheidze was 
president; Skobeleff and I were chosen vice-presidents. 
I heard of my election by chance, for I did not attend 
this meeting of the Soviet and I do not remember even 
looking in at the meeting for a moment. ! In fact, even 
after my election I rarely attended the Soviet meetings 
or those of its Executive Committee. From the first 
days of the Revolution,my relations with the Soviet 
leaders were strained. [They could not abide me, as I 
was compelled to fight continually against the academic, 
dogmatic socialism of the Soviet, which from the very 
beginning tried to thwart the normal development and 
sound forces of the Revolution.! I speak here of the 
Executive Committee of the Soviet as it was constituted 
during the first weeks of the Revolution. Later, the 
personnel and conduct of the Executive Committee 
changed considerably for the better. 

I But I will deal with the Soviet later. For the pres- 
ent I simply record the definite creation of this sec- 
ond center of the Revolution, which was soon to swal- 
low up the first.* I repeat that the suicidal conduct of 
the Duma majority in refusing to take part officially 
as the Duma in the events comprising the outbreak of 
the Revolution, in submitting to the Czar’s decree of 
dissolution on March twelfth, and turning its session 

[ 29 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 

into a private meeting (as it had done every time it 
had been prorogued during the War) threw away all 
chances of preserving a single center of authority in the 
Revolution. 

On proclaiming itself the supreme administrative 
authority, the Temporary Committee of the Duma be- 
gan to issue orders and instructions to the Petrograd 
garrison. But by what right? It could claim no be- 
ter right than the Soviet, which soon also began issuing 
orders and instructions to the garrison. The Tem- 
porary Committee of the Duma acted as a private, self- 
appointed revolutionary organization. 

So, two centers of authority, each of which elected 
its own executive committee, were established on the 
very first day of the Revolution (though I doubt 
whether the Soviet Executive Committee had much 
power) , and this division finally led to the decay of all 
authority and to the anarchy of Bolshevism. 

On the first night of the Revolution the city was lit 
up by the glow of fires. Inside the Duma there was 
dead silence and emptiness, and one could collect one’s 
thoughts a little. Our minds were occupied chiefly 
with wondering what would be the result of the con- 
flict between the Duma and the still living authority of 
Czarism. -Only the day before Rodzianko had tel- 
egraphed to the Czar: 

The situation is serious. There is anarchy in 
the capital. The government is paralyzed. Gen- 
eral discontent is growing. There is desultory 
firing in the streets. One portion of the troops 
is firing on the other. It is absolutely necessary 
to appoint some one possessing the confidence of 
the country to form a new government. Delay 
will be fatal. I pray God that a share of the 
responsibility may not fall upon the Monarchy 

[ 30 ] 



DAYS THAT ENDED RUSSIAN MONARCHY 

A day later Rodzianko had adopted revolutionary 
methods and was heading the temporary central organ 
of the Revolution, while the representatives of the 
“revolutionary democracy” were proclaiming the Rev- 
olution in the Soviet and publishing the first appeal to 
the people to fight for a Constituent Assembly. Our 
minds could not keep pace with the events. They were 
bewildered and overwhelmed by the peculiar glowing 
atmosphere of intense popular emotion. And those 
who, in spite of everything, wished to' keep to their 
ordinary way of thinking at this extraordinary time of 
mysterious revolutionary creation, those who hastened 
to build up in nice and well laid out designs their re- 
spective political schemes and systems in order to set 
themselves above the events and to direct their course 
— those people sometimes managed to look extremely 
silly. 'I have already mentioned how the wise men 
of the Left formulated a declaration intended to coun- 
teract the monarchist tendencies which by all the rules 
of revolutionary theory must be inherent in a bourgeois 
government. But they were not the only ones who 
made such miscalculations. On March twelfth, one 
of the wisest members of the Moderate Progressive 
Bloc in the Duma majority, when asked what would 
be the program of the new government, replied quickly 
and authoritatively: “Of course, its program will be 
the program of the Progressive Bloc.”/] Moreover, on 
the morning of March fifteenth, Miliukoff proclaimed 
to the throng collected in the halls of the Tauride Pal- 
ace: 

S “The power will pass to the Regent. The despot 
who has brought Russia to complete ruin will either 
abdicate or be deposed. The power will be trans- 
ferred to the Grand Duke Michael Alexandrovitch. 
Alexis will be the heir to the throne.” 

[3i] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


He was interrupted by cries : “It is the old dynasty,” 
etc. But he continued : 

“In my opinion we ought to have a parliamentary, 
constitutional monarchy. Perhaps others are of dif- 
ferent opinion, but if we discuss this point now instead 
of deciding it at once, civil war will break out in Russia 
and she will return to the regime that has just been 
destroyed.” 

But by the evening of March twelfth it had already 
become quite evident that any attempt to save the 
monarchy or the dynasty was doomed to failure. The 
monarchy was bound to be swept away in two or three 
hours. Many impractical plans were put forward and 
it was extremely trying to listen to the endless discus- 
sions of lifeless, academic programs. These plans 
were put forward by the representatives of the upper 
classes as well as by the revolutionary democracy. I 
did my best to avoid these meetings, not deliberately 
but because such interminable and impractical discus- 
sions have always been repugnant to my nature. Polit- 
ical programs rarely interested me at that time, j I 
was absorbed entirely by the vast and mysterious de- 
velopment of events which was sweeping us along so 
swiftly and so inexorably. One felt that programs 
and discussions could neither speed nor prevent that 
which had come about* 

'The Revolution was not the product of mere human 
reason. It came from the depths of the soul and con- 
science of humanity.! Indeed, all these programs and 
theories were shelved and forgotten even before the 
authors had had time to try them out, while the au- 
thors themselves followed a course precisely the op- 
posite of that which they had advocated the day be- 
fore. But how much time, energy and intelligence 
were wasted during those months of the Revolution in 

[ 32 ] 



DAYS THAT ENDED RUSSIAN MONARCHY 

discussing academic schemes and manifestoes and in 
working out formulas to conciliate opposing views! 
iThese were the heritage of long centuries of autocracy, 
during which the Russian people had had no oppor- 
tunity to acquire political acumen and the art of prac- 
tical government. Neither the Left nor the Moderates 
nor the Right had any experience of government, with 
the possible exception of the bureaucrats. One must 
not blame them for this unhealthy tendency to settle 
everything by resolutions.! They had learned to rea- 
son well, but they had never been able to try out their 
theories in practice. Much paper was wasted during 
the Revolution! Many decisions were taken, only to 
be forgotten the next day by those who had urged and 
defended them. It would be unjust to attribute this 
lack of efficiency to the revolutionary democracy alone, 
for it was common to the whole Russian intelligentsia. 

The first night of the Revolution passed, but it 
seemed to us that all eternity had gone by. On the 
morning of March thirteenth, the military schools and 
almost all the Guard regiments with their officers came 
to express their allegiance to the Revolution. Reports 
arrived that the troops and the people in neighboring 
towns were joining the movement. 1 It was becoming 
clear that the Revolution was approaching decisive 
victory.! Rodzianko received telegrams from the com- 
mander-in-chief and the commanders at the front which 
dissipated all anxiety about the attitude of the army 
in the field. Tsairskoye Selo joined the movement the 
very same day that Nicholas II left General Head- 
quarters for the imperial residence. In the midst of 
the anarchy in Petrograd newly founded organizations 
began to appear. Resistance to the revolutionaries 
diminished rapidly and, in fact, disappeared almost en- 
tirely. We were now concerned only with the possible 

[ 33 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


opposition on the part of the old regime in other parts 
of the country. The events at Tsarskoye Selo, how- 
ever, had foredoomed all such efforts to failure. We 
heard that General Ivanoff had begun his advance on 
Petrograd. For what object? With what forces? 
What relation had this enterprise to the departure of 
the Emperor from General Headquarters? We did 
not know as yet. 

But such questions troubled us only at night, for all 
day long we lived in happy, feverish activity. We had 
to meet and welcome the various sections of the gar- 
rison as they arrived. As a rule the procedure was as 
follows : 

An army unit — let us say the Semenoffsk Guard 
Regiment — came in. The soldiers poured in noisily 
and gayly, like a great wave, through the main en- 
trance into the Duma, lining up along the walls of the 
long Catherine Hall. Then Rodzianko was sent for 
to greet them in the name of the Duma. He said 
what was expected of him. !He spoke of the great joy 
of liberation, of the dawn ‘of a new life and of the 
solemn, patriotic duty that lay before us at the front./ 
He pointed out that it was essential to have confidence 
in the men in authority, to observe military discipline, 
etc. His last words were usually drowned in thunder- 
ous cheers. Then some one from the regiment, usually 
the officer in command, would reply. And there were 
more cheers and joyful shouting. Then the regiment 
would want to hear other speakers. Usually the sol- 
diers asked for Miliukoff, Tcheidze or me. It was a 
great happiness to make these first speeches of freedom 
to a free people, to speak freely and openly for the 
first time to the army. 

I remember particularly one incident. The Mi- 
chailovsk Artillery School and several army units were 

[ 34 ] 



DAYS THAT ENDED RUSSIAN MONARCHY 

in Catherine Hall, while all the adjacent rooms and 
passages were thronged with soldiers and people. 
They called for me and lifted me on their shoulders in 
the center of the hall. I saw a sea of heads, of gleam- 
ing, enthusiastic faces. I felt as if we all had one emo- 
tion, one heart, one will. I felt that this throng was 
capable of great self-sacrifice, of .great devotion. I 
tried to express this in my speech. 1 1 spoke of the free 
man that was born in every one of us in this hour of the 
new, free Russia; of the great deeds that lay before 
us and of the call that had come to every one of us to 
serve pur country in complete sacrifice and without re- 
serve.’ I said that a double service was required of 
them, 'that they must carry on both the War and the 
Revolution; that this was a difficult task, calling for 
all the energies of every man and of the entire nation. 
I spoke of the generations of heroic revolutionists who 
had died unflinchingly for the liberty of future gen- 
erations. I pointed out that representatives of all 
classes had perished for this cause and that all classes 
must now trust each other. Again I called for gen- 
erous, heroic sacrifices in the name of our motherland 
that was reborn. 

Thousands of hands were raised and all swore to 
serve their country and the Revolution to the very 
end. It was indeed a new life that sprang up within 
the walls of the Duma. New fires of hope and aspira- 
tion were kindled and the masses were drawn together 
by mysterious bonds. We have lived through many 
beautiful and terrible events since then, but I can still 
ffeel the great soul of the people as I did in those days. 
I can feel this terrific force which may be led to per- 
form great deeds or incited to horrible crimes. J As a 
flower turns to the sun, so the newly awakened soul of 
the people longed for light and truth.’ The people 

[ 35 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 

followed us when we tried to raise them above ma- 
terial things to the light of high ideals. I hold, as I 
did then, what now seems to many an absurd faith: 
I believe in the spirit of the people, whose wholesome, 
creative forces will come out victorious in the end, 
vanquishing the deadly poison that has been poured 
into them during these long years, not, alas, by the 
Bolsheviki alone. There have been so many poisoners 
— the Bolsheviki are only more logical, more persistent, 
more daring and more shameless than the rest. 

We had a great, deal of trouble in those first days 
of the Revolution with the prisoners in the Govern- 
ment Pavilion, the ministers, dignitaries, bureaucrats, 
generals and police officials assembled there. Certain 
episodes come back to me. I recall the arrival of 
Goremykin, a small and very old man, who had twice 
been premier. It was morning ; some one stopped me 
and told me of Goremykin’s arrest. I went to Rod- 
zianko’s room, to which he had been taken. In a 
corner sat a very old gentleman, with exceedingly long 
whiskers. He wore a fur coat and looked like a 
gnome. Deputies, priests, peasants, officials stood 
around him. They could not take their eyes off the 
famous Goremykin with his chain of the Order of St. 
Andrew the Apostle. The old man had found time 
when he got up to put it around his neck, over his old 
morning waistcoat. Goremykin’s arrest made perhaps 
even more impression on the deputies than Scheglo- 
vitoff’s the day before. The Moderates were alarmed, 
wondering whether it would not be better to release 
him. They were all interested to know how I would 
deal with this man who held the very high title of 
“privy councilor of the first class.” I put to him the 
customary question: “Are you Ivan Loginovitch Gore- 
mykin?” “Yes,” he answered. “In the name of the 

[ 36 ] 



DAYS THAT ENDED RUSSIAN MONARCHY 

revolutionary people I declare you under arrest,” I 
said, and turning to those about me, I added: “Please 
call the guard.” Two soldiers appeared. I placed 
one on each side of Goremykin. : Some deputies anx- 
ious about the fate of his “highest excellency” sur- 
rounded the crestfallen and confused old man more 
closely, tried to enter into conversation with him and 
seemed to express their sympathy. I asked them to 
move away. At my request the old man got up, his 
chain jingling mournfully, and I led him to the Gov- 
ernment Pavilion, amidst the respectful silence of the 
deputies., 

] I should mention that at this time many Duma 
deputies did not realize how deep were the wrath and 
indignation of the masses in Petrograd against the 
chiefs and representatives of the old regime.j They 
failed to understand that only by arresting and show- 
ing a certain degree of severity to the former digni- 
taries could we keep the crowds from lynching them. 
I remember that in my absence the deputies, in the 
kindness of their hearts, released Makar off, former 
minister of the interior, minister of justice and member 
of the Senate. While he had been minister of the in- 
terior, on April 17, 1912, there had been a massacre 
of workmen in the Lena goldfields in Siberia, which 
provoked the indignation of the whole of Russia. In 
accounting for this incident to the Duma, Makaroff 
had unwittingly uttered the hateful phrase, which be- 
came proverbial : “Thus it has been and thus it always 
will be.” 

It is not difficult to imagine what would have hap- 
pened if such a minister had graciously been allowed 
to remain at large. What would have happened if the 
agent s-provocateurs and demagogues who were already 
trying to excite the populace to rash and bloody acts 

[ 37 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


had taken advantage of the news? This unwise and 
unjustifiable release took place in the evening. When 
I entered the study of the Duma president, Makaroff 
had just left it with the good wishes of the kind dep- 
uties. I demanded that I be told where I could find 
him and was informed that he had probably gone to 
an upper apartment in the Duma building because he 
was afraid to return home at night. I immediately 
took two soldiers and hurried upstairs to the apart- 
ment. I rang the bell. A lady opened the door and 
screamed with terror at the sight of the bayonets of 
my soldiers. I calmed her and asked: “Is Makaroff 
here?” She replied that he was, and I said: “Take 
me to him, please.” The minister was sitting in a 
comfortable room — as far as I remember it was a 
dining room. I explained that his release was a mis- 
understanding, apologized for having to trouble him 
again and conducted him to the Pavilion. 

J Again, later in the evening on March thirteenth, I 
was passing along the corridor to the small entrance 
leading to the rooms of the Temporary Committee of 
the Duma. At the door of what had been Proto- 
popoff’s office some one approached me. He was un- 
couth and untidy, but his face was familiar. He called 
me “Your Excellency.” There was a familiar ring in 
the voice. ^‘1 am coming to you of my own accord; 
do arrest me,” was his next statement. I, looked more 
closely and, behold, it was Protopopoff I It appeared 
he had been in hiding in the suburbs for two days and 
was trembling with terror. But when he learned that 
the prisoners at the Duma were being treated kindly 
and that I was in charge of them, he came to give him- 
self up. At least, that was how he explained the mat- 
ter to me. We were standing at the door of his former 
office, and no one had as yet taken notice of him. I 

[38] 



DAYS THAT ENDED RUSSIAN MONARCHY 

knew that if his arrival became known it would end 
badly for him. For this wretched man was perhaps 
more hated at that time than any other, not ex- 
cluding the Czar himself. I said softly: “You have 
done quite well in coming, but be silent. Come along 
quickly and do not show yourself more than you can 
help.” When the door of the Government Pavilion 
closed behind us, I drew a deep breath of relief. 

I think it was on the evening of March fourteenth, 
while I was attending a meeting of the Military Com- 
mission, that some one pale and terrified ran up to me 
and said: 

“Sukhomlinoff * is being brought along to the 
Duma. The soldiers are terribly excited. It looks as 
if they might tear him to pieces.” 

I ran out into the corridor. The throng was press- 
ing forward, unable to restrain its wrath, muttering 
ominously. They were staring intently at the repulsive 
old man who had betrayed his country, and seemed 
ready to pounce upon him to tear him to pieces. I 
cannot recall the nightmare of this scene without hor- 
ror. Sukhomlinoff was surrounded by a small guard, 
manifestly inadequate to protect him from the in- 
furiated crowd. But I was determined there should 
be no bloodshed. I joined the guard and led it myself. 
We had to walk for several minutes through the ranks 
of the enraged soldiers. I had to use all the power of 
my will and all possible tact to restrain the raging 
human flood which was about to overflow all bounds. 
I thanked Heaven when we had passed through Cath- 
erine Hall. The narrow corridor that we still had to 
cross between Catherine Hall and the side door lead- 


♦Minister of war under the Czar's regime, condemned by a court 
for treason during the War. 

[39] 




THE CATASTROPHE 


ing to the main meeting hall of the Duma was almost 
deserted, but in the semicircular hall near the door of 
the Government Pavilion there were more soldiers. 
It was there that we passed the most terrible moments. 

Seeing that their prey was about to escape, the 
throng ma4e a determined movement in our direction. 
I quickly covered Sukhomlinoff with my body. I was 
the last barrier that separated him from the pursuers. 
I shouted that I would not permit them to kill him, 
that I would not allow them to disgrace the Revolution 
in this way. Finally, I declared that they would lay 
hands on Sukhomlinoff only over my dead bodyi I 
stood thus, shielding the traitor, alone against the 
furious crowd. It was a terrible moment. But they 
began to hesitate and I won. Gradually the crowd re- 
ceded. We succeeded in pushing Sukhomlinoff through 
the door that opened behind us. We shut it and 
barred the way with the bayonets of the guard. In 
the Pavilion the appearance of Sukhomlinoff aroused 
tremendous indignation among the arrested digni- 
taries. Not a single one of them would sit near him, 
and all showed their objection to being in the same 
rpom with him. 

i It was, indeed, very difficult to protect these prison- 
ers from the fate that might have befallen them. At 
first they were terrified at what might become of them 
in this “accursed” Revolution^ for they were thor- 
oughly conscious of their guilty Some of them, like 
Beletsky, Protopopoff and Beliayeflf, the former min- 
ister of war, inspired repugnance by their cowardly 
conduct. Others, like Scheglovitoff, Makaroff and 
Bark, on the contrary, behaved with courage and dig- 
nity- The calmness and self-possession of Scheglovitoff 
especially struck me. All of them were, of course, pre- 
pared for the worst. I But they soon saw that our 

[ 40 ] 



DAYS THAT ENDED RUSSIAN MONARCHY 


Revolution was not to be a parody of the autocracy,; 
and they not only calmed themselves but accepted with 
complete confidence the assurance of myself and my 
associates that their lives were safe in our hands and 
that no harm would come to them. 

^People from the Right have blamed and are still 
condemning me for my leniency towards the Left, i.e., 
towards the Bolsheviki. They forget that on the prin- 
ciple they put forward I should have been obliged to 
begin by applying terror not to the Left but to the 
Right, that I had not the right to shed the blood of the 
Bolsheviki unless I had first shed streams of blood in 
the early days and weeks of the Revolution, when I 
risked my authority and prestige with the masses by 
fighting against the demand that the Czar and all the 
members of the fallen dynasty and all its servants 
should be atrociously punished!* 

I remain a decided adversary of every form of 
terror, f I shall never renounce this “weakness,” this 
humaneness of our March Revolution. ! The real soul 
of the Russian people is one of mercy without hatred. 
This is the heritage of our Russian culture, which is 
deeply humane and tested by long suffering. Looking 
back upon the Decembrists, upon Vladimir Solovieff, 
Tolstoy, Dostoyevsky, Turgenieff, upon the noble, stub- 
born fight of the entire Russian intelligentsia against 
the henchmen and hangmen of Nicholas II,jhow could 
this Russian Revolution have begun with capital punish- 
ment, the characteristic habit of autocracy, by setting 
up “Her Majesty the Guillotine'’ ?| 

It was with faith in the justice of our cause that we 
launched the Revolution and sought ko create a new 
Russian commonwealth founded upon human love and 
tolerance. 1 Some day our hopes will be realized, for 
in those days we all sowed seeds which will bear 

[ 41 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


fruit. Just now our eyes are blinded by mists of blood, 
and people have apparently ceased to believe in the 
creative power of love, in the power of mercy and for- 
giveness, which alone foster the growth of national 
life and culture. | People say now this humaneness was 
simply a sign of weakness of the revolutionary gov- 
ernment, but as a matter of fact great determination 
and strength were needed to prevent and curb blood- 
shed, and to suppress in oneself and others the im- 
pulses of hatred and vengeance, which were cultivated 
by the centuries of autocracy.^ 

iThe strength of our Russian Revolution lay pre- 
cisely in the fact that it did triumph over its enemies, 
not by terror and bloodshed, but by mercy, love and 
justice, even if only for one day, for one hour . 1 Per- 
haps I dreamt all this. Perhaps this Revolution never 
existed, except in my imagination. But it seemed to 
exist then. Now every one in Russia is dazed by 
blood. One hates the other to the extent of mutual 
annihilation. I But this will pass, or if it does not pass, 
if the Russian people never come to understand the 
beauty and greatness of their first impulse, then we 
have been mistaken and our Revolution was not the 
prelude to the new life of which we all dreamt but 
the epilogue of the dying culture of a people about to 
vanish forever into history.f 

I remember how the first group of Czarist digni- 
taries was transferred from the Government Pavilion 
to the Fortress of SS. Peter and Paul. It was during 
the night of March sixteenth. We did not want to 
place these prisoners in the cells hallowed by the suf- 
ferings of many generations of Russian revolutionists, 
from the Decembrists and Novikoff to those of our 
own days. But the other prisons had been destroyed 
on March twelfth, so that the Fortress of SS, Peter 

[ 42 ] 



DAYS THAT ENDED RUSSIAN MONARCHY 


and Paul was the only place where these new and un- 
expected guests could be lodged with safety. The very 
walls of the old fortress must have shuddered to re- 
ceive those who only yesterday were sending here the 
noblest and most courageous fighters for liberty, to 
suffer and to die. 

The city was by no means calm when we found 
ourselves confronted with the necessity of removing 
the ministers of the Fortress of SS. Peter and Paul. 
It would have been highly unsafe to make the transfer 
during the day or with any publicity. I, and my imme- 
diate associates in charge of the Government Pavilion, 
determined, therefore, to make the transfer during the 
night, without even giving notice to the guard. All 
preparations had been completed by midnight and I 
myself notified the prisoners to make ready for de- 
parture, without telling them where they were going 
and why. These were Scheglovitoff, Sukhomlinoff, 
Kurloff, Protopopoff, Goremykin, Beletsky, Maklakoff 
and Beliayeff. 

| The secrecy of the removal and the hostile faces of 
the soldiers filled the dignitaries with terror. Some 
of them lost the last shreds of self-possession. Scheg- 
lovitoff was very calm, but inwardly probably he was 
comparing his sensations with those of his many vic- 
tims, carried off in the same manner in the dead of 
night and driven from the Fortress of SS. Peter and 
Paul or some other prison to the place of execution. 
Protopopoff could hardly keep on his feet and some 
one else — I think it was Beliayeff — implored me in a 
low voice to tell him at once whether he was being led 
away to execution. 

I thought of Goremykin and went up to him. He 
had not yet donned his fur coat and I noticed that the 
chain of his order was no longer around his neck. 

[ 43 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


“What has become of your order?” I asked him. 

The old man became excited and confused like a 
schoolboy before his master, but he kept silent. 

“Was it taken away from you?” I asked. 

“No,” he answered. 

“Then, where is it?” 

At last the poor man tremblingly unbuttoned his coat 
and waistcoat and began pulling out his chain from 
under his shirt. He knew that he would not be per- 
mitted to take superfluous things to prison but could 
not bear to part with his toy. I made an exception and 
allowed him to take his precious chain with him. 

The removal of the ministers brought back to my 
mind my conversation with Scheglovitoff on March 
twelfth, immediately upon his arrival at the Govern- 
ment Pavilion. He was still quite alone and I suggested 
to him that if he had any love for his country, if he 
wanted to atone for the past or wished to perform one 
decent service for Russia at least at this hour, he 
should telephone to Tsarskoye Selo, or to any one else 
he deemed proper, to inform the authorities that fur- 
ther resistance was useless and urge them to surrender 
to the people. But this he firmly refused to do. 

I will now return to the events of March thirteenth. 

I have already indicated that the arrival of the garri- 
son troops, of all the Guards, including the Czar’s own 
bodyguard, had strengthened the position of the Tau- 
ride Palace.} The resistance of the police in the streets 
was diminishing, although frequent firing continued in 
the suburbs. This gave us no ground for anxiety, but 
our position in the provinces was still uncertain, par- 
ticularly in Moscow, from which we had as yet received 
no news at all. The situation in general was not yet 
definite, and the movements and conduct of Nicholas 

II were still a riddle to us. Why had he left General 

[ 44 ] 



DAYS THAT ENDED RUSSIAN MONARCHY 

Headquarters for Tsarskoye Selo ? I believe now that 
he departed for Tsarskoye without realizing the ab- 
solute hopelessness of the situation, hoping perhaps to 
placate the Duma with concessions, or he may have 
gone to see his family, to which he was devoted, for 
most of its members were ill at that time. 

It did not seem so simple then, however. In any 
case, we were obliged to take action, for we could not 
permit the Czar to come to Tsarskoye Selo, so near the 
capital. If he could not or would not undertake to 
organize any resistance himself, there were others who 
might have sought to make use of him. The Tempo- 
rary Committee of the Duma decided not to permit the 
Czar’s train to proceed to Tsarskoye but to detain it 
on the way and negotiate with him en route. I Every one 
realized that his abdication was essential and inevi- 
table. Already at the beginning of the winter, plans 
for a coup d’etat had been launched among the upper 
classes. Some of these plans were known in the army,, 
and all of them involved the abdication of Nicholas II.' 

Our Commissar Bublikolf was keeping a close watch 
on the Czar’s train. The shortest route from Mohileff 
to Tsarskoye Selo lies through Vitebsk and Dno, a trip 
of fourteen to sixteen hours. The Czar left Mohileff 
in the morning of March thirteenth. The Temporary 
Committee of the Duma ordered the train stopped at 
Dno. Time was passing. It was midnight. We had 
heard that the train was on the way to Pskoff, the 
Main Headquarters of the Northern Front. This 
meant that the Czar was intending to throw himself 
upon the army. I do not remember how many hours 
this cat-and-mouse game lasted, but the “mice” of yes- 
terday showed considerable skill in catching their 
“cat.” Finding the road barred at Dno, the Czar 
ordered the train to proceed to Bologoye, a junction 

[ 45 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


point from which two roads were open, one to Moscow 
and the other to Petrograd. We ordered the road cut 
at Bologoye. fFor the first time the Czar and his suite 
found they could no longer go where they wished and 
felt the power that now lay in the hated Duma’s hands! 

From Bologoye the imperial train turned back to 
Dno, whence it proceeded to Pskoff. I do not remem- 
ber whether the Czar’s train arrived at Pskoff at dawn 
on March fourteenth or fifteenth. I think it was on 
the fourteenth, although I recall vaguely that during 
that day Rodzianko made some efforts to get in touch 
by telephone with the Czar’s train. But perhaps it was 
the Czar who tried to get into communication with 
Rodzianko from Pskoff. ; However, this is not a point 
of great importance, forlby the morning of March fif- 
teenth General Roussky, commander of the Northern 
Front, had not only received a telegram from Rodzi- 
anko declaring, in the name of the Duma, that the 
Czar must abdicate, but he had already discussed this 
question by telephone with General Alexeyeff at Gen- 
eral Headquarters.’ The army did not oppose the 
Czar’s abdication. In spite of the formal proposal 
that the Czar abdicate in favor of his heir and that 
the Grand Duke Michael Alexandrovitch, the Czar’s 
brother, become regent, the fate of the dynasty was 
already sealed. I do not mean to suggest that Rodzi- 
anko and the other members of the Temporary Com- 
mittee were deliberately deceiving Nicholas II when 
they asked him to abdicate on these terms. » On the 
contrary, I believe that on the morning of March four- 
teenth they were sincerely convinced that it would be 
possible to make common cause with JMichael Alexan- 
drovitch for the salvation of Russia.! But they were 
deceiving themselves. I, for one, did not believe for 
a moment that this plan could be realized, and so I did 

[ 46 ] 



DAYS THAT ENDED RUSSIAN MONARCHY 


not go to the trouble of raising any objections for the 
time being. ;The logic of events showed itself stronger 
than all plans and suggestions, 
j I wish to point out here that all measures taken to 
intercept the Czar’s train and to communicate with the 
front for the purpose of forcing his abdication were 
taken without any pressure from the Soviet, (although 
by the evening of March thirteenth the Soviet already 
felt it had sufficient strength to begin functioning as an 
authoritative organization, on a basis of equality with 
the Temporary Committee of the Duma. The mili- 
tary section of the Soviet was already competing with 
the Military Commission of the Duma, issuing various 
independent orders. In answer to Colonel Engel- 
hardt’s orders to the garrison, it issued the famous 
“Order No. i,” which was written on the night of 
March fourteenth. I shall discuss this order in de- 
tail later but, for the present, I merely note the time 
it was issued. I must point out, also, that this order 
was applicable only to the Petrograd garrison and it 
had neither more nor less authority than the orders of 
Colonel Engelhardt. I emphasize these facts because 
“Order No. i” has been used as a strong weapon of 
attack against the Provisional Government and myself 
in particular. Without entering at this juncture into a 
discussion of its contents, I should like to say once and 
for all that neither the Provisional Government (which 
had not yet been formed) nor I had anything whatever 
to do with this order. It may be noted as a matter of 
interest that I personally read the text of this order 
for the first time in London, in December, 1918. This 
ordef was one of the effects of the peculiar state of 
disintegration and lack of authority in the Petrograd 
garrison, and by no means the cause of it, as has been 
charged. 


[ 47 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 

On March thirteenth, fourteenth and fifteenth the 
lack of officers made the situation very difficult. The 
soldier mass, released from the bonds of discipline and 
daily routine, became willful and unmanageable. It 
was further aroused by innumerable rumors about al- 
leged counter-revolutionary plots by officers (most of 
whom had gone into hiding) and on the part of the 
high command of the army. Agitators contributed 
their share to inciting the rank and file against the 
officers. I must say, however, that all the responsible 
elements, from Rodzianko and the Executive Com- 
mittee of the Duma to Tcheidze and the Executive 
Committee of the Soviet, strove hard to put an end 
to the discords in the Petrograd garrison and to save 
the officers from being lynched. Tcheidze, Skobeleff 
and other members of their Executive Committee re- 
peatedly appeared before the soldiers to counteract the 
false rumors concerning the counter-revolutionary ten- 
dencies of the officers and to urge the need for unity 
and confidence. Tcheidze and I addressed a com- 
munication to the garrison, pointing out that a certain 
proclamation against the officers issued ostensibly by 
the leaders of the Social-Democratic and Social-Revo- 
lutionary parties was a deliberate forgery, perpetrated 
by agents-provocateurs. The officers of the Petrograd 
garrison soon adopted a resolution expressing their al- 
legiance to the Revolution and to the Duma. The 
resolution was countersigned by Milinkoff, Karauloff 
and myself. The resolution was widely distributed, and 
I concluded my first speech as minister of justice by 
calling upon the soldiers to obey their officers and sub- 
mit to discipline. 

In short, to say that any member of the government 
was spreading discord between the officers and soldiers 
is either downright calumny or a complete misunder- 

[ 48 ] 



DAYS THAT ENDED RUSSIAN MONARCHY 

standing of the facts. Colonel Engelhardt, Gutchkoff, 
Karauloff, Rodzianko, Tcheidze and I, and all who had 
to deal with the Petrograd garrison in the first days of 
the Revolution, were obliged by the peculiar circum- 
stances in Petrograd to speak not about the officers in 
general but only about the officers who were faithful 
to the people and the Revolution. It was not we but 
the situation which compelled the distinction. Soon all 
these misunderstandings disappeared, but they left 
scars which could not be erased. 

| From the very first days of the Revolution, agents- 
provocateurs, German agents and liberated criminals 
began to stir up feeling against us.i To understand the 
danger and effectiveness of this agitation, it should be 
remembered that the police department alone had sev- 
eral thousand agents and' agitators, spies and informers 
operating among the workers, the troops and the in- 
telligentsia in Petrograd. And there was a consider- 
able number of enemy agents J These gentry were hard 
at work spreading anarchy and disorder* They printed 
and distributed incitements to massacre, they sowed 
hatred, accentuated misunderstandings and spread ru- 
mors which despite their falsity had no inconsiderable 
effect on the population, fl was informed (I think it 
was on March fourteenth) that bales of proclamations 
of the most preposterous character, calling for massa- 
cre and anarchy, and purporting to be signed by the 
Social-Democratic party, had been brought to the quar- 
ters of the Soviet) Having previously observed a 
number of suspicious individuals lurking about the 
Soviet quarters I went there and actually found a quan- 
tity of the most disgraceful proclamations, in good 
print and on good paper, which had obviously come 
from the police. Of course, I immediately confiscated 
them, but we could not intercept all such documents in 

[ 49 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 

time, as there were too many scoundrels at work dis- 
tributing them. 

At the same! time “reliable” information was spread 
about a revolution in Germany, together with an ap- 
peal to hold out a fraternal hand to the insurgent 
German proletariat.', A revolution in Berlin in March, 
1917! How many simple-minded folk accepted this 
news in good faith! Even honest people went about 
town in automobiles, distributing announcements of this 
mythical revolution. The masses believed this rumor 
because the hearts of many thousands were already 
aglow with the faith that the Russian Revolution 
would kindle the fires of fraternity in the hearts of all 
the working people of the world, and that by common 
impulse the workmen and peasants of all belligerent 
countries would put a stop to the fratricidal war. 

It would be a great mistake to attribute this pacifist 
movement entirely to the ignorance of some and the 
treachery of others. For there was much candid faith 
in the international solidarity of the working classes, 
which was highly desirable but had no basis in reality. 
The imagination of the Russian socialist, whether he be 
workman or intellectual, created a composite “French- 
British-German socialist workman” who did not exist 
anywhere in sober, practical, materialistic Europe. 
This imaginary European proletariat was simply an 
idealized image in the likeness of the ordinary Russian 
workman and intellectual, i.e., of a hungry dreamer 
who does not possess a corner on earth where he can 
lay his head./ But in reality there is a great deal of 
satiety and of comfort at the disposal of the plain 
working man in Western Europe. It may seem para- 
doxical but it is true:ithe Russian proletariat would 
hate and fight the bourgeois and the intellectual at home 
a hundred times less if he knew that the whole of 

[ 50 ] 



DAYS THAT ENDED RUSSIAN MONARCHY 


Europe, the whole of nature, does not contain such 
socialists and such socialism as he and his creed, i But 
he did not know this, and so he burned with fanatical 
faith in the immediate realization of the socialist mil- 
lennium throughout the world, until the flames of his 
belief destroyed him and his unfortunate country. All 
the tragic phenomena which developed in Russia after 
the great Revolution were not the expression of the 
primitive forces of barbarism, as some distinguished 
foreigners and even many of the Russian “cultured” 
classes believe, but were in reality far more complex 
in their material and spiritual causes. 

On the morning of March twelfth, Rodzianko had 
sent his second wire to Nicholas II. It contained the 
following words: “Steps must be takeij immediately, 
for by to-morrow it may be too late.” jThis prophecy 
was accurately fulfilled. On the night of March thir- 
teenth it became quite clear that it was too late to 
save the dynasty and that the Romanoff family had dis- 
appeared forever from Russian history.] 

| By the night of March fourteenth there was but one 
tragic problem confronting us: how to save Russia, 
from the rapidly spreading distintegration and anarchyi 

In the face of this situation and of the task con- 
fronting the nation at the front! it was imperative to 
give the country a new government.) It could not af- 
ford to drift along without a government even for an 
hour, and yet three days had already passed without 
a supreme authority, the government of Prince Golitzm 
and Protopopoff having become paralyzed by the morn- 
ing of March eleventh. It was impossible to delay any 
longer, for the process of disintegration was proceeding 
with meteoric speed, threatening to destroy the whole 
administrative machine. With the administrative ap- 
paratus wrecked no government would have been able 

[5i] 



THE CATASTROPHE 

to cope with the situation. What happened came very- 
close indeed to such destruction. One longed to speed 
the necessary action, to force quick decisions. ' The task 
demanded creative work instead of discussions. It 
called for risk instead of calculation. One had the 
painful feeling that every minute of delay, indecision 
and unnecessary calculation was an irretrievable loss.1 
Every minute in those days was worth months and 
years of ordinary time and yet many minutes were 
wasted. Mere human reason was overwhelmed by the 
whirlwind, and the march of events left it behind at an 
ever widening distance. 

However, by the morning of March fourteenth the 
main features of the new government and its program 
had already been sketched in bold outline, and there- 
upon the representatives of the upper classes and the 
bourgeoisie began to parley with the democracy, as rep- 
resented by the Executive Committee of the Soviet. 
I cannot give an account of these pourparlers, as I took 
little part in them. On the rare occasions when I was 
present I sat quite passive and hardly listened. A pro- 
visional government was projected, composed almost 
entirely of “bourgeois” ministers, with two portfolios 
reserved for the Soviet. ‘The Temporary Committee 
of the Duma proposed Tcheidze as minister of labor 
and me as minister of justice. This rather one-sided 
arrangement was brought forward because of the still 
prevalent illusion that for some time to come the Duma 
majority and the governing upper classes in general 
would retain power and authority in the country,* 

The invitation of the Temporary Committee of the 
Duma to send two representatives as members of the 
projected government was discussed by the Executive 
Committee of the Soviet in the course of the day, 
March fourteenth. It was on this occasion that the 

[ 52 ] 



DAYS THAT ENDED RUSSIAN MONARCHY 


resolution I have already briefly mentioned was carried, 
declaringjthat the representatives of the revolutionary 
democracy “could not take office in the Provisional 
Government because the government and the whole 
Revolution were bourgeois.”} What reasons did the 
scribes and pharisees of socialism bring forward to per- 
suade the Executive Committee to this decision? I do 
not know. But when I heard of it, it seemed to me to 
be utterly absurd, for it was obvious that all the real 
power lay in the hands of the people themselves. It 
seemed clear to me that the Revolution was a revolu- 
tion of all the people, of the whole nation, and that the 
questions of the governing authority had to be solved 
in a broad spirit, on a national scale and in a spirit of 
constructive statesmanship.; 

1 On March fourteenth I was confronted by a pain- 
ful question, having to choose between leaving the 
Soviet and remaining in the government or remaining 
in thp Soviet and refusing to take part in the govern- 
ment. 1 ' Both alternatives seemed impossible to me. The 
dilemma buried itself deep in my mind and the decision 
ripened somehow by itself, for there was no time or 
opportunity to think over the problem in the turmoil 
of the day. 

On the same day the general situation again gave 
cause for anxiety. . Obscure reports were, in circula- 
tion about some catastrophe at Kronstadt/ In Petro- 
grad hooligans attacked the officers’ hotel (Astoria), 
broke into the rooms, molested women, and commit- 
ted depredations. At the same time news of the ar- 
rival of General Ivanoff and his troops at Tsarskoye 
Selo spread rapidly throughout the capital and in the 
Duma, and although there was no cause for fear on 
this score the throng in the Duma was obviously ner- 
vous and agitated by the uncertainty of the situation. 

[ 53 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 

At about eleven o’clock in the morning the Grand 
Dukes came to pledge allegiance to the Duma, includ- 
ing Cyril, the present “pretender” to the throne, Nich- 
olas Michaelovitch and others. The troops continued 
to fraternize with the people. The firing slackened 
and in spite of isolated acts of violence some sort of 
order had been restored. A city militia and even the 
office of a revolutionary prefect were created. People 
were working hard to restore discipline in the garri- 
son, and Gutchkoff, who next day became minister of 
war, took part in the work. 

\Meanwhile the Revolution in its sweep had spread 
to the provinces.\ Good news came from Moscow, 
where, as one eyewitness reported, “everything went 
like clockwork.” Moscow said good-by to the past 
gladly and unitedly. I remember how on my arrival 
in Moscow, on March twentieth, I felt as if I could not 
drink in enough of the pure, fresh air of Russia, which 
Petrograd, infected with intrigue and treachery, 
needed so badly. 

News kept pouring in from all parts of Russia, from 
towns big and small, telling of the advance of the Rev- 
olution. The movement was already nation-wide. 
There was, therefore, all the more reason to make 
haste in organizing the new government and clearing 
up the remnants of the old one. By the evening of 
March fourteenth we were hard at work composing 
the manifesto of the Provisional Government, which 
on the morrow was to take up the reins of government. 
We were concerned only with setting up the executive 
departments. The question of the supreme executive 
authority was not discussed by the Temporary Com- 
mittee, for the majority of the Committee regarded 
it as settled that the Grand Duke Michael wpuld as- 
sume the regency during the minority of Alexis* How- 

[ 54 ] 



DAYS THAT ENDED RUSSIAN MONARCHY 

ever, on the night of March fifteenth all, without 
exception, had agreed that the /Constituent Assembly 
was “to determine the form of government and the 
constitution of the country,” so that even the Con- 
stitutional Monarchists, who on the morning of March 
sixteenth still favored a regency, had already agreed 
that the people alone were supreme and had the sole 
right of determining the future Russian constitution. 
Thus the monarchy was discarded and by unanimous 
consent relegated to the archives of history. 

The contents of the first declaration of the Provi- 
sional Government was the subject of heated discussion. 
Agreement almost broke down completely over some 
points. There was much passionate dispute between 
the representatives of the Temporary Committee and 
those of the Executive Committee of the Soviet on the 
point concerning the rights of soldiers. As far as I 
can remember the Soviet’s original draft of this point 
was altered entirely. The original draft of the dec- 
laration or, at least, the fundamental points and 
clauses, were drawn up, if I remember aright, by the 
Executive Committee of the Soviet. Every item pro- 
voked sharp disagreement, but not a word was said 
about the War and its aims. It is indeed remarkable 
that this subject, which only a fortnight later became 
the most painful and, one may say, the fatal question 
of the Revolution, was not alluded to by a single word 
in the working out of the program of the Provisional 
Government. On this question of the War and its 
aims the Provisional Government was left absolutely 
free, taking upon itself no formal obligations, being at 
liberty to act as it wished and proclaim whatever war 
aims it deemed proper and necessary. |And yet later 
no other question led to such furious attacks on the 
Provisional Government from the Left, which declared 

[ 55 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


that precisely on this point the government had some- 
how betrayed the Revolution and violated its pledges. 

]What may perhaps seem even more incredible is 
that this inaugural manifesto of the Provisional Gov- 
ernment did not refer in a single line or word to the 
social and economic grievances of the working classes; 
In fact, this initial declaration of the Provisional Gov- 
ernment was altogether so general in its character that 
I was quite indifferent to its contents. ’ The Provisional 
Government, as first constituted, not only fulfilled the 
obligations it had taken upon itself but went far be- 
yond this declaration, unfolding a wide and compre- 
hensive program of social reform. But that did not 
deter people from assailing it, accusing it of having 
failed to live up to its obligations and inspiring the 
masses with deep mistrust of the government created 
by the Revolution.! 

Does not the absence of a social program from the 
declaration of the Provisional Government show that 
the “leaders” of the Soviet were quite accidental to the 
Revolution? Does it not show how they misunder- 
stood the nature of the profound upheaval, of this 
turning point in the life of the Russian people? I 
have no doubt there will be many ingenious efforts to 
explain away the fact that the Soviet draft of the gov- 
ernment’s declaration contained no reference to the 
War and the economic needs of the workers and peas- 
ants. Some people pretend this silence was deliberate, 
that these questions were deliberately ignored for tac- 
tical reasons, so as not to frighten the upper classes at 
the beginning of the Revolution. Very well, let them 
find whatever consolation they can from such specious 
argument ! 

The cabinet list of the Provisional Government was 
completed by the night of March fifteenth. I cannot 

[ 56 ] 



DAYS THAT ENDED RUSSIAN MONARCHY 

say what considerations influenced the Temporary 
Committee of the Duma in choosing the ministers, for 
I did not take part in the consultations on this ques- 
tion. I do not remember when Prince Lvoff, the first 
premier of the Provisional Government, appeared 
among us for the first time, but I think he arrived by 
the evening of March fourteenth. I know that Rod- 
zianko’s candidacy for the premiership found no sup- 
port among the influential deputies. I know also that 
in Duma circles it was considered imperative that I be 
included in the Provisional Government. I learned 
later that some of the ministerial candidates made my 
inclusion in the government a condition of their ac- 
ceptance. No one seemed to think that the decision 
of the Executive Committee of the Soviet against par- 
ticipation in the government would necessarily prevent 
my taking office. 

This night of March fifteenth was perhaps the most 
painfully difficult period I had yet experienced. I was 
on the verge of a breakdown. The superhuman ten- 
sion of the previous two days had begun to tell on 
me. I was often on the point of fainting and some- 
times I would fall into a semiconscious state for ten 
or fifteen minutes. But it was up to me to find a way 
out of the difficult situation, which seemed to be im- 
possible of solution. I must say that even in Soviet 
circles it was considered by some necessary and in- 
evitable that I should enter the Provisional Govern- 
ment. Some Soviet members even sought to per- 
suade me to leave the Soviet in order to do so. But 
this was an important question for me. It was es- 
sential that the Provisional Government include a 
formal representative of the second center of the 
Revolution, in order that it might have the character 
and authority of a popular government. 

[ 57 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 

It mattered not how many seats in the cabinet were 
allotted to the respective parties, for even if the 
revolutionary democracy had only one representative 
his influence was bound to be determined by the weight 
of public opinion behind him. I was, therefore, not in 
the least embarrassed at finding myself alone in the 
cabinet, when Tcheidze had refused categorically to 
enter the government. I felt that if the masses were 
to be left to the haphazard leadership of the Soviet 
and had no official representative in the Provisional 
Government, serious danger and trouble were ahead. 
I could not permit this to come to pass. Moreover, I 
felt that without a hold on the Left, without direct con- 
tact with the masses, the Provisional Government was 
foredoomed to failure. Yet, the immediate and essen- 
tial need of the Revolution was a strong government, 
able to organize the dissolving structure of the country. 

It is very difficult at this time to express in words all 
these considerations, which did not come to me at that 
time one by one through the process of reasoning, but 
forced themselves upon me painfully and instinctively 
in a mass. I was face to face with an excruciating 
dilemma. My friends urged me to have done with 
the Soviet and enter the government. I felt this was 
impossible, but on the other hand it was equally im- 
possible to make the Soviet leaders change their minds. 

Unable to bear the thought of this difficulty any 
longer, I determined, before dawn, to go home. I 
do not know why, but I could no longer listen to all 
these discussions regarding the question settled ir- 
revocably by the Executive Committee of the Soviet. 

How strange it was now to come out into the street 
which I had so often traversed on my way to the Duma, 
followed by spies of the Czarist secret police 1 How 
strange it was to pass the sentinels, to see the sinister 

[ 58 ] 



DAYS THAT ENDED RUSSIAN MONARCHY 


flames from the building of the district gendarmerie, 
to which the people had set fire. It was all so unreal, 
so fantastic..; 

Only on my return home did I perceive fully the 
significance of what had happened. I broke down and 
fell into a faint. It is difficult to describe the state of 
mind through which I was passing during all these 
days. One’s very nerves, one’s entire organism felt 
extraordinarily quick and vibrant. One lived under 
what seemed unendurable tension. Yet one felt strong 
enough to vanquish even death. It is worth living to 
experience such ecstasy. 

For two or three hours I lay in a semiconscious, semi- 
delirious state. Then, suddenly, I sprang up, for the 
answer to that question which I seemed to have for- 
gotten had come to me at last, j I determined to tel- 
ephone immediately my acceptance of a post in the 
Provisional Government and to fight it out later not 
with the Executive Committee but with the Soviet it- 
self. Let the Soviet decide between the Executive 
Committee and myself I Strangely enough, my final de- 
cision to ignore the ruling of the Executive Committee 
was not prompted by the reasons mentioned above but 
simply by the sudden thought of the prisoners in the 
Government Pavilion and elsewhere.' .Could any one 
else, could any bourgeois minister of justice save them 
from lynching and keep the Revolution undefiled by 
shameful bloodshed? I felt sure that, under the cir- 
cumstances, no one but myself could do this. I tel- 
ephoned to the Temporary Committee and announced 
my decision. I think it was Miliukoff who answered 
the telephone. He seemed pleased, and congratulated 
me heartily. My weariness disappeared. I began im- 
mediately to lay plans for the organization of my de- 
partment, to pick my nearest associates. I sent for 

[59l 



THE CATASTROPHE 


Zarudny, who was to be my assistant minister, etc. 
; One might have thought that I was in no doubt as to 
whether the Soviet would approve my decision. To 
tell the truth, I was not./ 

I returned to the Duma, where every one had mean- 
while learned of my decision and was waiting to see 
how my conflict with the Executive Committee of the 
Soviet would be settled. I proceeded at once to the 
Executive Committee and found nothing but stern 
faces and great anger. A plenary session of the entire 
Soviet was already in progress. I said I would go 
there and announce my decision immediately. “No, no, 
no !” was the advice of some. “Do not go. They will 
attack you and tear you to pieces. Give us time to 
prepare them beforehand.” 

“I myself will go and tell them,” I replied. 

In the adjoining large hall I heard Stekloff making 
his report on the pourparlers with the Temporary 
Committee of the Duma on the organization of the 
government. When he had finished, the chairman 
(Tcheidze) was told that I was waiting to appear be- 
fore the Soviet, and he granted me the floor. 

I climbed on to a table and launched upon my speech. 
I had hardly begun when I realized that I was winning. 
I only needed to look at this crowd, to watch the re- 
action of their eyes and faces to realize that they were 
with me. j 1 declared that I appeared before the Soviet 
as minister of justice in the Provisional Government, 
that it had been impossible for me to await the de- 
cision of the members of the Soviet, and that I must 
now ask for their vote of confidence.^ I spoke of the 
program of the Provisional Government^] saying that it 
was to the interests of Russia and of the working class 
that the revolutionary democracy be represented in the 
government, so that the government might be in close 

[60] 



DAYS THAT ENDED RUSSIAN MONARCHY 

and constant touch, with the will of the people, etc.* I 
no longer remember the details of my address, but I 
recall that nearly every sentence was punctuated by the 
acclamation of the audience. 

On descending from the table I was lifted on the 
shoulders of the Soviet delegates and carried across 
the Duma to the very door of the Temporary Com- 
mittee’s room. I entered it not only as minister of 
justice but also as vice-chairman of the Soviet of Work- 
men’s and Soldiers’ Deputies and the formal represen- 
tative of the working class. I led the way in the 
revolt against the absurd veto of the Executive Commit- 
tee, but so many others followed suit that very soon 
a whole coalition had been established. But in the 
midst of the ovations accorded me by the Soviet mem- 
bers, in the unbounded enthusiasm of the throng, I 
had already observed the faces of the angry leaders, 
foreboding vengeance, | The fight had begun, the bat-- 
tie against me, against my influence and my authority 
with the masses.j This battle was waged obstinately, 
systematically, unscrupulously. 

Incidentally, the same day, the first conference of 
the Social-Revolutionary party also gave its approval 
of my inclusion in the Provisional Government, as did 
the members of the Labor party, with whom I had 
been intimately associated during my career in the 
fourth Duma. 

By ten o’clock, March fifteenth, the Provisional Gov- 
ernment was definitely formed. 

By the evening of March fifteenth the manifesto of 
the Provisional Government was made public, f The 
Provisional Government became, until the convocation 
of the Constituent Assembly, the only sovereign power 
in the country, and all the subsequent changes and ap- 
pointments in the Provisional Government were made 

[61} 



THE CATASTROPHE 


by cooption, the Provisional Government itself choos- 
ing new ministers . 1 

On the morning of March fifteenth, Miliukoff, in 
an address before the throng in Catherine Hall, 
concerning the composition of the Provisional Govern- 
ment, ideclared that the Grand Duke Michael Alex- 
androvitch would become regent and that we had de- 
cided to establish a constitutional monarchy in Russia! 
On the very same morning and almost at the same 
hour the Emperor Nicholas II, at Pskoff, was draw- 
ing up a manifesto appointing a new government! 
Both Miliukoff’s declaration and the Czar’s manifesto 
were quite useless under the circumstances. The Czar, 
however, understood soon that it was no longer a 
question of changing the- cabinet and, by the evening 
of the same day, before the arrival of the Duma dele- 
gation dispatched to demand his abdication, he decided 
to abdicate for himself and for his son. Miliukoff, on 
the other hand, defying the iron logic of events, af- 
firmed over and over again, up to the last moment, 
that it was possible and necessary to establish a regency 
under the Grand Duke Michael. 

Miliukoff’s declaration aroused the ire of all the 
democratic elements in the Tauride Palace. The Ex- 
ecutive Committee hurriedly called a special meeting, 
at which I was subjected to hostile cross-examination. 
I refused to be drawn into a dispute and merely re- 
plied : 

“Yes, that is the plan, but it will never be carried 
into realization. It is impossible and there is no rea- 
son to be alarmed. I have not been consulted about 
the regency and I took no part in the discussion of it. 
As a last resort, I can ask the government to choose 
between abandoning this plan and accepting my resig- 
nation.” 

[6z] 



DAYS THAT ENDED RUSSIAN MONARCHY 


This question of a regency did not trouble me in the 
least, but it was difficult to transmit my own confidence 
to others. 

The Executive Committee launched its own measures 
against the project of the regency. It wanted to send 
its own delegation to Pskoff, together with Gutchkoff 
and Shulgin, who were leaving that day, or, failing 
that, to prevent our delegates from getting a train. 
But it all came out right in the end. 

The delegation of the Temporary Committee of 
the Duma, consisting of Gutchkoff and Shulgin, a con- 
servative deputy, left for Pskoff at about 4 P.M., to 
demand the Czar’s abdication. On their arrival they 
found everything already settled and in a manner con- 
trary to their expectations. The Czar had abdicated 
not only for himself but also for his son, naming his 
brother, Michael Alexandrovitch, his successor. At 
the, same time Nicholas appointed the Grand Duke 
Nicholas Nicholayevitch (who had filled the post in 
the early part of the War) his successor as commander- 
in-chief of the Russian armies. 

We learned of all this only on the night of March 
sixteenth, but in the meantime, while we were waiting 
for news from Gutchkoff and Shulgin, there were many 
things to be attended to. I made arrangements for 
removing the ex-ministers to the SS. Peter and Paul 
Fortress and appeared for the first time in my capacity 
as minister of justice before the Council of the Petro- 
grad Bar. I wanted to salute the members of my own 
profession, in which I had learned to fight for right 
and liberty under law. jin spite of the autocracy, the 
Bar was the only independent state organization, for 
which the autocracy and the Czar himself hated it. 
I wanted to tell the members of my profession, which 
had played so great a part in the struggle for the 

[ 63 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


liberation of Russia, of my projected reforms in the 
Ministry of Justice and to enlist their support. 

By evening we succeeded in restoring normal tel- 
egraph communication between the capital and the 
provinces. There was a special telegraph office in the 
Duma. As soon as the apparatus was restored I sent 
out my first orders as minister of justice. The first 
wire instructed all public prosecutors throughout the 
country to visit immediately all prisons, to liberate all 
political prisoners and transmit to them the greetings 
of the new revolutionary government. jfThe second 
wire went to Siberia, ordering that Catherine Bresh- 
kovsky, “grandmother of the Russian Revolution,” be 
immediately released from exile and conveyed with all 
due honors to Petrograd.i I sent similar wires order- 
ing the release of the five Social-Democratic members 
of the fourth Duma, who had been condemned to exile 
in 1915. 

• Meanwhile a grave situation developed at Helsing- 
fors. A massacre of officers and the destruction of the 
fleet were expected at any moment.! I was hurriedly 
summoned to the Admiralty, where I spoke by long 
distance telephone with the representative of all the 
naval crews. In response to my pleas this man prom- 
ised to use all his efforts and the influence of his as- 
sociates to calm the crews. *The massacre was averted} 
The same evening a delegation of all Duma parties 
left for Helsingfors to restore discipline. For a time 
we had no more trouble at the naval base. The dis- 
turbances did not end without tragedy, however, for on 
March seventeenth, Admiral Nepenin, a gentleman 
and an excellent officer, was killed in Helsingfors. He 
was killed by a civilian whose identity was never dis- 
covered. 

]The affair at Kronstadt, to which I have already al- 

[64] 



DAYS THAT ENDED RUSSIAN MONARCHY 

luded, and which threatened the destruction of the en- 
tire Baltic Fleet, took place on March fourteenth. 
The news of these riots arrived somewhat late. Sev- 
eral scores of people were killed, including thirty-nine 
officers. ’ Admiral Yiren, the Commander-in-Chief at 
Kronstadt, was literally torn to pieces. About five 
hundred persons, including more than two hundred 
officers, were arrested by the soldiers and sailors, put 
into prison and subjected to humiliating treatment. 
The notorious Kronstadt chamber of horrors is the 
gloomiest page of the Revolution. 

At last, night ended this hectic day. The members 
of the Provisional Government gradually threw off the 
anxieties of the day and met to talk over more fun- 
damental questions. We were waiting impatiently for 
news from Gutchkoff and Shulgin. ?It was becoming 
clear to every one that it was too late to think of a 
regency, that it would be almost impossible to trans- 
fer power to such a government and that any attempt 
to do so would lead to grave consequences. ' 

In those days the opinions and attitudes of men 
were adapting themselves rapidly to the changing situa- 
tion. I learned in private conversations with members 
of the Provisional Government and of the Temporary 
Committee of the Duma that they were prepared for 
news that the regency was doomed and that they were 
ready to accept this fact with equanimity. Miliukoff 
alone (Gutchkoff being absent) failed to comprehend 
the changed circumstances. Every one felt we were 
approaching the decisive moment. 

The night of March sixteenth remains unforgetable 
in my memory. That night brought the members of 
the Provisional Government close together and made 
them understand each other (at least that was how I 
felt) better than would have been possible through 

[65] 



THE CATASTROPHE 

months of intimate association. At this critical mo- 
ment each one acted and spoke only according to his 
conscience. They revealed themselves to each other 
and established that mutual confidence, those imper- 
ceptible bonds between soul and soul, without which 
it would have been quite impossible to bear the burden 
of government at this most acute crisis in the history 
of the nation. The night of March sixteenth made it 
clear that the Provisional Government, as first con- 
stituted, would be a strong, compact nucleus and that 
the great majority would work in complete solidarity, 
abandoning once and for all class, party and personal 
tastes and sympathies.; 

I think it was about three o’clock in the morning, or 
at any rate very late, when the long expected com- 
munication from Gutchkoff and Shulgin arrived. “Ab- 
dication has taken place, but in favor of Michael 
Alexandrovitch, who is already proclaimed Emperor,” 
read the message. We could not understand it. What 
had happened? Who had inspired this move? Wb4 
was backing the new Emperor? What had our envoys 
done about it ? - Michael as Emperor ! It was im- 
possible, preposterous I ! 

The first problem before us was to prevent this news 
from becoming known to the country and in the army. 
I think it was Rodzianko who rushed to the direct 
telephone line at the War Ministry to communicate 
with General AlexeyefE at General Headquarters. 
Other urgent measures were taken. Then we began to 
discuss the situation. Michael Alexandrovitch was in 
Petrograd, so that the question could be decided one 
way or the other by morning, f in any case, we had to 
settle the problem immediately, for the country could 
not any longer be kept in this condition of uncertainty 
and anxiety.! Either we must take the oath of loyalty 

[ 66 ] 



DAYS THAT ENDED RUSSIAN MONARCHY 


to the new Emperor or we must compel him also to 
abdicate, and that immediately! 

The decision of Nicholas II had really cut the Gor- 
dian knot. Every one felt with great relief that 
once the direct and rightful succession to the throne 
was broken, the immediate question of the dynasty was 
settled. Fate had decided that it was to leave the 
stage at least until the Constituent Assembly had 
spoken. ; It became evident immediately upon the open- 
ing of our discussion that a majority in the Provisional 
Government would be in favor of the abdication of 
Michael Alexandrovitch and of the assumption of su- 
preme power by the Provisional Government. These 
men were not confirmed republicans seeking a con- 
venient pretext to get rid of the monarchy. Most of 
them had not been republicans up to the last hour. 
Not theories but life, not their personal preferences 
but the force of circumstances, not trivial considera- 
tions but a sense of duty brought them gradually and 
after painful hesitation to this truly patriotic decision. 
Even Rodzianko understood at once that Michael 
Alexandrovitch could not possibly become Emperor 
at that moment.'* 

But Miliukoff still refused to admit this and Shin- 
garioff gave him half-hearted support. The night 
hours passed in long, fervid dispute, for Miliukoff de- 
fended his position with tremendous perseverance and 
tenacity. He seemed to misunderstand the situation 
completely. He thought we were all faint-hearted and 
were losing our heads. It seemed to him, as he said 
next day to the Grand Duke Michael Alexandrovitch, 
that we had all “fallen under the influence of the mob” 
and lost control of ourselves. He simply could not 
understand that the monarchists had perhaps even 
more reason than the republicans for opposing the 

[ 6 7 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


proclamation of Michael Alexandrovitch as Emperor 
at that time. It would have been absurd under the 
circumstances and could not have lasted more than a 
few days, and perhaps even a few hours. 

We continued our argument with Miliukoff until 
close to the approach of dawn. We did not know 
how much Michael Alexandrovitch knew of what had 
happened. At any rate, it was clear we had to warn 
him and prevent whatever steps he was planning to 
take until we had come to a decision. 

The Grand Duke was living with friends in a private 
apartment at 12 Millionnaya street. We looked up 
the telephone number and early in the morning, shortly 
before dawn, I rang up. There was an immediate 
reply. As I had surmised, the household, excited by 
the developments, had not been to bed all night. 

“Who is speaking?” I asked. 

It was the aide-de-camp of his Royal Highness. 

I revealed my identity and asked the aide-de-camp 
to inform the Grand Duke that the Provisional Gov- 
ernment would come to consult with him within a few 
hours, requesting him in the meanwhile to take no de- 
cision. 

The aide-de-camp promised to transmit my message 
at once. 

It was still quite early when we finally decided to go 
to the Grand Duke, without waiting for the return of 
Gutchkoff and Shulgin, who were delayed at some point 
on their return from Pskoff to Petrograd. *We had 
decided that the Grand Duke must abdicate, trans- 
ferring the supreme power to the Provisional Govern- 
ment until such time as the Constituent Assembly should 
finally settle the form of government* Miliukoff de- 
clared that he would immediately leave the Provisional 
Government unless he were permitted to state the case 

[ 68 ] 



DAYS THAT ENDED RUSSIAN MONARCHY 

of the minority before the Grand Duke. We agreed 
to this. 

At about ten o’clock in the morning we drove un- 
guarded, in an automobile, to 12 Millionnaya street, 
accompanied by ovations and cheers from the populace. 
We were met by the aide-de-camp, who showed us into 
a drawing-room. The Grand Duke entered almost im- 
mediately and seemed much perturbed. We shook 
hands and exchanged courtesies. There was an awk- 
ward pause. Then Prince Lvoff and Rodzianko laid 
the opinion of the majority of the Provisional Govern- 
ment before the Grand Duke. The latter was ex- 
tremely excited and restless. He would ask the speak- 
ers to repeat certain things and would repeat single 
words to himself. Then Miliukoff’s turn came. He 
launched upon a veritable lecture. He spoke coldly 
and calmly. He continued for more than an hour, 
apparently in the hope that Gutchkoff and Shulgin 
might turn up to support him. Just as he was about to 
conclude, Gutchkoff and Shulgin came in, and we called 
a short recess. 

We told them what was going on and they gave us 
the details of what had happened at Pskoff. After 
some consideration, Gutchkoff decided that he must 
support Miliukoff, declaring that should Michael 
Alexandrovitch side with the majority of the Provi- 
sional Government he, Gutchkoff, would not remain in 
it. Finally the conference with the Grand Duke was 
resumed. Gutchkoff spoke, but in a manner quite dif- 
ferent from Miliukoflf’s. He spoke clearly and briefly. 
The Grand Duke seemed to grow more weary and 
impatient. When Gutchkoff had finished, the Grand 
Duke suddenly declared that he would like to consult 
privately with two of us and then think the matter 
over by himself before making his final decision. I 

[69] 



THE CATASTROPHE 

thought it was all over now, fearing he would ask for 
Miliukoff and Gutchkoff. But he said: “I should like 
to speak with Prince Lvoff and Michael Vladimirovitch 
Rodzianko.” A weight fell from my mind, as I 
thought to myself: “If he wants to speak with those 
two it means that he has already decided to abdicate.” 

Rodzianko objected, saying that we had agreed to 
discuss the matter collectively and that he did not think 
it proper to permit private consultations. He looked 
questioningly at me, however, as if seeking my per- 
mission. I declared that we trusted one another and 
that we could not refuse to allow the Grand Duke to 
consult with those in whom he had most confidence, 
before deciding on a matter of such extreme im- 
portance. “I think we cannot very well decline the 
Grand Duke’s request,” was my final statement. 

The Grand Duke, Prince Lvoff and Rodzianko re- 
tired, and we remained behind. We tried to persuade 
Gutchkoff not to leave the Provisional Government for 
a few days, in the event of the Grand Duke’s abdica- 
tion, until we should find a substitute for him. As a 
matter of fact he remained for good and apparently 
came to the conclusion that it had become quite impos- 
sible for the Romanoffs to take any further part in 
Russian history. 

Finally, Prince Lvoff and Rodzianko returned. 
"They were followed soon by the Grand Duke, who an- 
nounced that he had determined not to take upon him- 
self the burdens of government and asked us to draft 
the form of abdication.! 

“Your Royal Highness,” I said, “you have acted 
nobly and like a patriot. I assume the obligation of 
making this known and to defend you.” 

We shook hands. From that moment we were on 
good terms. True, we met only once afterwards, 

[ 70 ] 



DAYS THAT ENDED RUSSIAN MONARCHY 

on the night of the Czar’s departure for Tob^’sk, but 
we knew all about each other through our aides-de- 
camp, and I occasionally helped the Grand Duke, try- 
ing to make his life easier under the new conditions. 

Following the Grand Duke’s declaration, Rod- 
zianko and most of the ministers left, but Prince Lvoff, 
Shulgin and I remained to draft the act of abdication. 
It read as follows : 

^Inspired, in common with the whole people, by 
the belief that the welfare of our country must 
be set above everything else, I have taken the firm 
decision to assume the supreme power only if and 
when our great people, having elected by universal 
suffrage a Constituent Assembly to determine the 
form of government and lay down the fun- 
damental law of the new Russian State, invest me 
with such power.: 

Calling upon them the blessing of God, I there- 
fore request all the citizens of the Russian Empire 
to submit to the Provisional Government, estab- 
lished and invested with full authority by the 
Duma, until such time as the Constituent As- 
sembly, elected within the shortest possible time 
by universal, direct, equal and secret suffrage, 
shall manifest the will of the people by deciding 
upon the new form of government. 

(Signed) Michael Alexandrovitch 

Petrograd, March 1 6, 1917. 

The abdication of Nicholas II and that of Michael 
Alexandrovitch were published simultaneously, and we 
thus succeeded in settling the question of , the dynasty 
quickly and without further complications. | These acts 
of abdication marked the close of the most difficult and 
most inspiring period of the Revolution! The Czar- 
dom was definitely superseded by a new revolutionary 

[ 71 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 

power. ''Amidst the chaos appeared the outline of a 
new state — the Provisional Government — around 
which as a central point the new order developed. 
The first act in the drama of the Revolution — the death 
of the old and the birth of a new, popular government 
— lasted one hundred hours. 

When one recalls what Russia was on the evening 
of March sixteenth, one feels that some divine spirit 
swept our country from end to end, leaving not one 
stone upon another of the old regime. One realizes 
that it was beyond the power of human reason to 
direct these events, which marked the turning point 
in the destiny of the Russian people. One can almost 
see the huge edifice of the old regime, built on the 
blood and tears of millions, crumble and fall into dust. 
One can almost hear the noise of its fall and the groans 
of those who perished with it. One almost feels again 
one’s own struggle against suffocation in the debris 
and dust of that fall, which seemed to fill the universe. 

Small human creatures try to measure with their 
tiny foot rules this immense upheaval, which was made 
possible only by divine grace, by the breath of fate 
itself. They try to prove, with the satisfied air of 
experts, that everything would have happened differ- 
ently if so and so had acted thus and not otherwise, 
that everything would have been perfect if some one 
else had not been half an hour late in making up his 
mind. Perhaps everything would have been different 
if the Duma had found courage to act in its official 
capacity and to place itself as a recognized, parliamen- 
tary body at the head of the movement on the morn- 
ing of March twelfth. Perhaps this or that mistake 
might have been averted if in those first days of the 
Revolution the Soviet had not been guided by men 

[ 72 ] 



DAYS THAT ENDED RUSSIAN MONARCHY 

like Stekloff, Sukhanoff, Bonch-Bruyevitch, Sokoloff, 
Tcheidze, etc. Perhaps Russia would have been saved 
from the calamity which overtook her eight months 
later if some one else had been in Kerensky’s place, 
or if Kerensky had never existed. But it is easy to 
prophesy after the event ! 

No one wanted a revolution of the kind we have 
had. No one expected it or wanted it to turn out as 
it did. No one wanted a revolution accompanied by 
blood and the tumult of anarchy, j The increasingly 
chaotic condition of Russia between March twelfth 
and sixteenth was brought into some kind of order by 
a great, nation-wide impulse of love for the mother- 
land, by an intense devotion to the welfare of the 
country. The credit for this is due largely to the 
Duma and to the upper classes generally, who acted 
conscientiously for the good of the whole nation, as 
they understood it. History will recognize their merit 
in this. But the working classes, too, regardless of all 
their mistakes and of the crimes of isolated individuals, 
devoted all their revolutionary ardor to organizing 
themselves and converting a formless mass of human- 
ity into an ordered revolutionary body.l They, too, 
acted in accordance with their conscience and worked 
fpr the welfare of Russia as they understood it. 

V Who would have thought that the fourth Duma,t 
representing the aristocracy and the middle classes, 
could rise at last above all considerations of class to 
such great heights of patriotic devotion?! Its members 
were able to do this because they felt that they rep- 
resented the whole country. It was this idea which in- 
spired them and made them look beyond the needs and 
interests of their own class to those of the entire com- 
monwealth. For the mere idea of representative gov- 
ernment implies an institution which, in its very essence, 

[ 73 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 

is consecrated to the welfare of the whole people. It 
is true that whatever class has the upper hand is apt 
to use its power to further its own aims, but where 
it is vigorous and endowed with creative force its rule 
may be an advantage to the country as a whole. More- 
over, every kind of government considers itself acting 
for the common good and believes that its rule is best 
for the country. Even the autocracy used to affirm 
its right to govern by alluding repeatedly to the tradi- 
tional formula: “Regarding the welfare of our sub- 
jects,” etc. At times of peril and upheaval this inten- 
tion of acting for the common good becomes the lead- 
ing inspiration of all public-spirited men and especially 
of such institutions as can lay claim to represent, even 
if only partially, the interests of the nation. Even a 
totally reactionary class government will sometimes 
act for the good of the whole people. 

The fourth Duma, which consisted mainly of govern- 
ment servants, of men belonging to a past era of Rus- 
sian statesmanship, was transfigured at the moment of 
its death by such an impulse to save the country, and 
passed it on to the new Russia, to a more democratic 
generation. The Provisional Government, which con- 
tained the new and regenerated elements, carried on 
the same idea of governing the people as a whole and 
was for long months the only real national institution 
in the general disintegration and decay of the old 
political and social world, until it, too, was swallowed 
by the advancing chaos. Then, even the symbol of 
unity disappeared and it seemed as if Russia had ut- 
terly fallen to pieces. But the fire of devotion to the 
commonwealth, which once shone so brightly, cannot 
be wholly extinguished. Deep down in the heart of 
the nation it still flickers and some day it will flare up 
again and shine with an undying light. 

[ 74 ] 



DAYS THAT ENDED RUSSIAN MONARCHY 

' In judging the career of the Provisional Government 
one should remember that it had to undertake the 
guidance of a state practically devoid of the machinery 
of government.! Even the army came to it without 
leaders, for the authority of the superior officers van- 
ished as quickly as that of the central and local ad- 
ministrations. ;It inherited nothing from the autocracy 
but a terrible war, an acute food shortage, a paralyzed 
transportation system, an empty treasury and a popula- 
tion in a state of furious discontent and anarchic dis- 
integration.; One thing alone enabled it to govern — 
faith in the good sense, the conscience and the creative 
forces of the people. It may have been folly to under- 
take to govern under such conditions, but it would have 
been criminal to refuse, to consider only oneself and 
to stand aloof. 

In one hundred hours, hours of continuous anxiety 
and rapture, the old government, which had been de- 
stroying Russia, was wiped off the face of the earth. 
i At the same time, however, the forces that had fought 
together against the common enemy and worked to- 
gether for the creation of new forms of government 
began to divide.* Some ranged themselves on the side 
of the new government, others on the side of the 
Soviet. But many returned to their private affairs and 
merely began to grumble at everything that was being 
done. 

The new ministers, entered their ministries on March 
sixteenth, and on the following day the Provisional 
Government left the Tauride Palace for good. For 
a few days we held our meetings in the council room 
of the Ministry of the Interior. After that, until 
July, we had quarters in the Maryinsky Palace, where 
the Czar’s government and the State Council had 
formerly met. 


[ 75 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


I left the Tauride Palace with a heavy heart. Here 
I had struggled for five years, as a member of the 
Duma, against the Czarist regime, and here I had 
lived through the few hours of revolutionary creation 
which were worth years of ordinary life. It was diffi- 
cult to break, perhaps forever, with all its associations. 

I have tried to describe the great collapse and the 
swift unfolding of events as we saw them within the 
walls of the Tauride Palace and as I myself took part 
in them. For the moment I have ignored other fea- 
tures of the situation. But, as I have already indicated, 
time did not exist for us then, so that in attempting to 
follow the sequence of days and hours in reconstructing 
the events in chronological order I have probably made 
mistakes. In order to understand the tension of those 
hours one must keep in mind that we had to deal with 
all the kaleidoscopic developments at once, so that 
the separate events seemed interwoven into one. 

But what enthusiasm, what faith, what devotion we 
found among the thousands who crowded the Tauride 
Palace I How quickly everything was organized! 
How many threw themselves wholly into the common 
cause! How many were ready to live and die to- 
gether! Those innumerable delegations, processions, 
greetings, those bright, shining faces, those outbursts 
of delight and faith seemed to prove to us all that the 
people had found themselves at last, that they had 
cast off the accursed yoke and were advancing joy- 
fully, in festal garments, towards the new day that 
was already dawning. A mighty living impulse, a 
divine spirit, a transfiguring ecstasy descended upon the 
land. 

It is in such moments that people really live. 



CHAPTER II 

BEFORE THE CRASH 

T HE months immediately preceding the out- 
break of the Great War found Russia seeth- 
ing with revolutionary sentiment. * 

Political leaders who kept in constant, active con- 
tact with all elements of the population realized that 
Russia stood on the eve of a new upheaval, and were 
preparing for it. With a group of friends I spent 
the spring and summer of 1914 in traveling from one 
end of Russia to the other, organizing and marshaling 
everywhere the political and social forces of the coun- 
try for the coming joint offensive of all bourgeois lib- 
eral, proletarian and peasant parties and organizations 
against Czarism, and for the establishment of a demo- 
cratic parliamentary regime. 

I was firmly convinced that the revolutionary move- 
ment would break out openly before very long. ! Enor- 
mous mass meetings, attended by many thousands, con- 
spiratory gatherings in the provincial cities, and the 
passive attitude of the Czarist authorities towards the 
frank expression of the people’s will at my mass meet- 
ings all evidenced a deep psychological crisis, of the 
kind that always precedes the final act of an advancing 
revolutionary movement and a radical change in the 
supreme political authority of a nation. 

I remember well the arrival of the dispatch an- 
nouncing Austria’s ultimatum to Serbia. I was in 
Samara, a big political and commercial center on the 

[ 77 3 



THE CATASTROPHE 

Volga. It was late in the evening and I had just come 
from a great mass meeting. The city was throbbing 
with political excitement. Next morning I boarded a 
steamer to go to Saratoff, the leading city of my Duma 
constituency, where preparations had been made for 
another rally. With me were a group of political co- 
workers and friends who had come to see us off. We 
were exchanging latest impressions and expressing 
amazement at the mounting fever heat of the political 
situation in the country, the tensity of which was sur- 
prising even to us. Suddenly we perceived a group of 
newsboys running towards the gangplank, crying: 
“Austria’s Ultimatum to Serbia !” In that moment our 
mood underwent a decided change; in the cry of the 
newsboys we sensed at once the first breath of the 
historic hurricane. 

The entire international situation in Europe left no 
doubt that war was inevitable. Bidding good-by to 
our local friends, we boarded the steamer. Nothing 
seemed altered in the serene expanse of the mighty 
river, the boiling summer sun, the merry passengers 
disporting themselves on deck. Without talking to 
any one and concealing our troubled spirit, our little 
group of political workers from the Duma hurriedly 
called a “council of war.” It was decided to cancel 
our propaganda tour at once, to halt the internal 
political struggle and to return immediately to Petro- 
grad. tWe realized that it was necessary to concen- 
trate all the strength of the country upon the organiza- 
tion of the national defense, as it was quite clear that 
the government, enmeshed in Rasputin’s web, would 
not be able to handle the task of the War and would 
bring Russia to defeat and ruin.! 

\ Quite intuitively I perceived that Czarism would 
not survive the War and that on the fields of battle 

[ 78 ] 



BEFORE THE CRASH 

would Russia’s liberty be born.i It was thus that, as the 
representative of the Labor party in the Duma, I later 
formulated this thought at the Duma’s historic session 
upon the occasion of the official declaration of war. 

On the steamer I expressed the same thought to 
none other than the sister of Nicolai Lenin. The ex- 
planation of my conversation with the sister of the 
chieftain of Bolshevism is perhaps not without inter- 
est. The Ulianoff (Lenin) and Kerensky families had 
lived in Simbirsk, on the Volga. My father had been 
principal of the two local high schools, one for boys 
and the other for girls. Lenin’s father, Ulianoff (the 
future head of the so-called Soviet government adopted 
the name of Lenin as a pseudonym), had been inspec- 
tor of elementary schools in the province of Simbirsk. 
All his children had been educated in the local high 
schools, under my father’s supervision. After old 
Ulianoff’s death, my father, by virtue of his close as- 
sociation with the Ulianoff family, had become the 
family’s guardian. In the reminiscences of my child- 
hood I have retained no impressions of Nicolai Lenin 
and his brothers and sisters, as there was a wide differ- 
ence in our ages. It was quite natural, however, that 
meeting Lenin’s sister accidentally on a river steamboat 
I should have entered into conversation with her. 
After exchanging a few reminiscences of our childhood 
days, the conversation turned upon Lenin himself, who 
had been living for many years as a political exile in 
Western Europe. 

I “But don’t worry,” I said. “You will soon see him 
again. There will be war and it will open to him the 
road to Russia.” 

My prophecy, half serious and half in jest, was 
realized. Alas, to Russia’s sorrow! j 

I have set down these lines so that my readers may 

[ 79 ] 



TflE CATASTROPHE 

realize the tense and complex internal situation under 
which Russia entered the War. iln order that Russia’s 
war drama may be understood, it is necessary to keep 
in mind that the War did not provoke, but merely 
postponed temporarily, the revolutionary movement 
which had been gathering increasing momentum with 
inexorable stubbornness. \ 

For the sake of the national defense against an 
enemy splendidly armed and organized, the deep, pa- 
triotic instinct of the people dictated to them the duty 
of halting the inner political struggle against Czarism. 
The people’s urge for national unity and their desire 
to lay aside all internal conflicts for the time being were 
indeed remarkable. The entire nation presented a 
united front against the external foe. 

At the moment of the outbreak of the Great War, 
history presented to Russian absolutism what was per- 
haps the only chance it ever had to gain an understand- 
ing of the people and to make peace with them in the 
name of a common love for Russia, by uniting around 
the government all the live, decent and honest political 
forces of the country. But the government deliberately 
threw away this only chance, which, had it been taken 
advantage of, would have saved Russia from dissolu- 
tion and ruin. The government’s reply to the patriotic 
outburst of the people was to redouble the force and 
pressure of the reaction. jTo save Russia, the Russian 
people had to fight on two fronts: on the military 
front, almost unarmed and unequipped, they had to 
resist a powerful enemy armed to the teeth, while in- 
ternally they had to defend themselves against the in- 
trigues, corruption and inefficiency of Rasputin’s 
minions, eager to retain their power and quite un- 
concerned about the fate of the country,! The preserva- 
tion of absolutism and the cause of successful resistance 

[8o] 



BEFORE THE CRASH 

to the enemy stood in tragic contradiction to one an- 
other. 

Russia’s national consciousness was confronted with 
a problem of tremendous difficulty, a problem which, 
as future events demonstrated, was insoluble. It was 
necessary to remove from power those who were de- 
stroying Russia, and at the same time to protect the 
army and the entire administrative apparatus of the 
state from perturbations which, in time of war, might 
prove fatal. 

; I am quite convinced that but for the War the 
Revolution would have come not later than the spring 
of 1915, perhaps even at the end of 1914. The War 
interrupted the crusade for the liberty and salvation of 
Russia, and the nation — under a regime already 
doomed to destruction and under the leadership of 
men like Rasputin, Sukhomlinoff and their ilk — was 
obliged to fight an enemy excellently equipped and 
organized. 

In other respects, also, Russia was differently sit- 
uated from the other belligerent powers. She came 
into the War unprepared and was quite unable to make 
up for her lack of preparedness during the course of 
the Wari With the outbreak of the War she was 
obliged to reorganize her economic and financial struc- 
ture from top to bottom. *This reorganization was 
necessitated by the blockade that encircled Russia and 
by the prohibition of the sale of vodka, which had 
been not only the chief source of state revenue, but 
one of the chief means of promoting trade between 
town and country, between producer and consumer.,- 
Much has been said about the blockade of Germany as 
an instrument of her defeat, but few realize that 
Russia, least equipped of all the great powers tech- 
nically and industrially, suffered even more than Ger- 

[81] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


many from the isolation imposed upon her by the War. 
Germany was cut off from the world but she was able 
to maintain close contact with the nations associated 
with her. Russia was cut off even from her allies. 
The lack of direct communication made the transport 
of ammunition, machinery and equipment, in any ap- 
preciable quantities, impossible. It was barely pos- 
sible to send limited and inadequate shipments through 
Sweden and by way of the Murmansk Railroad, which 
was opened only in the autumn of 1916 and never 
worked well. What little could be sent through 
Vladivostok, which was thousands of miles from the 
seat of war, was a negligible fraction of what Russia 
needed. 

The world is quite familiar with the effects of the 
Allied blockade on Germany ,\ so that I hardly need 
emphasize the workings of this terrible weapon with 
regard to Russia. In order to realize what it means 
for a country at war to be cut off from the whole 
world, one need only imagine what would have hap- 
pened to France if her coasts had been inaccessible to 
the supplies of men and material which came to her in 
unlimited quantities from all corners of the earth. 

“One can compare Russia to a house, the doors and 
windows of which are hermetically sealed and which 
can be penetrated only by means of its chimneys and 
water pipes,” said the representatives of the Inter- 
Allied Council on their visit to Petrograd in February, 
1917. 

VThe second factor in the upheaval in Russia’s eco- 
nomic life was the prohibition of the sale of vodka on 
the very first day of the War} I do not mean to imply 
that the state merely lost one^third of its revenue.! To 
make the population sober and increase its productivity 
.and individual incomes is worth the loss of a billion to 

[8a] 



BEFORE THE CRASH 


the state. But when the peasants stopped drinking 
they began to eat. The consumption of bread in- 
creased from fourteen to twenty-one or more pouds* 
per capita. Meat, butter and eggs were consumed by 
the producers in unheard-of quantities. When they 
could no longer spend their profits on vodka, the peas- 
ants not only began to eat the produce they had been 
accustomed to sell, but they started buying household 
necessities and even luxuries Very soon, however, 
there was nothing left for them to buy, for the supply 
of goods in the towns was not equal to the requirements 
of a well-to-do and sober peasantry, being adequate 
only to the needs of a poor and drunken class of con- 
sumers. It was quite impossible during the War to 
equalize supply and demand. On the contrary, the 
supply actually decreased when factories producing 
commodities for the internal trade were turned ex- 
clusively to the production of war and military ma- 
terial. Nor was it possible to import goods. When 
the villagers found that they could spend their money 
neither on vodka nor on household goods they stopped 
selling produce. After hoarding their money for some 
time (the amount of currency held in the villages in- 
creased* by six billion rubles in the first years of the 
War) they found that the value of the money had 
depreciated. Arguing on the simple business principle 
that it was better to hoard grain than depreciating and 
useless money, they determined to keep their grain. 
To prevent seizure by the government, they buried it in 
pits. I remember how, as early as in 1915, the Budget 
Commission of the Duma was racking its brain on how 
to extract grain or money from the peasants. 


*Potid, variant of pood; a Russian weight equal to forty pounds 
Russian or slightly more than thirty-six pounds avoirdupois. 

[83] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


Once mobilized, the army absorbed a large propor- 
tion of the country’s food supply. It consumed as 
much meat and butter as the entire population did be- 
fore the War. Before the War Russia exported from 
400,000,000 to 600,000,000 pouds of cereals an- 
nually, and in the first year of the War the government 
purchased 300,000,000 pouds for the army alone. 
In 1916 the army consumed 1,000,000,000 pouds of 
cereals, which was only 200,000,000 pouds less than 
Russia had provided for her home and foreign markets 
before the War. 

The needs of the army and the oversupply in 
the villages brought about an acute crisis in the 
“granary of Europe” — a crisis which soon developed 
into a catastrophe. The sobriety and prosperity of 
the peasant class upset the trade of the entire country 
and resulted in a large shortage of supplies. Economic 
anarchy ensued. , 

But there were also other factors in the general 
economic upheaval. *The import of coal ceased almost 
entirely and there was a shortage of fuel for the arms 
and munition factories and for the railways.! The 
Petrograd district, the main center of the metal- 
lurgical industry, suffered most because before the 
War it had depended almost entirely on foreign coal. 
Not only did the foreign coal disappear but the output 
of Russia’s mines also diminished, owing to the im- 
provident mobilization of miners, the lack of mining 
machinery and equipment, the presence of poorly 
trained' and underfed labor and the frequency of spo- 
radic, anarchic strikes. 

* In short, the economic condition of Russia during 
the War was in itself sufficient to produce a catastrophe.! 
Only the. wisest possible utilization of the country’s 
resources, the most careful and economical distribution 

[84] 



BEFORE THE CRASH 

of commodities and of the means of production could 
have made possible the solution of the nation’s grave 
economic and financial problems. The entire industrial 
and political life of the country should have been re- 
organized from the very beginning of the War so as 
to create a real coordination of all the vital forces. 
But instead of a competent government, Russia had at 
her head Rasputin, supported by a clique of criminals, 
feeble dotards, incompetents and greedy adventurers. 
This government merely utilized the War and the 
general patriotic spirit animating the country as an 
opportunity for the destruction of all the independent 
institutions of national life. The War became a pre- 
text for men like N. Maklakoff, Sukhomlinoff and 
others for the suppression of the hated movement of 
opposition and revolution, which had the support of 
fully ninety-five per cent of the population. |The chief- 
tains of Czarism launched upon a veritable orgy of ar- 
rogance and violence.| All labor organizations and 
the entire labor press of Petrograd were immediately 
suppressed. Hundreds of thousands of “disloyal” 
citizens were sent to Siberia. Poles, Jews, Finns 
and other non-Russian nationalities were persecuted. 
Every form of independent initiative, however pa- 
triotic, was severely discountenanced. jThe govern- 
ment seemed to be bent on killing all the spontaneous 
life and activity of the country and to carry on the War 
without itl Yet the War called for sustained, heroic 
effort by the entire nation. This was perhaps even 
more necessary in the rear than at the front, for the 
unprecedented struggle was rather a war of endurance 
than of swift, decisive strokes. 

In those tragic days of the War we revolutionists 
were branded as Utopians for trying to seize upon 
the patriotic sentiments and good sense of the people 

[851 



THE CATASTROPHE 

as a means of accomplishing Russia’s emancipation, 
but it was far more naive on the part of our critics to 
believe that a government of Rasputins, Goremykins 
and Sukhomlinoffs could carry on the War even for a 
day without imperiling the country. ' Yet at the begin- 
ning of the War the upper classes as a whole and all 
the government parties in the Duma believed in the 
power of the government to carry on the struggle, ceas- 
ing all opposition and leaving a free hand for eighteen 
months to the incompetents and traitors.! While the 
government was committing its blunders and crimes, 
the upper classes remained blind to every ominous sign 
of impending catastrophe, repeating automatically the 
absurd declaration that “during the War the opposi- 
tion must cease to oppose.” The Russia of Rasputin 
tried to imitate the union sacree of the parliamentary 
governments of France and England and she paid 
dearly for the effort. 

Up to the debacle in Galicia, in the spring of 1915, 
Russia silently permitted herself to be sacrificed by the 
old regime. But if silence was excusable in the man in 
the street, who was kept in ignorance by an iron censor- 
ship and lulled into a false sense of security by recol- 
lections of the victories of 1914, it was criminal in the 
men at the head of affairs who knew well what was 
going on. 

Later the Duma majority began to assail the old 
regime and continued this criticism in the case of the 
Provisional Government, blaming it for the subsequent 
war disasters. But it showed the most culpable and 
most frivolous neglect of duty when it took no steps 
to avert these calamities at a time when it had the 
power and the prestige to do so. It saw the high com- 
mand destroying the army, the ministers undermining 
the economic life of the country, provoking infuriated 

[ 86 ] 



BEFORE THE CRASH 

discontent among the people, stifling the popular pa- 
triotic impulse of the first months of the War and 
freely sowing the seeds of hatred among the subject 
nationalities of Russia — and yet it did nothing. There 
were, indeed, a few men who did not permit themselves 
to be led astray by the union sacree of France and 
England. These men tried to warn the people of the 
approaching calamity. P'hey protested against the 
criminally irresponsible government and endeavored 
to bring the pressure of public opinion to bear upon 
it. In their anxiety they even tried to fight the gov- 
ernment immediately upon the outbreak of the War, 
to save the country from inevitable defeat and anarchy, 
but in vain, for no one paid any heed to them.* 

This was how Gutchkoff described the situation be- 
fore the conference of army delegates, held May 12-14, 
1917: 
f 

l When the War began, I, like many other 
people, was filled with anxiety and alarm. We 
felt the catastrophe approaching and we knew 
that there would be no security for the country 
unless the high command were changed and the 
system of supplying the army completely reorgan- 
ized.! The debacle of 1915 justified our anxiety. 
We demanded the dismissal of the commander- 
in-chief and his staff and other drastic reforms. 
But we did not succeed in having anything done. 
On my visit to the front in August, 1914, after 
viewing the shattered remnants of our two armies 
defeated at Soldau and studying the system of 
organization of supplies, it already then became 
clear to me that we were hopelessly involved in 
disaster. Neither the government nor the legis- 
lative bodies believed me. They merely called 
my attention to our victories in the south, in the 
Carpathians. I, who had been far from being a 

[ 87 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 

>' 

man of advanced views-,' became a revolutionist in 
1915, for I became firmly convinced _ that the 
autocracy was leading us to defeat which would 
have tragic consequences at home, and that only 
the end of the old regime could save the country.! 

At a time when Gutchkoff, a conservative who had 
resolutely opposed the Revolution of 1905, but a man 
of practical intelligence who knew how to read the 
signs of the times, had already become a revolutionist, 
most of the Octobrist and Cadet leaders, after two 
years of inaction, were barely beginning to utter vague 
criticisms, in the hope of influencing Khvostoff, Mak- 
lakoff, Goremykin and their like. But already in the 
autumn of 1914 we “dreamers and Utopians” of the 
Left were demanding a serious program of political 
and economic reforms to deal with the problems of the 
War.] We foretold Russia’s inevitable shortage of the 
elementary necessaries of life and pointed out what 
would be the result of the abolition of the sale of 
vodka. Like Gutchkoff, whose eyes were opened in 
1915, we repeated again and again from the rostrum 
of the Duma that the old regime would bring Russia 
to defeat and catastrophe. In January, 1915, I 
pointed out to the Budget Committee of the Duma that 
the economic disintegration of the country was inev- 
itable unless measures were taken immediately to deal 
with the problems of production and distribution, par- 
ticularly in the rural districts. 

The majority of the committee considered my sug- 
gestions altogether heretical, although a year later it 
began to put such mdasures into effect. ! In an address 
before the Duma I declared to the Czar’s ministers: 
“If you have any conscience, if there ;s any feeling of 
patriotism left within you, resign I’M The majority 

[ 88 ] 5 



BEFORE THE CRASH 

maintained a disgraceful silence, contemplating calmly 
the destructive activities of the government. My voice 
was a voice crying in the wilderness. I was regarded as 
a defeatist for proclaiming my fear and anxiety for 
the nation. In 1914 and 1915 it was the fashion to 
condemn all those as defeatists, pro-Germans, dreamers 
and doctrinaires who, foreseeing the approaching 
catastrophe and sensing the abyss opening up before 
Russia, affirmed that it was vain to think of victory 
while Rasputin was in power. We were severely re- 
proached for breaking the “political solidarity” of the 
country and told to stop the insolent persistence of our 
criticism. But those who could not or would not face 
the truth and who shirked the duty of fighting against 
the forces of disintegration were really the men who 
unconsciously laid the foundations of Russia’s inev- 
itable ruin. 

At the very beginning of the War, when the Duma 
was preparing for the historic session of August eighth, 
Rodzianko sought my opinion, among others^ as to 
what proposals he was to lay before the Czar. >'• I ad- 
vised him to ask the Czar to grant an immediate polit- 
ical amnesty, to restore Finland’s constitution, to pro- 
claim autonomy for Poland, to put a stop to political 
persecution, to grant civil equality and civil liberties. 
Of course Rodzianko did not take my advice. I made 
the same suggestions to the leaders of the Progressive 
parties, but they curtly upbraided me for my youthful 
impetuosity and pointed out that even in England the 
parliamentary opposition had ceased to oppose the 
government with the outbreak of the War. What 
naivete! The British parties rallying around a na- 
tional, democratic government compared with the 
Duma majority sorrily submitting to the incompetent 
and criminal Czarist government! The practical poli- 

[89] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


ticians of England who rallied round the government 
acted from patriotic impulse and made the government 
pay for their support by conceding what they deemed 
necessary for the national welfare. Our “practical” 
politicians not only failed to perceive the nation’s peril 
and fight for essential reforms, but gave the govern- 
ment a free hand in its diabolical policy of national 
destruction. 

All that our wise statesmen accomplished by their 
naive policy was to cut their own throats. Not only 
the government officials, from whom such folly was to 
have been expected, but even the middle classes rep- 
resented in the Duma, failed to understand that with- 
out the voluntary cooperation of all classes of the 
population no country could carry on a war such as 
was being waged. For a whole year before the man 
in the street awoke to the situation, the economic, ma- 
terial and human resources of the nation were being 
ruthlessly, madly, criminally dissipated.! 

i,The Galician defeat, the millions of casualties and 
the loss of the frontier fortresses opened Russia’s eyes\ 
The country shuddered with horror and indignation, 
and the government, like an assassin caught in the act, 
was frightened into making certain concessions. * It 
modified slightly its rule of terror and gave the middle 
classes some scope for independent activity, par- 
ticularly in the domain of provisioning the army 4 The 
second phase of the War began. Independent bodies 
were permitted to organize the resources of the coun- 
try. At last the Duma ventured to make itself heard. 
Various organizations began to function, through which 
the middle classes set about the task of improving the 
condition of the army, particularly the supply system, 
and reorganizing the production and distribution of 
food throughout the country. The success achieved 

[ 90 ] 



BEFORE THE CRASH 


by the middle classes in this task was due in no small 
measure to the patriotic support of the working class. 
Peasants, workmen, cooperative societies and local offi- 
cials were animated by the same patriotic anxiety and 
hastened to the support of the country. The popula- 
tion as a whole was at that time remarkably moderate 
and reasonable, conscious of its duty to the nation. 

Had the Duma, in the autumn of 1915, evinced more 
self-reliance and courage, had it shown better under- 
standing of the people and made common cause with 
all the responsible democratic and progressive forces, 
it could have easily driven from power the internal 
foe, as an essential prerequisite to the defeat of the 
external enemy. 

In 1915 the country was not yet exhausted eco- 
nomically, the army was not yet bled to death and a 
radical and wholesome change in the government might 
have had very beneficial results. The nation’s state 
of mind was essentially sound and by no means war- 
weary. But the impulse of self-sacrifice revealed by 
the people was permitted to go to waste. 

Meanwhile the effects produced on the country by 
the debacle of 19x5 had begun to lose their potency 
and to fade from the public mind. The government 
returned to its old ways and most of the population 
lost interest. Only the privileged class retained a slight 
measure of independence and relief. However, in the 
autumn of 19x5, the various middle-class organiza- 
tions, such as the Union of Municipalities and Zem- 
stvos, managed to get into closer contact with the army, 
helping to reorganize and equip it, establishing friendly 
relations and gaining authority in all the ranks. I An 
alliance between the army and the civilian population 
began to develop, and this alliance eighteen months 
later made the Revolution possible. I 

[9i] 1 



THE CATASTROPHE 

’The defeats and sufferings of the army in the re- 
treat of 1915 had destroyed the last vestiges of its 
loyalty to the autocracy and the Romanoff dynasty.! 
The nation’s efforts in 1915 checked the military de- 
bacles by giving the army a measure of technical and 
moral support, but the principal source of Russia’s 
peril, the Rasputin regime, still remained, for the en- 
tire system and administration of the government had 
been left untouched. As a crumbling edifice may be 
propped up for a while by buttressing it with iron 
girders and patching up the largest cracks, so did the 
popular movement hold together the disintegrating 
structure of Imperial Russia. 

By the spring of 1916 the condition of the army had 
so much improved that Brusiloff was able to launch 
his Galician offensive — which saved Italy — striking 
against the advice of his superiors, who maintained 
that the army was too demoralized by the retreat of 
1915 to undertake offensive operations. Brusiloff was 
unable, however, to follow up his initial brilliant suc- 
cesses because of lack of cooperation on the part of the 
high command and the anarchy and disorganization 
at General Headquarters. The subsequent develop- 
ment of Brusiloff’s campaign wiped out the early vic- 
tories and brought new trials and tremendous losses. 
Incidents such as the loss of tens of thousands of lives 
at Kovel may well account for the spirit of utter hope- 
lessness which swept the army. The process of final 
disintegration set in in the autumn of 1916. By Jan- 
uary of the next year the situation had become really 
critical. 

j Those reactionaries who hold that the Revolution 
undermined the Russian army, that the army, hav- 
ing fought heroically in 1914 and 1915, began in 1917 
to flee in panic, distort the facts completely.} The fight- 

C 92 ] 



BEFORE THE CRASH 

ing qualities of tKe army diminished inevitably. It 
became more and more an ill equipped and undis- 
ciplined rabble, commanded largely by men who had 
donned their uniforms after only six or seven weeks of 
training, and headed by staff officers who were shame- 
fully negligent of their duty. Mutinous and corrupt 
garrisons in the rear formed a dark background to the 
tragic picture in the winter of 1916. It was not with- 
out cause that Brusiloff afterwards declared: “The 
experiences of 1916 prepared me for the Revolution.” 
Nor was General Alexeyeff, in October, 1916 (at that 
time chief-of-staff to the commander-in-chief, Nicholas 
II), unjustified when, with the approval of Prince 
Lvoff, he planned to have the Czarina arrested and 
exiled to the Crimea and to compel the Czar to grant 
certain reforms. 

The situation of the country as a whole was even 
more desperate than that of the army. Rasputin and 
his clique had thrown off all restraint. Their govern- 
ing methods and their attitude and conduct towards the 
Russian people surpassed all the bounds of audacity 
and treachery. In the face of the growing food, 
financial, fuel and transport crisis they renewed, with 
fiendish ardor, the persecution of the cooperatives, the 
Union of Municipalities and Zemstvos, the municipal 
bodies and similar organizations. The censorship op- 
erated fast and furiously. Newspapers and organiza- 
tions, however innocent, were suppressed. All freedom 
of assembly was forbidden. An endless stream of 
exiles flowed to Siberia from all parts of Russia. 
While the ruling clique, drunk with blood, was indulg- 
ing in an orgy of oppression, Russia was perishing. 
Despair, terror and hatred permeated the soul of the 
people as never before. .Defeatist and Bolshevist 
propaganda began to spread in labor circles. Strikes, 

[93 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


deliberately fomented by the government, became fre- 
quent. A wave of riots swept the army and the hungry 
mobs. Desertions increased. Separatist movements 
sprang up in the border provinces. The country was 
advancing towards a precipice. 

From Grand Dukes to peasants, indignation and wild 
apprehension seized the whole of Russia. Early in 
November, 1916, Grand Duke Nicholas Michaelovitch 
wrote to the Czar: 

You have repeatedly affirmed your intention 
of carrying the War to a victorious conclusion. 
Do you think this is possible in the present condi- 
tion of the country? Do you know the real state 
of affairs in the border provinces and in the 
interior? Believe me, when I urge you to shake 
yourself from the web in which you are entangled, 

I do so only because I hope and trust that by so 
doing you may save your throne and our beloved 
country from irretrievable disaster. 

By “web” the Grand Duke meant Alexandra Feo- 
d^rovna and the Rasputin clique. 

^Fearing that the folly of Alice, as Alexandra Feo- 
dorovna was called in the imperial family, would bring 
ruin upon the entire dynasty, the Grand Duke Dmitri 
Pavlovitch took part in the assassination of Rasputin! 
During the winter of 1916 the Duma, although by no 
means as yet revolutionary, began to talk in revolu- 
tionary language. In his famous speech Miliukoff 
openly attacked the Stuermer government and asked 
point blank: “Is this country actually in the hands of 
traitors?” Middle-class Russia raised the demand of 
a government responsible to the Duma. But in this 
demand, too, the Duma lagged behind. IWhile the 
country as a whole joined in the demand for radical 

[ 94 ] 



BEFORE THE CRASH 

constitutional reforms, the Progressive Bloc in the 
Duma (the majority) , led by Miliukoff, Shidloffsky and 
Shulgin, was still clinging to the vague slogan: “A 
ministry with public confidence.” < 

By December, 1916, a marked difference of opinion 
had arisen between the Duma and those organizations 
which most resembled it in political tone and social 
status, such as the All-Russian Union of Municipali- 
ties and Zemstvos. 

“In proportion as the country has become aware of 
the general disintegration,” said Efremoff, leader of 
the Progressive party, on February 27, 1917, “it has 
lost faith in the government and acquired faith in the 
Duma. There is now, however, an ever increasing 
tendency to set the Duma aside and solve the nation’s 
difficulties in a more radical way. The country will 
shortly give proof of its discontent, and the obstinate 
shortsightedness of the authorities seems determined 
to drive it to the conclusion that it is impossible to ob- 
tain by parliamentary means a government responsible 
to the people.” 

The middle classes were losing faith in the Duma, 
but the more democratic and radical circles had never 
looked to it as an infallible guide, though they had 
tried for months to induce it to join in the struggle for 
the salvation of the country. In November, 1916, the 
country’s peril had become so evident that all those 
who had any spark of patriotism had already become 
revolutionists. In December the whole of Russia was 
unconsciously adopting revolutionary methods against 
the government. lAs I said to the Duma majority: 
“Like Moliere, who did not know when he was talking 
prose, you reject revolution while you talk and behave 
like revolutionists.” f When Stuermer tried to pour 
oil on the troubled waters by announcing the news to 

[ 95 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


the Duma that the Allies had agreed to give Con- 
stantinople to Russia at the conclusion of the War, 
even the most imperialistically inclined felt uncom- 
fortable at the pompous ministerial declaration which 
had so little relation to the actual state of the country. 

Altogether, the obvious incongruity between Russia’s 
actual situation and the interminable repetition by 
boasting officials of their tactless phrasemongery about 
complete victory over Germany and Russia’s hered- 
itary mission with regard to Turkey infuriated the 
exhausted masses. 

The New Year of 1917 found Russia in this state of 
increasing anarchy. A few still cherished gleams of 
hope that the old government would, at the eleventh 
hour, bethink itself or, at least, perceive its own deadly 
peril and make concessions to the demands of the na- 
tion. The Crown, or rather the influences behind 
Alexandra Feodorovna, who had meanwhile openly 
taken up the reins of government, met this hope with 
a series of new reactionary measures. Scheglovitoff, 
hated by the whole of Russia, was named president of 
the Imperial Council, to which were added also a num- 
ber of other notorious reactionaries. A new ministry 
was formed, with Protopopoff as its central figure and 
Golitzip, who was himself much surprised at the ap- 
pointment, a s pre mier. Protopopoff was at that time 
the most hated man in Russia, so that it is not difficult 
to imagine the effect created by his appointment. 

In September, 19x6, Protopopoff, a former member 
and ex-vice-president of the Duma, had 1 availed him- 
self of Rasputin’s help to work his way into the Min- 
istry of the Interior. His appointment, many were 
convinced, was backed by certain financial interests in 
Rasputin’s entourage, with a view to ending the War 
as quickly as possible, even at the price of a separate 

[ 96 ] 



BEFORE THE CRASH 

peace. It was upon him that Rasputin’s mantle de- 
scended after the latter’s assassination. 

So the authorities answered the country’s demand 
for a popular ministry by resorting anew to the in- 
strumentality of the Rasputin clique. Taking the bit 
between its teeth the government rushed, at full speed, 
towards a collision with the people. There was no 
longer any doubt of its preparing for the collision. 
Strikes were fomented by government agents, and 
often the strikers came to battle with the police. Secret 
plans were worked out by Protopopoff, in cooperation 
with General Kourloff, one of the most detested of- 
ficials in the police organization, for the “pacification” 
of Petrograd, plans involving wholesale bloodshed. 

The police department was zealously provoking 
riots among the population. Incredible as it may 
sound, the military censorship, on orders from the 
Ministry of the Interior, prohibited the publication in 
the Petrograd press of the following appeal by the 
labor section of the War Industrial Committee: 

Comrades! Workers of Petrograd! We 
think it our duty to beg you to resume your work 
immediately. Labor, conscious of its .responsibil- 
ities at this moment, must not weaken its forces 
by such strikes. In the interests pf the working 
class you must return to your factories. 

In spite of the fact that there was a great strike in 
progress in the munition factories, the publication of 
this appeal was forbidden. 

With diabolical persistency the police department, 
led by Kourloff, set itself to destroying all democratic 
organizations that stood for national defense and to 
push the masses into the arms of defeatist-Bolshevist 
agitators, who were assiduously spreading their propa- 

[ 97 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


ganda among the aroused workers and soldiers. In 
January, almost the entire labor group of the Central 
War Industrial Committee was arrested. This group 
was the stronghold of national defense in the world of 
labor and was bitterly assailed by the Bolsheviki and 
defeatists. At the same time the government began 
the demobilization of the labor sections of the pro- 
vincial War Industrial Committees. A conference in 
Moscow of various independent organizations called 
to consider the food problem was forbidden, although 
many cities and towns were on the verge of starvation. 
Even a commercial and financial conference summoned 
in Moscow was suppressed. The central body of the 
cooperative societies, which were supplying the army 
and the cities with food, was dissolved and its members 
prosecuted. 

Tn a word, the government set itself to demolishing 
everything that was likely to avert an uprising, mean- 
while laying plans for the suppression of rioting in 
Petrograd with machine guns..' The motto attributed 
to the Ministry of the Interior — “through anarchy to 
a separate peace” — was being successfully put into 
effect. 

I must say, however, that Nicholas II had nothing 
to do with all this. The government was simply pre- 
paring to confront him at a given moment with a fait 
accompli which would oblige him to sign a separate 
peace. I cannot say whether Alexandra Feodorovna 
had anything to do with it. Her immediate circle was 
not above suspicion and German agents were hovering 
around her and Madame Vyroubova. But whether 
the Czarina and her lady-in-waiting took part in pre- 
paring the country for a separate peace I cannot say, 
although I did my best to find out when I first took 
office. 


[ 98 ] 



BEFORE THE CRASH 


Meanwhile the condition of the army was becom- 
ing desperate. By January, 19x7, there had been 
1,200,000 desertions and the number was still increas- 
ing. The! army was demobilizing itself. The high 
command was helpless to stem this tide for home. 
Special military police detachments were formed to 
round up the deserters and rewards of from seven to 
twenty-five copecks a head (according to the rank of 
the deserter) were offered as encouragement in the 
man hunt. 

The Naval and Military Committee of the Duma 
was at its wit’s end to find a means of preventing the 
army from melting away. ^Military discipline began 
to vanish, li Whole units refused to fight or to relieve 
their comrades in the trenches. Here and there the 
men in the trenches engaged in and encouraged frater- 
nization with the Germans. The lack of military dis- 
cipline in the rear was even worse. A memorandum 
dealing with the tragic condition in the army and the 
urgent need for certain measures to cope with it, drawn 
up by a special conference on defense consisting of 
representatives of the Duma, the Imperial Council 
and independent organizations, was laid before the 
Czar at the end of January. Shingarioff, Chairman of 
the Military and Naval Affairs Committee of the 
Duma, obtained an audience with the Czar in a naive 
effort to prevail upon him to take measures to save 
the country. 

!The condition of the country as a whole continued 
to be worse than that of the army.j Owing to the coal 
shortage, the blast furnaces in the south came to a 
standstill in December and the munition factories in 
Petrograd began closing down. In February came an 
acute crisis in the textile industries of Moscow, which 
used a very large proportion of the coal required by 

[ 99 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


the country. The transportation system was becom- 
ing more and more disorganized. Passenger traffic 
had to be stopped for weeks at* a time to enable the 
most essential military and supply trains to go through 
to the front. In Vladivostok alone there were 40,- 
000,000 pouds of military supplies and agricultural 
material which it was quite impossible to transport into 
Russia. The last war loan had brought almost noth- 
ing. In January and February, 1917, 995,000,000 
paper rubles were issued as against 662,800,000 for 
the first half of 1916. The cost of the War exceeded 
50,000,000 rubles a day. 

At the end of January the Central Committee of the 
All-Russian Union of Municipalities and Zemstvos 
presented a memorandum to the Government Food 
Commission which contained the following observa- 
tion: 

“The towns received only one-fiftieth and one-eigh- 
teenth of the supplies allotted to them, respectively, for 
November and December, 1916. All stores in the 
towns are exhausted. fBy February there will be no 
bread.” 

And, indeed, there was no more bread in the towns 
by February. There were hunger riots in all the 
provinces. On February tenth, what the authorities 
called a “misunderstanding” due to “food shortage” 
occurred in Petrograd. The working classes had been 
provoked by hunger into the riots which were to justify 
the government in concluding a separate peace. 

From this time on it became impossible to stem the 
inevitable development of events into revolution. 5 The 
time for a coup d’etat, for a quiet revolution from 
above, had passed,* Not without reason did Basil 
Maklakoff declare on May 17, 1917, before a con- 
ference of Duma deputies : 

[ 100] 



BEFORE THE CRASH 


“At a certain moment it became clear to us that it 
would be impossible to carry the War to a successful 
conclusion while the old regime was in power, and it 
became the duty for those who feared the consequences 
of an upheaval to save the country from revolution 
from below by revolution from above. That was the 
duty we failed to fulfill. If our children should come 
to curse this Revolution they will also curse those 
who did not know in time how to prevent it.” 

There had been but one means of saving the coun- 
try from revolution and consequent anarchy, and that 
was by liberating it by a swift and energetic stroke 
from the government which was destroying it, as a 
center of infection is cut out of a healthy body. 

Those who were in closest touch with the masses 
realized most clearly the danger of an anarchic revolu- 
tion. That was why the interparty group, to which 
I belonged, so persistently demanded radical recon- 
struction of the government and did its best to speed 
it.' Beginning, with the autumn of 1916 preparations 
for a coup d’etat were launched in various circles. A 
number of organizations and even members of the 
Progressive Bloc in the Duma took part in the con- 
spiracies. The conspirators were in touch with army 
circles, and some generals, not to mention junior offi- 
cers, were drawn into the plans. There were a num- 
ber of plots under way and the plans were discussed 
by the respective conspiratory groups at secret meet- 
ings in Moscow and Petrograd. One plan provided 
for the arrest of the Empress and her entire circle, 
followed by a demand for the Czar’s abdication in 
favor of his young son, under the regency of Michael 
Alexandrovitch. 

Some of these plans were ready for execution in the 

[ 101 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


winter of 19 1 6, and those initiated into the con- 
spiracies were looking forward with impatience to 
their realization. Our interparty group, consisting 
of representatives of all Left elements in the Duma, 
was in touch with all active radical forces in the coun- 
try and through our agents we sought to develop a 
common program and prevent disagreements which 
might interfere with the proposed coup d’etat. This 
was made necessary because many revolutionary cen- 
ters were not familiar with the ends for which other 
groups were working. Besides helping to facilitate a 
coup d’etat we had to prepare all democratic and social- 
ist parties for the event and to create a center around 
which to rally the revolutionary democracy as a con- 
trolling force against popular excesses. The secret 
information bureau of the democratic parties provided 
such a center. 

As far as I knew of and participated in the plans 
for a coup d’etat, that was how the situation stood in 
Petrograd and Moscow. There were, however, ad- 
ditional projects of the same kind at the front and 
elsewhere. For instance, one group of army officers 
planned to bomb the Czar’s automobile from an aero- 
plane at a certain spot along the front. 

Unfortunately none of the plans for a coup d’etat 
was carried out. The men upon whom the realiza- 
tion of these plans depended were held back by their 
old traditions of loyalty to the throne and the imperial 
family. They kept on vacillating and tinkering with 
the plans, trying to define the powers of the regent, 
etc., and putting off the decisive moment. But every 
day’s delay endangered the whole enterprise by expos- 
ing it more and more to discovery by the police. Sev- 
eral opportune moments had already been permitted 
to pass. 


[ 102] 



BEFORE THE CRASH 


Finally, the coup d’etat was fixed by one group 
for the beginning of March. But it was too late. 

On February twenty-seventh the Duma began what 
was to be its last session. A great popular demonstra- 
tion was expected on that day. Police and troops 
lined the streets leading to the Tauride Palace. There 
was a strong movement among the workers for march- 
ing to the support of the Duma, but the Duma ma- 
jority, through MiliukofFs open letter to the workers, 
firmly and even rudely declined this help, asking the 
workers to take no action. (The government censor- 
ship, by the way, tried to stop publication of this let- 
ter. ) j} The session began in an atmosphere of great 
tension. The majority, although realizing that critical 
events were impending, refused 1 to admit that the time 
for conciliation with the government had passed, and 
that the people were about to take matters into their 
own hands.. It still obstinately refused, in its all too 
moderate declaration of policy, to join in the demand 
of the whole middle class for a ministry responsible 
to the Duma. 

This declaration was altogether in dissonance with 
the actual situation and with the opinion of the whole 
country. J Yet the leaders of the majority regarded 
the original draft of this declaration, as drawn by 
Shulgin, too radical. Even those progressives who 
bolted the Progressive Bloc to join the Left believed 
that a solution consistent with loyalty to the Czar was 
still possible, although they declared in their pro- 
nouncement that the country was “on the eve of 
demonstrating its discontent.” On the same day (Feb- 
ruary twenty-seventh) Miliukoff declared in the Duma: 
“Only heroic measures can cure the helplessness that 
has descended upon the country as the result of the 
wall which the government has built around itself and 

[ 103 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 

which during the last three months has become even 
more impenetrable.” He added: “We have reached 
a decisive point. On all sides we see patriotic anxiety. 
Only timely conciliation can bring salvation. The 
Duma alone cannot remove this anxiety, but we be- 
lieve that the patriotism of the people will not allow 
our powers of defense to be weakened at this critical 
moment.” 

On the following day I addressed the Duma and 
for the first time the Duma heard the unvarnished 
truth. I declared openly that the ruin of the country 
was due not to ministers who come and go but to the 
power which appoints them, i.e., the monarch and 
the dynasty. I called upon the Duma to begin at once, 
by every available means, a fight to the bitter end 
against these enemies of the people. I implored the 
Duma, in the name of the highest duty of citizenship, 
to take action immediately and to risk everything for 
the salvation of the country. I concluded by saying: 

“If you refuse to listen to my warnings, you will 
meet facts instead of warnings. Look at the strokes 
of lightning already flashing across the sky.” I de- 
clared that I for one would not shrink from violence. 

A few days later I said: “In my opinion an open 
collision with the authorities is bound to come soon.” 

But very few realized the catastrophe was approach- 
ing and most people listened to my warnings with in- 
credulity. ^1 remember that after my first address 
many people condoled with me, fearing the conse- 
quences that would befall me as a result of my attack 
on the dynasty.; Most people thought we were on the 
verge not of a revolution but of a bitter and hopeless 
reaction. The police department was still very effec- 
tive in its operations and every day the papers carried 
statements “forbidden by the censorship” in the 

[104] 



BEFORE THE CRASH 


columns allotted to the publication of speeches in the 
Duma. Even Pourischkevitch, the reactionary deputy, 
protested against the mutilation and falsification of his 
speeches by the military censorship. The number of 
arrests and house searches increased. The police and 
troops were successfully putting down the growing 
riots in the capital. On March fifth there was serious 
rioting in the largest factories in Petrograd, including 
the Putiloff works. The troops obeyed orders to 
resist the workers. 

\ On the same day the Czar left for General Head- 
quarters, leaving behind with Prince Golitzin a decree 
for dissolution of the Duma, signed but undated, 
“ready for possible contingencies.” The fate of the 
Duma was thus left entirely in the hands of Proto- 
popoff and his clique.! On February sixth the rioting 
assumed new intensity and the attitude of the govern- 
ment was such as to provoke Shingarioff, speaking in 
the Duma, to denounce the existing regime as “a dic- 
tatorship of madness.” 

The moment of collision approached more quickly 
than I thought. On March ninth all the newspapers of 
Petrograd ceased publication simultaneously with a 
general strike in almost all the factories. Here and 
there were battles between the throngs and the armed 
force's of the government. The acute food shortage 
in the capital finally compelled Prince Golitzin to make 
concessions. ! A special conference composed of mem- 
bers of the ’ government ( Protopopoff was not per- 
mitted to participate) and of representatives of the 
Duma and Imperial Council resolved to pass a law 
transferring the control of the food supply to the town 
councils within twenty-four hours. The Duma passed 
this law at its morning session, March tenth, which 
was its last! 

[ 105 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


There was* firing that day all over the capital. A 
crowd was shot down on the Nevsky Prospekt, quite 
near the Duma. The troops were still obeying orders. 
There was also fighting on the Znamensky Square and 
in other parts of the city. In the evening the Pavlovsk 
Regiment mutinied, but was immediately suppressed, 
the ringleaders being taken to the Fortress of SS. 
Peter and Paul. 

During these days conferences were going on in the 
Duma continuously from momi’ng till night. The 
majority was still hopelessly trying to find a “loyal” 
way out of the situation. 

On March ninth the whole city was transformed 
into a military camp. At midday all bridges were bar- 
ricaded and it became difficult to get into the center 
of the city from the suburbs. The Constitutional 
Democrats (Cadets) and the Laborites insisted that 
the session of the Duma, fixed for March twelfth, be 
held on the eleventh. We felt that it was essential 
to have an All-Russian political center in these days. 
But most parties disagreed with us and we compro- 
mised by calling a meeting of the leaders for midday 
and the Duma session for 2 p.m. on March twelfth. 
At midnight, on March eleventh, Rodzianko received 
the Czar’s decree of dissolution, which set no date for 
the reconvocation of the Duma. This last act of the 
“dictatorship of madness” turned the hunger riots 
into the Revolution. 

“It takes a thunderbolt to make a muzhik cross, him- 
self,” says an old Russian proverb. The action of the 
government in dissolving the Duma when confronted 
by the hungry, maddened throng struck Russia like a 
thunderbolt and opened her eyes to the abyss towards 
which thp madmen and traitors of Czarism were push- 
ing her. >' But for the Duma there could have been no 

C 106 ] 



BEFORE THE CRASH 

revolution, Neither could it have come about without 
the revolt of the workers and soldiers. At the first 
meeting of the Cadet party after the Revolution, 
Miliukoff said: “We must bow to those bodies we 
have seen lying in red coffins on the Field of Mars.” 

When we left the Tauride Palace on the evening of 
March eleventh we did not yet know that the Duma 
was to be dissolved. The mutiny of the Pavlovsk Regi- 
ment on March tenth was not supported by the rest 
of the garrison. The crowds in the streets seemed 
to be dispersing and calming down that evening. It 
looked as if the disturbances were drawing to an end. 
That is why the crash on March twelfth came as a 
surprise. 

I have given a brief summary of the events which 
led up to the Revolution. fThe Revolution did not 
create the anarchy in Russia, but was in fact the 
healthy effort of the country to save itself from the 
approaching disintegration! The criminal folly of the 
government and the war exhaustion brought Russia to 
thye Revolution. 

■The Revolution succeeded in abolishing the au- 
tocracy, but it could not remove the exhaustion of the 
country, for one of its main duties was to carry on the 
War. It had decided to put the utmost strain upon the 
country’s resources. Herein lay the tragedy of 
the Revolution and of the Russian people.^ Some 
day the world will learn to understand in its proper 
light the via crucis Russia walked in 1916-17 and is, 
indeed, still walking, il am quite convinced that the 
Revolution alone kept the Russian army at the front 
until the autumn of 1917, that it alone made it possible 
for the United States to come into the War, that the 
Revolution alone piade the deifeat of Hohenzollern 
Germany possible. 

[ 107 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


The years 1917-27 have shown that centuries of 
autocracy cannot fail to leave their marks on a coun- 
try. The body politic was corrupt long before the 
Revolution. The state, built on the sweat and blood 
and tears of the people, had' long been disintegrated 
and the soul of the people poisoned by the old regime. 
Russia ground down by the autocracy was like a slave 
rotting in a foul dungeon without light or air. By 
straining every nerve she found strength to break her 
fetters and prison bars, and to escape from her suffocat- 
ing captivity to freedom. 

But I hear sad and angry voices objecting: 

“What was the use of breaking out of prison only 
to collapse upon the threshold ?’\ 

To these I would reply: 

“Wait ! Russia has not fallen dead. The fight has 
only just begun,” 



CHAPTER III 

WITHIN THE PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT 

I HOPE the reader has by this time sufficiently 
grasped the political and social environment in 
which the Provisional Government was obliged to 
begin its work. 

Upon its formation, March sixteenth, and its de- 
parture from the superheated atmosphere of the 
Tauride Palace, the government held its sessions tem- 
porarily in the main meeting room of the Ministry of 
the Interior. In the silence of the spacious, quiet, 
ministerial chamber, hung with portraits of former 
rulers, imperial ministers and representatives of Rus- 
sian reaction, every one of us understood, perhaps for 
the first time, the change that had come upon Russia. 
There were eleven of us. Every one of us had been 
regarded by the Czarist Ministry of the Interior with 
hostility and suspicion. And now we had in our hands 
the supreme power of the great empire, power that 
came to us at the most difficult period of the War, 
after an explosion which swept away the entire old 
machinery of administration.* 

♦The Provisional Government was composed as follows: Premier 
and Minister of the Interior, Prince G. E. Lvoff, a veteran leader 
of zemstvos; Minister of Foreign Affairs, Paul N. Miliukoff, leader 
of the Constitutional-Democratic (Liberal) p&rty; Minister of War 
and Marine, A. I. Gutchkoff, member of the Duma, leader of the 
Octobrist (Conservative) party and representative of the Moscow 
merchant class ; Minister of Finance, M. B. Terestchenko, non-par- 
tisan, one of the wealthiest men of Russia, a noted philanthropist 

[ 109 ] 




THE CATASTROPHE 


I remember with what emotion Prince Lvoff read 
to us at our first meeting a report on the situation in 
the provinces. From all towns and cities, provincial 
and county seats came telegrams which seemed as if 
they had been written by one and the same hand. 
They all told the same story: the old administration, 
from the governor to the last town policeman and vil- 
lage bailiff had disappeared without trace, and every- 
where were being formed, instead, all sorts of self- 
appointed organizations — -Soviets, committees of pub- 
lic safety, conferences of public leaders, etc., etc. 

“I have telegraphed,” the prince told us, “to all the 
chairmen of zemstvo administrations the suggestion 
that they assume temporarily the duties of governors, 
in the capacity of commissars of the Provisional Gov- 
ernment.” But in the majority of cases the chairmen 
of the zemstvo administrations in the provinces were 
conservatives and, frequently, quite outspoken reac- 
tionaries. They enjoyed no wide influence and could 
not maintain themselves in authority for a week.’. Very 
much the same was true everywhere in the provinces 
with regard to the military authorities. Somewhat 
more favorable was the situation with respect to the 


and vice-chairman of All-Russian War Industrial Committee; Minister 
of Agriculture, A. I. Sbingarioff, Constitutional-Democrat, zemstvo 
worker, prominent member of the fourth Duma and dose coworker 
of Paul N. Miliukoff; Minister of Education, Professor A. I. Man- 
uiloff, Constitutional-Democrat, noted Moscow reformer and univer- 
sity leader; Minister of Commerce and Industry, A. I. Konovaloff, 
Progressive, noted public leader, member of the fourth Duma, vice- 
chairman of the All-Russian War Industrial Committee and one of 
the foremost industrialist and commercial leaders of Moscow; Minis- 
ter of Railways, N. Nekrassoff, member of the fourth Duma, leader 
of the Left Wing of the Constitutional-Democratic party; Procurator 
of the Holy Synod, V. Lvoff, moderate conservative, big landed 
proprietor and member of the fourth Duma; State Controller, God- 
neff, Octobrist, veteran public leader from the Volga region; Vice- 
Premier and Minister of Justice, A. F. Kerensky. 

[no] 




WITHIN THE PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT 

judicial machinery. But here, too, even in Petrograd, 
where the institution of the election of magistrates had 
remained intact, there was a difficult situation. The 
villages, liberated from all administrative vigilance, 
had begun to “govern themselves. 5 ’ There was an im- 
mediate mad rush by the peasantry for the land.' 

In the cities, various self-appointed organizations, 
whipped up by the raging revolutionary tempest, were 
devoting themselves to such creative revolutionary 
activities as raids, searches, confiscations and the liber- 
ation not only of political prisoners but also of crim- 
inals of the most desperate hue. 

\One need only visualize for a moment this raging 
human ocean, freed from all bonds, this molten, as yet 
formless revolutionary mass, to realize the tremendous 
historic and positive role played by the Soviets, which 
everywhere, as in Petrograd, contributed greatly to the 
establishment of revolutionary discipline. Despite all 
their great errors and frequent stupidities, the Soviets 
represented the first primitive social and political 
molds into which the molten revolutionary lava began 
gradually to flow and to cool off.? 

Sometimes it seems to me that the word “revolu- 
tion” is quite inapplicable to what happened in Russia 
between March twelfth and sixteenth. A whole world 
of national and political relationships simply sank to 
the bottom, and at once all existing political and tac- 
tical programs and plans, however bold and well con- 
ceived, appeared hanging aimlessly and uselessly in 
space. The political parties that survived the March 
earthquake (the Social-Revolutionaries; the Social- 
Democrats and the Constitutional-Democrats — all 
other more moderate and conservative parties being 
reduced at once to zero or almost to zero) sought to 
act in accordance with all the rules of Western Euro- 

[in] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


pean political art. Their leaders tried to classify the 
character of the Revolution by calling it “bourgeois” 
or “socialist.” They put forward political proposals, 
which in their opinion demanded immediate realiza- 
tion, and disputed about compromise formulae. But 
no one wanted to perceive the most important thing 
of all: the disappearance of the machinery of state, 
the need of restoring the apparatus of administration 
itself, without which all programs, platforms, formulae, 
resolutions, etc. assume the value of so much useless 
paper. 

• According to opinions in Russia and abroad, based 
on the classic models of the French Revolution of 
1789, the epoch of the Provisional Government can 
be divided into two periods : first, the bourgeois period, 
under the premiership of Prince Lvoff, and, second, the 
.socialist period, under the premiership of Kerenskyj 
i, Correspondingly, it is customary to say that in the 
second period the government was more radical in 
its legislative work, less constructive in its methods 
of administration and weaker in the application of ad- 
ministrative compulsion. 

The terms bourgeois and socialist would probably 
be applicable to the Russian Revolution if after the 
March upheaval all power in Russia had actually been 
in the hands of the bourgeoisie itself, organized as in 
the West in compact class formation, able to fight for 
power and knowing how to keep it. 

This interpretation would probably be correct if 
such a bourgeoisie had been susperseded in the natural 
course of the struggle for power by the fourth estate — 
the city, village and intellectual proletariat, and which 
would have occupied in the first, the bourgeois period 
of the Revolution, the position of an oppressed social 
class. 


[ 112I 



WITHIN THE PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT 

But such was not the situation. On the contrary, 
exactly the opposite occurred. 

The very formation of the Provisional Government 
took place under circumstances of tragic misunderstand- 
ing. 

Given to thinking along the line of historical pre- 
cedents and knowing the art of handling theoretical 
propositions rather than that of orienting themselves 
in the confusion of real life, the ideologists of the 
“bourgeois democracy” believed sincerely that the 
downfall of absolutism would be marked by the trans- 
fer of all power into the hands of the liberal-conserva- 
tive bourgeoisie represented by the Progressive Bloc 
in the fourth Duma. On the other hand, the socialist 
leaders and the ideologists of the “revolutionary pro- 
letariat” fully accepted this phantastic idea, for it 
coincided with their own theoretical conceptions, based 
on the very best European models of the development 
of a “real” revolution. Viewed from the point of 
view of the precedent of the French Revolution, the 
period of the Russian Resolution, beginning with 
March twelfth, constituted the epoch of the National 
Assembly and the Girondins. 

Subsequently, within a few years, it was to give way 
to the Jacobin Terror, etc. The absence of life in- 
stinct and of political intuition in the minds of political 
dogmatists assumfed at times most curious propensities. 
Thus, during their joint consideration of the program 
of the Provisional Government, the representatives of 
the Soviet (or of the so-called revolutionary democ- 
racy) forced on the Temporary Committee of the 
Duma the obligation not to determine beforehand the 
future form of government in Russia, pending convoca- 
tion of the Constituent Assembly, while P. N. Miliu- 
koff, the ideologist of the Progressive Bloc, fought 

[113] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


long and stubbornly against this limitation. What was 
all this about? It was very simple: P. N. Miliukoff 
was convinced of the inevitability of a constitutional 
monarchy in Russia after the Revolution (and on the 
night of March sixteenth), while the leaders of the 
revolutionary proletariat did not venture to demand 
openly the establishment of a republic, at a time when 
the republic had already become an historic fact. 

The Soviet leaders, guided by Western European 
political formulae, believed sincerely that after March 
twelfth the political power had to be in the hands 
of the bourgeoisie, this power to be controlled by the 
labor democracy, headed by the “class conscious pro- 
letariat,” which would support the government only 
to the extent to which it did not misuse its dominant 
position in the country to the disadvantage of the basic 
interests of the masses. 

Both sides — P. N. Miliukoff and the accidental 
leaders of the Soviet, drawn from the ranks of the 
revolutionists of 190 5 — were quite sincerely convinced 
of the wisdom of their opinions; they failed to notice 
what was actually taking place about them and to sense 
the profundity of the popular upheaval. 

I write this not with intent of sitting in judgment 
upon the leaders of that period. On the contrary I 
wish only to show right at the beginning that neither 
ill will nor mischief played any conspicuous role, nor 
had any appreciable part in the development of those 
future acute disagreements around the issue of the 
Provisional Government, which contributed to the 
weakening of the government’s barely established au- 
thority.jf The entire depth of the tragic catastrophe 
experienced by Russia is measured precisely by the 
fact that despite all their good will and their urge to 
help the country, people frequently injured it because 

[iH] 



WITHIN THE PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT 

they failed to realize the substance and meaning of 
what was taking place. 

Ignoring all historical comparisons and European 
precedents, the problem before the Provisional Gov- 
ernment and the political organizations and parties 
supporting it, however conditionally, was not a com- 
plex but a simple one, yet extremely difficult in its 
simplicity. 

It was necessary to restore the country and the 
state.' 

This task of reconstruction did not consist in restor- 
ing territorial boundaries embracing a definite popula- 
tion. In this material sense of the word, Russia did 
not as yet require restoration, for Russia was still in- 
tact. "tThe task of the moment was the restoration of 
the national governmental fabric as a creative, ad- 
ministrative and protective political organism,’ This 
meant, first of all, restoration of the administrative 
apparatus, of the machinery of government. It meant 
teaching some to govern and others to yield obedience. 
This problem was rendered all the more difficult by the 
necessity of continuing the War and by the need of 
what was in reality tantamount to reconstruction of 
all juridical, economic and social foundations of the 
country. 

One of the( strongest and brightest impressions of 
my life is the recollection of the work of the first 
cabinet of the Provisional Government, composed, as 
Lenin described it, of ten capitalist ministers, among 
whom I occupied the position of “hostage of the 
democracy." 

Had Lenin and his lieutenants possessed one-hun- 
dredth part of the ability to renounce all personal con- 
siderations of power and vanity, of the capacity for 
unselfish service to the country and the people dis- 

[ii5] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


played by the millionaires Terestchenko and Kon- 
ovaloff; by such typical representatives of the landed 
nobility as V. Lvoff, or by that characteristic liberal 
intellectual A. I. Shingarioff, Russia would have in all 
probability escaped the Golgotha to which she was 
brought by the blind, senseless, utterly unnecessary 
fomenting of class hatred by the irresponsible dema- 
gogues of Bolshevism. 

PRINCE GEORGE LVOFF 

Above all did Prince G. E. Lvoff represent the 
make-up and spirit of the Provisional Government. 
This true aristocrat, whose family had its roots in 
centuries of Russian history, was undoubtedly the most 
democratic among us, closer, than any of us to the real 
soul of the Russian muzhik; 

Modest, almost unnaturally retiring, absent-minded 
in all matters concerning himself, the prince outwardly 
possessed not a single earmark of the head of a gov- 
ernment. Revolting against the whole past of his 
power-loving ancestors, baronial rulers of medieval 
Russia, he seemed to have subdued in himself the fam- 
ily instinct for power. He felt a revulsion against all 
the exterior attributes of authority and of the state. 
During the sessions of the Provisional Government he 
kept deliberately in the background and saw to it that 
every one had an opportunity to speak his mind to the 
end, to say everything he wished to say. Rarely, al- 
most never, did he interject a word of command or 
criticism into the stormy debates of the cabinet, seek- 
ing always to bring about agreement by a kind word 
of wisdom, forgetting frequently the necessity for 
hurry to keep the government from lagging behind the 
elemental sweep of events. 

[116] 



WITHIN THE PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT 

All his life the prince had struggled stubbornly, un- 
ceasingly, with tremendous energy, against the stupid, 
ferocious, bureaucratic machine of the old absolutism. 
But he always approached the painful questions of 
Russian life not like a politician but in a peculiarly 
original manner. He moved not from ideas to man 
but from man to ideas. 

Although detesting the old regime, the prince had al- 
ways succeeded in striking some human chords in the 
men who served it. He would gather about him lead- 
ing men and women devoted to the people’s interests, 
and draw up, with their cooperation, plans and pro- 
grams of social welfare. Then, unostentatiously, he 
would depart for some ministry or some gubernatorial 
center, where single-handed, by means he alone seemed 
to possess, he would accomplish what innumerable 
political resolutions and demands of the Duma or 
zemstvo organs failed to achieve. 

In his work the prince covered the length and 
breadth of Russia. In most difficult periods of agricul- 
tural crises, he promoted successfully the work of mov- 
ing masses of peasants to settlements in the Far East. 
During the Russo-Japanese War, as head of the 
zemstvo organizations, he did much for the wounded 
and accomplished what was far beyond his official 
duties and limitations. He was a member of the first 
Duma. But this page of his career, in the opinion of 
some the most striking of his life, he regarded as the 
most uninteresting and unnecessary. ■ After the disr 
solution of the first Duma, he left the Constitutional- 
Democratic party and went out to seek again, in his 
own way, new roads to the happiness and welfare of 
the people.^ 

? Long before the European War, in the period of 
the cruel Stolypin reaction (1907-11) he began to de- 
li 117] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


vote himself to the organization of the independent 
forces of the zemstvos. ' Slowly and surely the prince 
assembled around him elements which could, in the mo- 
ment of the death of the old regime, take over, if neces- 
sary, the machinery of government. 

It is remarkable how the roads of the two most 
typical representatives of aristocratic and bourgeois 
Russia, of Prince Lvoff and Gutchkoff, met during the 
War in this work of the building up of independent 
political and social organizations and of the selection 
of men of administrative ability, for during the period 
after the Russo-Japanese War and of the first Duma 
the two men had been politically widely divergent. 

During the European War the name of Prince 
Lvoff became the symbol of the social and cultural 
forces of Russia. At the front he gained great pop- 
ularity in the commanding corps because of the 
tremendous work for the army performed under his 
leadership by the Union of Zemstvos. 

I met the prince for the first time shortly before the 
Revolution — I think it was in December, 1916. I had 
already made the acquaintance of his close associates 
and knew not only of the general humanitarian and 
social work but also of the contrabandist political ac- 
tivity of Lvoff’s circle. Sensing the hurricane advanc- 
ing upon Russia, I felt finally that I could no longer 
postpone making the personal acquaintance of one who 
was obviously destined to be one of the future political 
leaders of emancipated Russia. I met the prince in 
Moscow, at the headquarters of the Governing Com- 
mittee of the Union of Zemstvos, following his ad- 
journment of some business meeting. After exchanging 
salutations he led me to his study. There after a brief 
conversation we came to understand one another, both 

[« 8 ] 



WITHIN THE PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT 

of us realizing the tribulations awaiting the country in 
the very near future. 

There was a peculiar simplicity, bordering at times 
on what seemed to be naivete, in the political conversa- 
tion of the prince. But behind this naivete lay con- 
cealed a deep knowledge of the people and one sensed 
that he had not only felt the problems of Russia 
through his heart but had thought them out carefully 
through his mind. Soon after the beginning of the 
Revolution many of the admirers and associates of 
the prince began to hate or to detest him for his “lack 
of will-power,” for his “Tolstoyan non-resistance to 
evil.” However, let those who consider the prince’s 
policy in the first weeks of the Revolution, both as 
premier and minister of the interior, as “non-resist- 
ance to evil,” let them undertake to build a house of 
cards in a tempest, under the open sky, to the accom- 
paniment of an all-devouring hurricane! The prince 
perceived honestly the full depth and measure of the 
decay and dissolution of old Russia. He, therefore, 
looked upon the elemental explosion of the people’s 
fury without astonishment. He understood, suffered 
and forgave. There are moments in the history of all 
nations when the highest wisdom of a ruler expresses 
itself in being able to wait, in the ability to grasp in- 
stinctively and not by reason the outwardly invisible 
spiritual pangs and experiences of the nation. 

“Let not your hearts be cast down by Russia’s free- 
dom,” said the prince in the beginning of May at a 
meeting of the Duma, in a speech remarkable for its 
thought and faith. To the! prince the heritage of 
Russia’s struggle for emancipation lay not in a collec- 
tion of dead formulae, fit only for the archives, but in 
the life and substance of the course of events. 

[ ” 9 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


The prince did not reveal “strong will-power” either 
as premier or as minister of the interior. But how 
could he have revealed it had he desired to do so? 
Police officials had just begun to reappear in city- 
streets — they were termed militia men, in order not 
to revive recollections of the old regime — and they 
were men, assembled hurriedly and casually, who had 
but little conception of the technical features of their 
work. 

When newspapermen sought to learn from the 
prince, following his initial sad experience in trying to 
find substitutes for the provincial governors, what he 
intended to do and whom he intended to appoint, he 
replied: “We will not appoint any one. The local 
populations themselves will elect and inform us ac- 
cordingly, and we will approve.” Most astonishing 
“non-resistance” ? Not at all. It was simply a demon- 
stration of the prince’s profound knowledge of the 
situation and of his realization that the moment had 
not yet come for the central authorities to exercise the 
power of appointment and to issue orders. As soon 
as the situation in the various towns and provinces 
permitted it, with the natural simmering down of the 
boiling cauldron, the central authorities began to act. 

“We! will build the new life of the people not by 
ourselves but together with the people.” These words 
of Prince Lvoff, expressed in another way by Abraham 
Lincoln, should enable my readers to understand the 
remarkable personality of the first freely chosen 
spokesman of the government of Free Russia, 
f We may, therefore, ask, could such a man be the 
representative of the class interests of the bourgeoisie ? 
Could he express the will of the propertied classes when 
his entire soul was bound much more intimately, ten- 
derly and deeply than that of men like Lenin with the 

[ 120] 



WITHIN THE PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT 

aspirations, the actual interests, the whole future of 
the Russian peasantry? This future lay in the land. 

BASIC REFORMS 

The land! No mention of it is to be found in the 
declaration of the Provisional Government made pub- 
lic on the day of its assumption of office! Neverthe- 
less, at its very first meeting, A. I. ShingariofF — after- 
wards killed by the Bolsheviki, on the eve of the con- 
vocation of the Constituent Assembly of which he had 
been elected a member — Was instructed by unanimous 
decision of the cabinet, and without any discussion, to 
work out a basic plan for the complete readjustment of 
land distribution and to prepare measures for the ex- 
ecution of this social reform, unprecedented in the 
history of Europe.} Perhaps somewhere in the sub- 
consciousness of one or another member of the 
Provisional Government there was a trace of doubt 
against this bold way of putting the question of the 
abolition of the entire old system of land ownership, 
but this egoistic feeling, so entirely natural to any man, 
was immediately suppressed by the imperative need of 
surrendering and sacrificing all for the sake of the 
country. 

On April second, the Provisional Government 
promulgated its agrarian reform, which was to give all 
the land into the hands of those who worked it, and 
on the same day the government created a Central 
Land Committee, which, in cooperation with similar 
provincial and county land committees and elected 
representatives of the population, was to draft a basic 
land law for presentation to the Constituent Assembly. 

: Quite simply, without any struggle, without any of 
the classic revolutionary scenes on the order of the 

[ 121 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 

celebrated oath of the French nobility at the beginning 
of the Revolution of 1789, occurred this fundamental 
social change. : A great, real and unprecedented social 
revolution was brought about through the signatures 
of the representatives of that propertied Russia which, 
according to all party formulae, should have defended 
the “propertied privileges of the bourgeoisie.” 

Likewise, the first declaration of the Provisional 
Government, drafted jointly by the representatives of 
the revolutionary proletariat from the Soviet and of 
the Temporary Committee of the Duma, contained not 
a word about the labor question. On this question the 
“bourgeois” government had the complete freedom of 
action it enjoyed in the land problem. Nevertheless, 
on March twentieth, Konovaloff, the new minister of 
commerce and industry, Moscow millionaire and pro- 
prietor of a large manufacturing establishment, placed 
at the head of his program the creation, in connection 
with the Ministry of the Interior, of a special labor 
division, incorporating representatives of labor or- 
ganizations in the machinery of the department, which 
began functioning on May twentieth. On March 
twenty-fourth, Konovaloff introduced the eight-hour 
day in the shops and factories, of Petrograd, by agree- 
ment with the manufacturers. Soon after he recog- 
nized the workers’ shop committees and began the 
establishment, by agreement with the representatives 
of employers and employees, of special boards of 
arbitration for the settlement of industrial disputes^ 
The Provisional Government’s measure determining 
the function of trade unions in the state remains a 
model to this day. What the Provisional Government 
failed to include in its work was only the demagogy 
of Lenin, so destructive and so costly to the workers 
themselves. 


[ 122 ] 



WITHIN THE PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT 


In comparison with the scope of its constructive 
social reforms, the purely political program of the 
“bourgeois” Provisional Government, representing the 
only measures to which it pledged itself, appears as a 
mere trifle.! After long casuistical disputes, of interest 
only to themselves, the socialist intellectuals represent- 
ing the Soviet and the liberal professors representing 
the Duma had drafted the following measures which 
the Provisional Government was to put into effect : 

1. Complete and immediate amnesty for all 
acts of political and religious nature, including 
acts of political assassination, military uprisings 
and agrarian disturbances. (This was put into 
effect March nineteenth, followed by abolition of 
capital punishment on March twenty-fifth.) 

2. Freedom of speech, press, assembly, trade 
union organization and strikes, and application of 
political liberties to men in the military service in 
so far as these were practicable under the tech- 
nical limitations of the setrvice. (Put into effect 
immediately. ) 

3. Abolition of all juridical discriminations 
based on distinctions of class, creed and national- 
ity. (Put into effect April twenty-sixth.) 

4. Immediate preparations for the convoca- 
tion of the Constituent Assembly (on the basis of 
universal, equal, direct and sefcret suffrage) , 
whose function it would be to* determine the form 
of government and the constitution. (Prepara- 
tions begun at once.) 

On May eighth a special commission, with the 
participation of representatives of all parties and 
social organizations, assembled for the drafting 
of an electoral law to govern the elections to the 
Constituent Assembly, and of technical measures 
for the election. 


[ 123 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 

5. The substitution for the old police of a peo- 
ple’s militia, its chieftains to be chosen by popular 
election and to be subordinate to the local govern- 
ment authorities. (Organization of such a militia 
was begun at once. ) 

6. Election of all organs of local self-govern- 
ment on the basis of universal, direct, equal and 
secret suffrage. 

On May second the government made public its 
measure for the election of city coundls and on May 
twenty-eighth was promulgated the basic reform of 
local zemstvo self-government. 

The official program of the Provisional Government 
was thus put into realization within a few weeks. 

j In addition, during the two months of its existence, 
the first cabinet of the Provisional Government ac- 
complished the following: 

It proclaimed the independence of Poland. 

It restored the autonomy of Finland. 

It created committees for the working out of 
local autonomy in the Ukraine and Latvia. 

It reorganized the administration of govern- 
ment in Turkestan and in the Caucasus and in 
Turkish Armenia and Galicia which were occupied 
by Russian troops. 

It abolished all special courts, introducing the 
general system of trial by jury. 

It reorganized the food distribution system, 
strengthening the grain monopoly and introduc- 
ing fixed prices on all articles of necessity. 

It established county zemstvos and reformed 
the system of peasant administrative machinery. 

It promulgated a law for the improvement and 
development of cooperatives which is regarded as 
exemplary to this day. 

[ 124 ] 



WITHIN THE PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT 


It abolished the exile system and reformed the 
prison system. 

It restored the institution of the election of 
magistrates. 

Finally, the Provisional Government changed 
radically the administration of the Church, re- 
storing the complete independence of the Ortho- 
dox Church, and prepared also the convocation of 
a sobor, which had not been convened for two 
hundred years, and which in the autumn of 1917 
restored the patriarchate. 

The measures enumerated above were sufficient to 
occupy generations of normal political effort. The 
Provisional Government carried out these measures 
quickly and easily, despite the fact that it was burdened 
by the War, with all the involved problems of com- 
munications, the food supply and acute financial dif- 
ficulties. 

I I assert confidently that as soon as Russia emerges 
from the present period of Bolshevist reaction, she 
will inevitably resume the work of national reconstruc- 
tion on the basis of the political, juridical and social 
principles laid down in. the first two months of the 
Provisional Government.' 



CHAPTER IV 


THE GOVERNMENT CRISIS 

4ND so the Provisional Government, by means of 
legislative initiative, began to lay the founda- 
JL tions of the new democratic state. The work 
proceeded swiftly. Towards the end of the summer 
the new organic laws began to make themselves felt 
in the increasing systematization of the nation’s 
political life and the strengthening of the administra- 
tive apparatus. But while this work was in progress 
it was necessary to live, i.e., to command at the front, 
to restore order in the rear, to circumscribe and bring 
within the limits of the possible the flaming appetites 
of individual groups and classes. All these wanted 
all they could get — all liberty, all rights but no obliga- 
tions. 

This extremism, this lack of moderation in the de- 
mands made upon the government was to be explained 
by the fact that the population, never having par- 
ticipated in the government of the country and only 
now, for the first time, realizing its boundless power, 
believed that the government was omnipotent and that 
its resources were unlimited — now, as before, after 
three years of the wear and tear of war and of eco- 
nomic exhaustion. ^To stop the destructive sweep of 
the elemental revolutionary tempest it was necessary 
to reveal to the people all the wounds and ulcers of 
emaciated Russia, to rouse in the heart of every sol- 
dier, workman and peasant concern for Russia.* 

[12 6 ] 



THE GOVERNMENT CRISIS 

Not the egoistic instincts of capitalist Russia but the 
real interests of Russian democracy itself, just come 
into power, required the protection of industry from 
destructive experiments by the workers, the restora- 
tion of authority at the front and a struggle against 
anarchic sentiments in the village. The basic interests 
of Russia demanded from all citizens the greatest pos- 
sible self-control and the subordination of all one’s per- 
sonal, class and caste interests to the fundamental 
problem of the moment — the salvation of the country 
and of the state. 

Russia could escape from her insurmountable dif- 
ficulties only in the measure in which the people de- 
veloped the feeling of political discipline and political 
responsibility. In the development of this feeling in 
the masses, the government could play a great part, 
but only on the condition of growth and strengthening 
of confidence in the government. While an old, tradi- 
tional organ of authority, supporting itself upon a 
strong administrative apparatus, can continue to exist 
for a long time, even after having lost the confidence 
of the country, no neiw government can possibly afford 
such a luxury, in the absence of even the simplest and 
most primitive instruments of compulsion. In this 
case, obedience to the demands of the new government 
depends entirely upon the good will of the people, 
who follow the instructions of the government only to 
the extent to which it has their confidence, j’ The de- 
velopment of authority constituted the cardinal con- 
dition for Russia’s safe emergence from the crisis of 
war and revolution. 5 , 

>, However, the more intensively the organization and 
solidification of democratic organizations around the 
Soviets proceeded, the wider grew the psychological 

[ I2 7 3 



THE CATASTROPHE 


gulf between the revolutionary government and the 
revolutionary democracy in the Soviets. Every action 
of the government was regarded with suspicion by the 
leading circles of the Soviet and subjected to close ex- 
amination from the point of view of the interests of 
the proletariat and of the “revolutionary people.” 
The speeches and articles of the Soviet leaders, playing 
the role of a “benevolent” parliamentary opposition, 
in themselves contained nothing evil or criminal. 
Under normal conditions, with a parliament and a 
parliamentary majority to fall back upon, all this 
would have been even useful to the government. But 
the leaders who essayed the role of the opposition 
were in reality bound not to a minority but to a ma- 
jority in the country. And this majority, untried and 
inexperienced in any parliamentary theories and party 
doctrines and having no conception of parliamentary 
practice, interpreted literally all the sharp criticisms 
directed against the government by the self-appointed 
opponents. 1 The Soviet press sowed the wind of op- 
position and the government reaped the revolutionary 
storm. * 

This situation finally became impossible and in- 
tolerable. All the leading members of the Provisional 
Government understood well the source of the political 
tension and of the brewing crisis. ‘ They all understood 
that it was necessary to change the composition of the 
Provisional Government in a, manner corresponding to 
the real disposition of forces in the country.] Foreign 
Minister Miliukoff alone stuck to his own theory that 
all the power after the Revolution must belong to the 
representatives of those elements of Russian society 
which are termed, according to the nomenclature of 
socialist ideologists, the bourgeoisie. 

[ 128] 



THE GOVERNMENT CRISIS 


PAUL N. MILIUKOFF 

Miliukoff is one of the most striking and most bril- 
liant figures of intellectual Russia. His name is in- 
extricably bound with the last decades of the struggle 
against Czarism, to the history of which he added 
many brilliant pages. 

An historian by nature, Paul N. Miliukoff is by 
temperament a statesman of great ability. In his 
youth he followed the call of science, but his fighting 
instinct, rather than police persecution, prompted him 
to alter his career. In the end, instead of a venerable 
scientist, Russia received in him one of her greatest 
political leaders. But the very historical attributes 
of his mind taught Miliukoff to understand political 
events post factum, to look at them more or less from 
the perspective of distance. Miliukoff sees life more 
clearly through a book or an historical document. 
Having analyzed the past, he proceeds to draw cor- 
responding conclusions, in accordance with all the rules 
of political logic. Thus, having worked out his pro- 
gram, his strategic and tactical plan, Miliukoff pro- 
ceeds to carry it out with all the fervor of a political 
leader who is thoroughly convinced of the wisdom of 
his judgment, failing to take into consideration, how- 
ever, the circumstances of to-day and, what is fre- 
quently more important, of to-morrow. 

jThis lack of political intuition is not an irreparable 
fault under normal conditions in one’s political activity, 
but in periods when minutes mean years and months 
become equal to decades, when the link between to-day 
and to-morrow is broken, the clash between precise and 
well-ordered schemes of political activity and life rush- 
ing on at blinding speed becomes catastrophic.* 

P. N. Miliukoff came to the foreign office with a 

[ « 9 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


well conceived plan of foreign policy. In the autumn 
of 1916 this plan was still quite in place. But in 
March, 1917, it was of no more use or, rather, it be- 
came an historical document fit only for the archives. 

To put it more concretely : the trouble was not in the 
aims set by the first minister of foreign affairs of the 
Provisional Government but in the methods chosen by 
him in his struggle for their realization. The Russia 
that had to declaim daily about the Dardanelles, the 
cross on St. Sofia, and to whom it was necessary to 
speak constantly of war to a victorious conclusion — 
that Russia ceased to exist on March 12, 1917. The 
New Russia which had come to take her place, lived 
under a new war psychology and wanted to hear new 
war slogans and to set new war aims. 

The fundamental change in the language of her 
diplomacy and her diplomatic methods, incumbent at 
that time upon the Provisional Government, did not, 
of course, in any way prejudice Russia’s actions after 
victory. Victory has its own logic and creates in the 
victor its own psychology. In war, diplomacy is only 
one of the means of struggle, of war propaganda. It 
must speak in a language corresponding to the attitude 
and sentiments of the country at war. 

“You may speak as you like and what you like,” 
said Gutchkoff to Miliukoff at a meeting of the Pro- 
visional Government, “but say only that which bolsters 
up the fighting capacity of the front.” 

Even before that, early in April, on my way with 
Miliukoff to General Headquarters at Mohileff, I told 
him the same thing but in another way: 

“It is necessary now to change entirely the language 
of all our diplomatic notes and declarations.” 

This opinion of an “inexperienced diplomat” pro- 
voked the horror of the new minister and of his 

[ 130] 



THE GOVERNMENT CRISIS 

associate, Prince G. Trubetzkoy, a professional 
diplomat. 

My -words and the “opportunist diplomacy” of 
Gutchkoff were not a misfortune for Russia. } Its 
misfortune was MiliukofFs refusal to yield in form to 
tie new national psychology in all his declarations./ 

THE DISPUTE OVER WAR AIMS 

It would be of no interest to describe here in detail 
the casuistical dispute which continued for two months 
between Miliukoff and the Soviet, between the Rietch, 
organ of the Constitutional-Democratic party and the 
Izvestia, organ of the Soviet. The only interest this 
dispute has for us now lies not in its substance but in 
the consequences. At that time all those endless dis- 
cussions — whether or not Russia’s war aims had 
changed after the Revolution, whether or not Russia 
had in reality abandoned her claims to the Dardanelles, 
whether or not the Allies should be officially informed 
of the new war formula proclaimed solemnly to the 
Russian people by the Provisional Government on 
April ninth — reacted painfully on the nerves of the 
people, exhausted by the War, and provoked the great- 
est irritation. 1 The Provisional Government itself had 
found the proper way of presenting Russia’s war aims 
to the people in the following declaration : 

Leaving it entirely to the people, in close unity 
with the Allies, to decide all questions in connec- 
tion with the World War and its solution, the 
Provisional Government believes it to be its right 
and duty to declare immediately that the aim of 
Free Russians not domination over other peoples, 
not to deprive them of their national patrimony, 
not the forcible seizure of foreign territories, but 

[ 131 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


the establishment of a stable peace on the basis 
of the self-determination of peoples. The Rus- 
sian people do not seek the extension of their 
external power at the expense of other peoples, 
nor do they include in their aim the enslavement 
and humiliation of any other peoples. 

This formula, which served as the basis of President 
Wilson’s famous fourteen points, did, at any rate, 
reflect closely the idealistic aspirations of the Russian 
people as a whole for an early, just, democratic peace. 
At any rate, the Provisional Government’s war aims 
manifesto had nothing in common with the former 
declarations on this question, which Russia had been 
accustomed to hear from the lips of the Czar’s foreign 
minister, S. D. Sazonoff, and his successors during 
the War. 

Nevertheless, the unanimous desire of the Pro- 
visional Government not to aggravate the differences 
about Russia’s war aims, and to follow closely its 
solemn declaration, was not in any way reflected in 
Miliukoff’s personal conduct and particularly in his 
policy as editor of his official party organ, f Imme- 
diately upon the government’s declaration of its war 
aims, the Minister of Foreign Affairs let it.be known 
that this declaration, addressed to the Russian people, 
did not in any way bind him as minister of foreign 
affairs, in his policy. Miliukoff’s declaration, coming 
upon that of the government, which had succeeded in 
satisfying and placating the Soviet leaders, produced 
the impression of a bomb explosion. A veritable ver- 
bal war ensued. And not Miliukoff alone but the 
authority of the government itself, which had barely 
begun to consolidate itself, was the suffereri 

The outburst of hatred against Miliukoff in the 
Soviet revealed the entire deep psychological crisis of 

[ 132] 



THE GOVERNMENT CRISIS 


the government, the crisis of lack of confidence, which 
began brewing on the very first day of the Revolution, 
due to the contradiction between the composition of 
the government and the disposition of forces in the 
cpuntry, and which had to be eliminated if the coun- 
try was to escape new and extremely dangerous per- 
turbations. 

MY INTERVENTION 

1 MiliukofFs personal declarations were already being 
accepted in all revolutionary, democratic and socialist 
circles as evidence of the Provisional Government’s 
duplicity.) 

Because of my position in the Revolution and in 
the Provisional Government I happened to be in closer 
touch with the people and felt more keenly the heat- 
ing of the nation’s pulse than the other members of the 
government. 

I saw the helplessness of Gutchkoff, as minister of 
war and marine, in his efforts *to stem the tide of 
anarchy and dissolution in the army and navy. I saw 
the complete helplessness of the Minister of the In- 
terior, in his struggle to overcome the anarchy in the 
cities and villages without the support of the revolu- 
tionary social forces, il felt the decline of my own 
influence in the struggle against the Bolshevist dema- 
gogues because of the slippery, dualistic policy of the 
Soviet in making its confidence in the government con- 
ditional on this or that point of theoretical casuistry./ 

However valuable the principle of unity of the 
Provisional Government was, the government that was 
born in the first minutes of the Revolution, and much as 
it was important to keep all the original members of 
the cabinet in the government, because of their solemn 
oath to lead the country to the Constituent Assembly, 

[ 133 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


and however desirable MiliukofFs presence in the Pro- 
visional Government was, his continuance as minister 
of foreign affairs was becoming a real national danger. 
On the other hand, it was no longer possible to tolerate 
a situation in which the leaders of the revolutionary 
democracy in the Soviet, who had the advantage of 
tremendous moral authority, did not share direct re- 
sponsibility for the fate of the country. 

It became necessary to force developments. On 
April twdnty-fifth, late in the evening, I informed the 
press that the Provisional Government was preparing 
to consider the question of dispatching a note to the 
Allies, 'informing them of Russia’s new war aims, as 
proclaimed by the Provisional Government on April 
ninth. 

In some way my statement appeared in the press 
the next day in garbled form. Anticipating develop- 
ments, the newspapers announced that the government 
was already discussing the note to the Allies. 

Some of the members of the government had already 
decided to bring this question before the entire cabi- 
net.* However, no such discussion by the cabinet as a 
whole had yet taken place. 

For this reason the Minister of Foreign Affairs was 
quite justified in demanding from the Provisional Gov- 
ernment an official denial. On April twenty-seventh 
the newspapers reported: “The government has not 
discussed and is not preparing any note on the question 
of war aims.” 

This denial provoked a veritable storm. As was 

♦It was precisely in these difficult April days that the beginning 
was laid of that compact group within the Provisional Government 
which continued to exist up to the days of the Korniloff rebellion (in 
September) and which was termed the “Triumvirate” (Terestchenko- 
Nekrassoff-Kerensky). In April there were five of us, the others 
being Prince LvofE and Konovaloff. — A. K. 

[134] 




THE GOVERNMENT CRISIS 


foreseen, Miliukoff was compelled to agree imme- 
diately to the dispatch of a note to the Allies on the 
question of war aims. But now this act assumed an 
exaggerated importance in the eyes of public opinion, 
being regarded as having been forced by the Soviet 
and, what was worse, by the Petrograd garrison. 

THE FIRST MOVE OF THE BOLSHEVIKI 

Because of the acute situation, the war aims note to 
the Allies was edited by the entire cabinet.* We spent 
the whole night doing this in the office of Minister 
of War Gutchkoff, who was quite ill. The contents of 
the note should have satisfied the most violent critics 
of Miliukoff’s “imperialism.” f However, what de- 
veloped was a psychological break which cost us very 
dearly. The lack of confidence in and the hostility to 
Miliukoff in the Soviet and in the Democratic-Revolu- 
tionary circles in general was so great that these ele- 
ments were no longer able to consider and to grasp 
the contents of the note. Revolutionary hysteria 
began.j 

At a special meeting the Executive Committee of 
the Petrograd Soviet adopted a resolution of sharp 
protest against the new “imperialist” declaration of 
the Provisional Government, and Lenin, who had just 
arrived from Switzerland, via Germany, hastened to 
dispatch his lieutenants to the barracks. 

On May third the Finnish Guards Regiment ap- 
peared in the streets of Petrograd. Fully armed, with 


♦In these days was formed within the cabinet a special committee 
for preliminary consideration of all domestic and foreign questions 
relating to the conduct of the War. Those named on the committee 
were Prince Lvoff, Miliukoff, Terestchenko, Nekrassoff and myself.— 
A. K. 

[ 135 1 



THE CATASTROPHE 


red banners and placards denouncing the Provisional 
Government, particularly Miliukoff and Gutchkoff, the 
troops marched to the Maryinsky Palace. All over the 
city appeared armed detachments of workmen and 
soldiers. The government was at that moment not in 
the Maryinsky Palace, which was surrounded by the 
armed mob, but on the Moika, at the office of Gutch- 
koff. Here appeared General Korniloff, commander 
of the Petrograd military district, with the request for 
the government’s permission to call out troops for its 
protection. 

Unanimously the government declined any such pro- 
tection. We were all confident of the wisdom of our 
course and felt certain that the population would not 
permit any acts of violence against the government.-. 

And, in truth, on the same day appeared an explana- 
tion by the Soviet of Workmen’s and Soldiers’ Depu- 
ties declaring that it had not summoned the troops to 
demonstrate against the government. Previous to this, 
immense throngs had appeared in the streets in a great 
demonstration in honor of the Provisional Government 
and, particularly, of Miliukoff. 

This first mobilization of Bolshevist forces ended 
rather ludicrously for Lenin, but not without the sacri- 
fice of a number of lives as a result of the shooting in 
the streets.* The spilling of innocent blood had also 
a sobering effect on the leaders of the revolutionary 
democracy. The Soviet chieftains hastened to repu- 

♦In the evening there was shooting beneath the windows of the 
Ministry of Justice, where I had as guests several members of the 
French socialist delegation, who had come to Russia to urge the 
Russian workers to continue the War to a victorious end. Particu- 
larly patriotic, frequently with tears in his eyes, was Marcel Cachin, 
who subsequently became leader of the French Communist party. 
While in my office he did not seem to relish the too close shots of the 
revolutionary proletariat — A. K. 

[i3«] 



THE GOVERNMENT CRISIS 

diate the Bolshevist adventure. On agreement between 
those leaders of the Soviet who were loyal to the 
government and the latter, the government made pub- 
lic, on May fourth, an explanation of the Foreign Min- 
ister’s note of May first. 

THE SOVIET LEADERS ENTER THE GOVERNMENT 

As a matter of fact this explanation explained noth- 
ing, for there was nothing to explain. What it did 
was to emphasize points of importance from the point 
of view of popular psychology. The government 
pointed out that its note was sent by unanimous agree- 
ment of all the members of the government. In other 
words, the Soviets and army committees were informed 
that in this Miliukoff and Kerensky were in complete 
agreement. None of the ministers wished to repudiate 
solidarity with Miliukoff as a member of the Provi- 
sional Government, but the Ministry of Foreign Af- 
fairs had to be transferred, none the less, to some 
one else who would be able to conduct the nation’s 
foreign policy by methods more elastic. Such was 
the opinion of the entire Provisional Government, with 
one or two exceptions. The question of readjustment 
of portfolios within the government was. formally pre- 
sented by me. 

? On April fourth I demanded from the government, 
on threat of leaving the cabinet, the transfer of Miliu- 
koff to the Ministry of Education. At the same time 
the question was boldly raised of obtaining the imme- 
diate entrance into the government of Soviet leaders 
and leaders of the socialist parties. On May eighth 
the cabinet crisis became a fact. Rejecting the advice 
of the most prominent leaders of his own party (V. 
Nabokoff and M. Vinaver) , P. N. Miliukoff refused to' 

C 137] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


accept the portfolio of education and left the govern- 
ment. Simultaneously I sent a communication to the 
Temporary Committee of the Duma, the Soviet and 
the Central Committee of the Party of Social-Revolu- 
tionaries. In this communication I declared that 
henceforth the Provisional Government had to include 
not merely individual and casual representatives of 
the democracy, but men “chosen formally and directly 
by the organizations they represent.” ' I also made my 
continued participation in the government contingent 
upon the agreement of all Left parties following the 
inclusion of their representatives in the ministry. 

;My communication was only the final, formal step in 
the development of the struggle for a coalition govern- 
ment. From the very beginning of April the govern- 
ment had unanimously decided to obtain, at all costs, 
the inclusion in the cabinet of representatives of the 
Soviet and of the socialist democracy. Prince Lvoff 
announced this categorically at his conference with the 
executive committee of the Soviet on May fourth. 

It was not so easy, however, to bring this to real- 
ization. For not only were some of the liberals de- 
cidedly opposed to the participation in the “bourgeois” 
government of representatives of the so-called labor 
democracy, but this opposition was equally strong on 
the part of the orthodox Marxists in the Soviet. 
Shortly before the acute cabinet crisis, F. Dan, one 
of the most prominent leaders of the Mensheviki, had 
branded as “calumny” the very suggestion of the 
Soviet’s agreement to participate in the reconstruction 
of the government. 

“The supreme power is the Provisional Govern- 
ment,” he had declared, “while the revolutionary 
democracy, represented by the Soviet, makes its in- 
fluence on the progress of political life felt by means 

[ 138 ] 



THE GOVERNMENT CRISIS 


of uninterrupted organized pressure upon the govern- 
ment, and by control over it.” 

In fighting for a government coalition, so obviously 
essential to the interests of the country, those of us 
who never followed rigid party lines were thus com- 
pelled to break through the blockade of theoretical for- 
mulae and dead political blue prints piled up against us 
by the orthodox custodians of party doctrine, both in 
the socialist as well as in the bourgeois camp. Very 
soon the crisis grew more acute because of the depar- 
ture from the government of War Minister Gutchkoff. 
I will speak of him and of the causes of his resignation 
later, j At this point I will only say that with his de- 
parture the first cabinet of the Provisional Govern- 
ment concluded its existence. The romantic period of 
the Provisional Government came to an endJ 

On its departure, the first cabinet of the Provisional 
Government left behind for the nation a political testa- 
ment which still continues to stir one’s mind and heart. 
In drawing up the balance sheet of its short but ex- 
tremely difficult and intensive work, the government 
addressed to the nation the following words of warn- 
ing which were destined to become a terrible prophecy: 

The Provisional Government cannot conceal 
from the population the difficulties and obstacles 
it has found in its work. It cannot, also, refrain 
from mentioning the fact that these difficulties are 
increasing and are provoking serious alarm for 
the future. 

Called into life by a great popular movement, 
the Provisional Government regards itself as the 
agent and custodian of the people’s will. As the 
basis of political administration it has chosen not 
violence or compulsion but the voluntary subordi- 
nation of free citizens to the government they 

C 139] 



THE CATASTROPHE 

have themselves created. It seeks support not in 
physical but in moral forces. 

From the very beginning of its existence the 
Provisional Government has never violated these 
principles. It has not been responsible for the 
shedding of a single drop of the people’s blood 
nor has it sought to erect barriers of force against 
any current of social thought. 

Unfortunately and to the great peril of liberty, 
the building of new social buttresses for strength- 
ening the country is lagging far behind the proc- 
ess of dissolution called forth by the collapse 
of the old political order. Under these circum- 
stances, with the refusal of the government to 
resort to the old, compulsory methods of ad- 
ministration and other artificial means of raising 
the prestige of authority, the difficulty of the task 
confronting the Provisional Government becomes 
insurmountable. 

The elemental urge of individual groups and 
elements of the population, as represented by the 
politically least intelligent and least organized of 
these elements, to achieve their desires and obtain 
satisfaction of their demands by methods of direct 
action and seizure^ threatens to destroy internal 
unity and discipline, and to create fertile ground 
for acts of violence stimulating hostility to the 
new order, and for the cultivation of private 
interests and ambitions to the detriment of the 
general interest and of the fulfillment of civic 
duty. 

The Provisional Government considers it its 
duty to declare frankly and definitely that such 
a state of affairs makes administration of the 
country extremely difficult and threatens, in its 
consequence, to bring the country to internal dis- 
solution and defeat at the front. 

There rises before Russia the terrible vision of 
[ HO] 



THE GOVERNMENT CRISIS 


civil war and anarchy which will destroy liberty. 
The dark and tragic road so well known to his- 
tory, the one leading from liberty through civil 
conflict and anarchy to reaction and restoration of 
despotism, must not be that of the Russian people. 

But Russia did not escape this Road of Crucifixion, 
for, amidst the horrors of war and the outbursts of 
civil conflict, the people did not have enough will- 
power, patience and discipline to stand fast on the 
brink of the precipice. 

There was only one way of salvation — the union and 
cooperation of all the living, creative forces of the 
country, regardless of their political and social as- 
pirations ! 

In May, 1917, we of the Provisional Government 
succeeded in laying the foundations of such union. 
After some resistance the Soviet, by a considerable ma- 
jority (forty-one to nineteen), decided to accept the 
proposal of the Provisional Government for the par- 
ticipation of the Soviet in the government of the 
country. The old Soviet formula of conditional confi- 
dence, so destructive to the Provisional Government 
seeking to stand above party, was definitely abandoned. 
jVery soon the Soviet leaders and the leaders of the 
Left parties themselves, as members of the govern- 
ment, came under the blows of demagogic Bolshevist 
propaganda and of the impossible demands of the 
mobs run amuck/ They then realized the entire scope 
of their responsibility towards the future of Russia. 
Only on the morning of May eighteenth, with the for- 
mation of the new coalition Provisional Government, 
did it become possible for the government, for the first 
time since the Revolution, to govern, to demand and 
to command.', 



CHAPTER V 

RESTORATION OF THE FRONT 
THE OLD ARMY 

T HE entire nation was developing a new state 
and political consciousness. This was, above 
all, true of the army and navy. The first 
cabinet crisis of the Provisional Government, which 
resulted in the inclusion in the ministry of the new 
forces of the labor democracy, born of the Revolu- 
tion, produced simultaneously a fundamental change in 
the administration of the army. Instead of Alexander 
Gutchkoff, leader of the conservative bourgeoisie, I was 
obliged to become minister of war and marine.' 

But, in order to understand the events in the Russian 
army in the summer and autumn of 1917, it is necessary 
to have at least some conception of the psychology, 
the mental and spiritual attitude characterizing the 
Russian army before the outbreak of the Revolution. 

I have spoken already of the conditions in the Rus- 
sian army before the crash. All those who at that 
time had any opportunity to look behind the curtain 
of military secrecy, behind the screen of official reports 
and official optimism, to see the Russian army in its 
daily surroundings, were driven to despair by the dis- 
order and disorganization confronting their eyes. A 
few, like Gutchkoff, foresaw already at the beginning 
of the War the tragedy which would befall Russia., 
How could it be otherwise? Criminals and traitors 
like Sukhomlinoff, Minister of War, were in charge 

[ 142 ] 



RESTORATION OF THE FRONT 

of supplying the army. The Grand Duke Nicholas, 
cruel and incompetent, was commander-in-chief, while 
General Yanushkevitch, vengeful, intriguing and med- 
dling in politics, was his chief-of-staff. Following the 
Grand Duke, this evil genius of the first half of the 
War, came a whole string of incompetent commanders- 
in-chief, promoted to their positions because of the 
services they had rendered to the reaction, men who, 
having been absorbed by civil and administrative ac- 
tivities, had had no time or inclination to occupy 
themselves with army problems and were but dimly ac- 
quainted with the developments of twentieth-century 
military science. 

This high military oligarchy, surrounded by a crowd 
of careerists and adventurers, had in its hands the fate 
of the army and, consequently, of the country. These 
oligarchs and their satellites looked with contempt 
upon the millions of human beings whom they com- 
manded, regarding them as just so many “cattle in 
gray,” as just so much cannon fodder. They sneered 
at those honest officers who suffered painfully but pro- 
tested in vain against the tragic situation. Then came 
the debacle of the spring of 1915. It descended upon 
the army like a mighty thunderbolt, producing some 
cleansing effects. 

The Russian people paid for the crimes of the ruling 
oligarchy with millions in killed and wounded, with 
the loss of all frontier fortresses, of the whole of 
Poland, and of untold quantities of guns, rifles, muni- 
tions and supplies. People who curse the Revolution 
have forgottefn all this. They have forgotten the dis- 
integration and despair brought upon the army by 
Sukhomlinoff, filling the hearts of the troops with 
poison and hatred against the regime dominated by 
Rasputin. 


[ 143 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


A vast network of political espionage was part of 
the army organization under the rule of Sukhomlinoff. 
The entire officer corps was utilized for the purposes 
of special political departments devoted to spying upon 
the rank and file and the people as a whole. Police 
agents and agents-provocateur filled the ranks of the 
soldiers and sailors. Regimental commanders had to 
spy upon and denounce their subordinates. One hears 
a great deal about how the Revolution destroyed the 
authority of the officers and sowed discord in the army. 
This is downright falsehood.* 

The authority of the commanding body was killed 
long before the Revolution, even before the War, by 
the whole system of army administration. Not the 
Revolution but the autocracy, in deadly fear of losing 
its sole support, the army, transformed it into a police 
organization, making it impossible to develop relation- 
ships of friendship, respect and mutual confidence 
between officers and soldiers. 

One must be courageous enough not to close one’s 
eyes to the truth. Remember how the army and navy 
lived during those sinister years after the collapse of 
the revolutionary movement of 1905-6 and up until the 
crash of 1917. How could the nightmare of political 
espionage in the barracks develop a feeling of loyalty 
and confidence on the part of subordinates towards 
their superiors? Did not the honest and conscientious 
officers suffer and curse the role of police agents im- 
posed upon them against their will? I know thor- 
oughly from my own observation the inner life of the 
army during the ten years of the Stolypin-Rasputin 
reaction. 

During that decade I was called upon constantly to 
defend, as counsel, soldiers and sailors prosecuted for 
political offenses. As a member of the Duma I had to 

[ 144 ] 



RESTORATION OF THE FRONT 

read and listen to hundreds of tales of woe and com- 
plaints about the administration of the army and navy. 
These complaints came to me surreptitiously from all 
ranks and quarters of the military establishment. 

Under the exterior mask of consideration for the 
welfare of the troops, behind the screen of a pa- 
triarchal, feudal system there was being waged a silent 
struggle between the rank and file and their com- 
manders. Increasingly bitter grew the hatred of the 
plain soldiers until the last vestiges of authority were 
wiped out. 

The best men, who, according to the frequent testi- 
mony of their commanders, were most conscientious, 
most capable and most desirable for the military serv- 
ice, came inevitably under the influence of political 
propaganda and were quickly transformed into “un- 
trustworthy” political “criminals.” I remember one 
case before the Petrograd Military District Court in 
1908-9. The case involved a revolutionary organiza- 
tion in the First Artillery Brigade of the Guards. 
Some fifteen soldiers stood before the court, accused 
of reading forbidden literature, of political propa- 
ganda and of organizing a social-revolutionary circle in 
the brigade. The witnesses against the men were their 
own commanders, the best officers in the brigade, the 
most educated and the most conscientious. One of 
them, the commanding officer of the battery, said with 
bitter emphasis : “But they are our best soldiers !” Yet, 
it had been his duty to spy upon them, to tolerate 
patiently the intrusion of police agents in the life of 
the battery, to follow the development of political 
propaganda in order to obtain evidence against his best 
men. | The soldiers regarded their officers as agents 
of the police department, failing to realize that very 
frequently the officers resented and despised the es- 

[ 145 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 

pionage duties forced upon them by army regulations. 
When the verdict against the accused soldiers was 
pronounced, they tore off their shoulder straps and 
threw them into the faces of the judges. 

And what was the situation in the fleet, particularly 
in the Baltic Fleet, where the level of culture was 
higher than in the army? The officers’ quarters and 
the sailors’ holds were two enemy camps, always at 
war with each other, always suspicious of one another. 
Scarcely a year went by without some disturbances on 
one vessel or another, or without discovery of some 
political propaganda. Prosecutions inevitably fol- 
lowed, in the course of which the officers were always 
witnesses against the men. With savage joy and sat- 
isfaction did the sailors after the Revolution go 
through the archives of the fleet, extracting the records 
of all past sins of their officers, revealing their espion- 
age upon the crews and the secret service roles of the 
respective officers and commanders of the fleet. “How 
could we tolerate that officer!” was the repeated 
statement made to me by men in the fleet after the 
Revolution. “It was due to him that so many of our 
people went into penal servitude!” 

jin justice, however, it must be said that few of the 
officers took up the work of spies voluntarily.* The 
great majority did not go beyond the minimum duty re- 
quired of them by the authorities with regard to spying 
on their subordinates, and that with great aversion. 
They could not refuse or did not have the courage not 
to fulfill the least measure of what was required of 
them in this connection, because they themselves were 
surrounded on all sides by espionage and supervision. 

The high command in the army and navy was quite 
ready to pardon almost any offense on the part of 
officers, except the one deadly sin of political “untrust- 

[146] 



RESTORATION OF THE FRONT 


worthiness.” In many cases this meant expulsion from 
the army and navy. To incur the suspicion of untrust- 
worthiness one had only to show sympathy with such 
moderate political parties as the Constitutional- 
Democrats. i Suspicion of sympathy with parties like the 
Social-Revolutionaries or Social-Democrats was, of 
course, downright high treason.; To show the slightest 
liberal inclination meant falling into the category of a 
dangerous suspect. Even to a civilian it was aggravat- 
ing to see how the police department made itself at 
home in the army and navy, assuming the role of 
supervisor and giving orders. 

Many communications from the police department 
and the local gendarmerie fell into my hands, inform- 
ing commanders in the army and fleet that such and 
such a soldier was in the employ of the political secret 
service. The commander in question was instructed not 
to interfere with the work of such “collaborators” 
among his subordinates and men. Just before the 
Revolution, in the winter of 1916, there was a trial 
before the Petrograd Admiralty Court, involving a 
Social-Democratic organization in the Baltic Fleet. 

The political police interfered brazenly in the inner 
life of the army and navy, undermining mercilessly all 
normal relations between officers and men and. destroy- 
ing authority and discipline. 

The officer was quite helpless in the matter. He had 
no ideas wherewith to oppose extreme political propa- 
ganda, because he had been taught to defend only of- 
ficial policy, hateful to the rank and file and frequently 
to the officer himself. He could not combat the nefa- 
rious activity of the political police because he himself 
was in its tentacles and often an unwilling and uncon- 
scious tool in its hands. The heartless initiation into 
the service ; the breaking-in, as Gutchkoff characterized 

C 147] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


it; the cold, lifeless official patriotism demanded by the 
government in its insistence bn obedience to the Czar- 
ist trinity of “absolutism, orthodoxy, nationality” ; the 
utter defenselessness of the weak before the strong — 
such was the system governing the life of the army and 
navy in 1914. Nowhere in Russia were the remains of 
serfdom more conspicuous than in the daily life in the 
army barracks. This serfdom persisted not only in 
the attitude and contact of the aristocratic officer class 
towards the good and simple peasant soldier, not only 
in the lade of responsibility on the part of the officers 
with regard to the plain human dignity and self-respect 
of the men, who were compelled to tolerate physical 
punishment without protest, but in the entire blind code 
of brutal discipline and obedience, in the absence of any 
invigorating idea of national service. This idea was 
replaced by the detested empty formula, “for the Czar, 
the Faith and the Fatherland.” The general concep- 
tion of the service prevalent everywhere was one of a 
difficult, uninteresting and detestable task. The com- 
manding bodies were marked by an astonishing absence 
of any feeling of personal responsibility. The result 
was an icy offirialdom and soulless bureaucracy. 

In many respects the army organization was an 
actual fragment of the Russia of serfdom. Its duty 
throughout the century-old fight between the people and 
Czarism had been, first and foremost, to defend the 
existing regime, without reasoning or consideration. 
Nowhere were men of independent thought and action 
feared more than in the army, especially in the com- 
manding body. 

“This man is guilty — he has tried to think,” Nicholas 
I is said to have remarked about one of the De- 
cembrists. This aphorism epitomizes the attitude of 
the autocracy towards the army officer. Only his 

[148] 



RESTORATION OF THE FRONT 


body was wanted, not his brain. General Vannovsky, 
favorite war minister of Alexander III, was thoroughly 
convinced that education was bad for the army. Him- 
self a man of no education, it was his deliberate policy 
to give no promotions to officers of academic training.' 

Ignorance and blind devotion at the top ; ignorance 
and automatic obedience! at the bottom — that was the 
autocracy’s conception of an ideal army. 1 . 

Of course, such an ideal was even more utopian and 
unattainable than any. ill considered socialist schemes. 
It was good to dream about, to strive for, but the more 
one strove for it, the more energetically one sought to 
realize it, the more unattainable it became. The more 
severe and the more merciless the autocracy was in its 
efforts to exterminate all the vital, living elements in 
the army, the greater grew the discontent and “dis- 
loyalty” in army circles. Military objectives were 
relegated more and more to the background with each 
year. More and more the army was carried away in 
its life and activity by the inner political struggle. 
“The army must be kept outside of politics,” was the 
repeated assertion of the Czarist war ministers, but 
in reality the army was not kept outside of politics 
any more than was the school system, which was sur- 
rendered to the mercies of reactionary political wire- 
pulling and intrigue. It is not very far from the truth 
to say that there was nothing but politics in the army. 
•The army was intended to be the chief rampart of the 
autocracy. Was this not politics? Was not every of- 
ficer duty bound to inspire the rank and file with a 
definite political creed? Was he not himself inspired 
from earliest childhood, from the elementary classes 
of the military school to his exit from the military 
academy with a definite, primitive political creed? N 

[ 149 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 

We schoolboys in the gymnasiums and other “civil- 
ian” schools also had to swallow large doses of politics, 
the prescribed quantity of official patriotism. Our 
teachers and mentors dealt it out to us in a rather per- 
functory, desultory manner, for the sake of going 
through the motions to please the authorities. There 
was not time enough to steep our minds and souls in 
government politics, for we spent the greater part of 
the day outside the school walls, under more salutary 
influences. It was otherwise, however, with our 
brothers and chums who entered the Cadet Corps. 

For a period of from seven to ten years they fell into 
an atmosphere of darkness, where they were trans- 
formed into a special species of man. My childhood 
and youth were spent in close contact with the officer 
milieu. My closest chum entered the Cadet Corps 
when very young. We met every year on our vaca- 
tions. He had been an able, well informed, independ- 
ent young man. Yet we, his comrades who remained 
free, observed from year to year the effects of military 
education upon his soul. Mutual misunderstanding 
and estrangement developed between us. The cause 
was not that he had different manuals and books, but 
in the inevitable estrangement of every cadet from the 
life that pulsated outside the walls of his military 
school, in the artificial surroundings in which he lived 
ten months out of the year, in the slow, systematic proc- 
ess of inoculating him with a distinct set of ideas and 
conceptions intended to become imperceptibly part of 
the future officer’s nature and to insure him forever 
against undesirable political influences. 1 In the military 
hothouses, where a special species of man was culti- 
vated to meet the special needs of the autocracy, the 
official gardeners had to produce an ideal compound 
of a military specialist, honest and faithful to his duty, 

[150] 



RESTORATION OF THE FRONT 

devoted to the Czar, but hostile to the political dreams, 
hopes and aspirations of civilian Russia. ? 

The conceptions of civic duty, honor, fatherland, 
state, service, demanded from the future officer were 
quite different from those of the rest of Russia. After 
some ten years of such hothouse training and education 
the officer was “ready.” He went into some army unit, 
quite ignorant of the rest of Russia, quite incapable 
of adapting himself outside the military surroundings 
in which he had been brought up. In this way was 
part of Russia’s youth tom away from its comrades to 
become the defense of the autocracy against “the enemy 
within.” 

I Such an enemy was particularly the Russian intel- 
ligentsia, whose ranks were filled with the brothers 
and chums of the very same young men who became the 
buttresses of the Czar and the fatherland. In time, a 
deep gulf developed between members of the same 
class or circle, only because some went in for a military 
career while others chose civilian occupations, because 
some became officers and others students. 

I remember the frequent disputes our company of 
military young men and students fell into the moment 
we began to speak of matters political. Immediately 
we began to speak different tongues. We ceased to 
understand each other, we grew irritated, we offended 
each other, because the things sacred to some were the 
incarnation of evil to others. I am convinced that all 
of us loved Russia equally well and wished her noth- 
ing but good. But our interpretations of Russia were 
as different as were our conceptions of Russia’s wel- 
fare and Russia’s good, so that involuntarily we saw 
in each other Russia’s enemies, the enemies of the 
Russian people. 

Yes, it was a terrible, fratricidal enmity and hatred I 

1 * 5*1 



THE CATASTROPHE 


Particularly deep, nay, bottomless grew the gulf be- 
tween military and civil Russia, between the military 
and civil intelligentsia, during the period of the Russo- 
Japanese War and the revolutionary movement that 
followed upon it. 

We appeared then on opposite sides of the barricade. 
The vast majority of the officers were still with the 
autocracy or remained quite neutral in the political 
struggle, performing mechanically their duty of defend- 
ing the throne against the inner foe. 

The rest of Russia, civil, cultured Russia, the entire 
intelligentsia plunged into the struggle of liberation. 
In the army, or rather in the officers, who then saved 
the autocracy, thus delaying the death agony of the 
old regime for another twelve years, we saw the worst 
enemies of the people, of the greatness, welfare and 
future of the country. There were many, too many, 
officers at that time who believed candidly that the 
students, the intelligentsia in general, the rebellious 
workers, and the peasants who were destroying and 
burning the landed estates, were the cause of all of 
Russia’s misfortunes. Yes, a great deal of water had 
gone over the dam since December 17, 1825, when a 
group of brave Guard officers, the “Decembrists,” 
standing quite alone in the feudal Russia of that epoch, 
appeared on the Senate Square in Petrograd and raised 
the banner of revolt against the autocracy, in the name 
of liberty and constitutional government. At that time 
the soldier masses looked on indifferently upon the 
tragic fate that befell those great sons of the nobility, 
those early forerunners of the liberation movement, 
who perished so gladly and so willingly for the cause 
of freedom. (Eighty years later, in 190 5, the army 
officers alone, and particularly the Guard officers, re- 
mained faithful to the autocracy to the end* They 

[ 152 ] 



RESTORATION OF THE FRONT 

failed to recognize in the masses of the students and 
workers they shot down the direct heirs and descend- 
ants of the Decembrists. 

But the year 1905 was a turning point in the life of 
the army, and particularly in the life of the army of- 
ficers. For" the first time military and civil Russia met 
face to face and tried to speak with each other. At 
first the pourparlers served only to accentuate the 
mutual enmity, but both sides were deeply shaken by 
the events. The Revolution, although drowned in 
blood, compelled people to think and to look deeper 
into the ills and sufferings of Russia. The officers who 
survived the Russo-Japanese War began to ponder 
upon what had happened. They began to think and to 
understand. Here and there officers participated and 
even played a leading part in the military mutinies of 
1905-6. 

Time passed. Russia began to change. 

■The ideas of liberty and emancipation sown in the 
ydars 1905-6 among the masses began to show re- 
sults. The new conscripts drawn into the army were 
quite different from those who preceded them. The 
inner foe penetrated deeper and deeper into the army 
ranks.] The ancient patriarchal order in the army 
gave way more and more to one of frank police sur- 
veillance. The forces of life beating upon the army 
from all sides cracked the traditional creed followed 
by the officer class, based upon the three pillars of 
“Absolutism, Orthodoxy, Nationality.” 

Parallel with the political fermentation and tempests 
of the last decade of the autocracy (1906-16) there 
was in progress within the ranks of the officers a con- 
cealed but stubborn process of political thought. A 
new consciousness developed. The feeling of discon- 
tent gained momentum with the reestimation of many 

[ 153 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


values. Many began to burn what but yesterday they 
had worshiped, and were ready to worship that which 
but yesterday they had burned. The blind began to 
see and the deaf to hear. Rasputin and his clique 
did more to destroy the old psychology of loyalty of 
the officers than did thousands of revolutionary proc- 
lamations and leaflets. 

On the other hand, the lesson of the Russo-Japanese 
War was not without effect. A whole school of non- 
conformists arose, who gave battle to the old military 
hierarchy, striving to do away with the musty tradi- 
tions and obsolete methods of army organization which 
had been in vogue since the conquest of the Crimea. 
But here, too, in the domain of pure military technique, 
the young reformers met with obstacles which com- 
pelled them to think not of military problems alone but 
also of politics. In such manner did the process of 
awakening in the army proceed until the honest, con- 
scientious elements of the officer class were confronted 
clearly by the alternative : the autocracy or Russia. 

Finally, came the War of 1914. The weakness and 
inadequacy of the entire military establishment mani- 
fested itself without delay. The terrible reality of the 
situation became immediately apparent. The relation 
between the corrupt and inefficient army system and 
the autocracy was revealed with tragic clarity to every 
onei 

On the battlefields of Galicia, under the walls of 
Warsaw, Brest, Kovno, in the Mazurian Lakes in 
East Prussia, the Romanoff dynasty perished, killed by 
the bullets of German machine guns striking the hearts 
of Russian officers and troops. 

Gutchkoff was not alone when in 1915 he definitely 
turned revolutionist. The majority of Russia’s officers 
shared his sentiments or were ready for revolution by 

[ 154 ] 



RESTORATION OF THE FRONT 


that time. The dream of generations of the Russian 
intelligentsia found realization — in the army. The 
whole army united with the people in a common love 
and a common hatred. 

Alas, it was too late I In the army itself there had 
accumulated too many painful emotions of wrath and 
hatred on the part of the lower against the upper 
ranks and, as usual, the crimes of the system had to 
be expiated by those who were least guilty. 

The soldier in the trenches, who only the day be- 
fore had been flogged, beaten and humiliated, could 
not understand the real causes of his suffering. He 
could not look beyond his immediate superiors, and 
sought to find the culprits close at hand. The more 
politically conscious soldier could not forget the recent 
devotion of his chiefs to the autocracy, for which his 
comrades suspected or accused of “disloyalty” had 
paid so dearly. And all these individual sensations 
were overshadowed by a common distrust of the 
“master,” which seized the masses the day after the 
Revolution. To the mind of the average soldier the 
“master” was, of course, the officer. 

I have tried purposely to restore in some detail the 
psychology of officers and soldiers under the old regime 
and upon the outbreak of the Revolution, because no 
one who does not know or has forgotten the gulf that 
only so recently had separated civil and military 
Russia, who has forgotten the relations between the 
lowelr and upper ranks as late as January, 1917, can 
understand the main cause of the horrible tragedy 
which developed in the army and navy with the down- 
fall of the autocracy. 

The old officers, who are now so embittered and 
inclined to curse the Revolution and every one and 
everything concerned with it, should find the moral 

C 155 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 

courage to look into the past without prejudice and 
try to find there the answer to the terrible question — 
“Why?” I do not refer to the officers who came into 
the army during the War. I speak of the officer class 
that emanated from the old Cadet Corps. 

No one able to think even a little can fail to under- 
stand that the officers who suffered so grievously from 
the anarchy in the Revolution were, perhaps, least to 
be blamed for the dark aspects of the soldier’s life 
under the autocracy. The officers themselves could 
not escape from the clutches of the system and rebuild 
the army in accordance with their own ideas. Brought 
up from childhood under the old system of education 
and amidst their peculiar surroundings and traditions, 
they had carried out orders from above passively, try- 
ing to think as little as possible when they felt that 
these orders were in contradiction with the higher 
duties of efficiency and honor. All this is true. But 
the officers themselves should realize how it came to 
pass that the soldier sought to express his satisfaction 
with the downfall of the system not in mere abstract 
realization but in revenge upon his nearest chiefs. 
What is needed is a little more analysis, a little more 
broadmindedness and a little self-criticism. One can- 
not ascribe everything to the ill will of separate in- 
dividuals, one cannot explain everything by pointing 
to the propaganda which turned the soldiers against 
the officers. All this did exist, but it was not the main 
thing, not even the secondary factor. 5 The main 
cause lay in the past, in the whole feudal army system, 
in the cruel, artificial relations between the officers 
and men. The main cause of the human tragedy in 
the army after the Revolution must be sought in th? 
barrack interiors as they existed before the Revolution! 

And also: One must not idealize that past, as 

C *56 3 



RESTORATION OF THE FRONT 


many are now inclined to do. It was a sad, an ac- 
cursed past. Unfortunately, the masses do not de- 
liberate. They cannot grasp and explain quickly new 
phenomena, especially if old forms, old appearances 
remain, as they necessarily must. The masses of the 
army rank and file had too long been accustomed to 
see in the officer the symbol of the system of oppres- 
sion, and they could not, therefore, suppress imme- 
diately the instinctive desire for a bloody sequel. Still, 
in the army this desire expressed itself in comparatively 
weak form. In the army the officer suffered rather 
because he was a noble, or a bourgeois, than because he 
was an officer. 

The contrary was true in the fleet. And the ex- 
planation of this lies not in the fact that the navy 
crews were politically more class conscious than the 
army masses, nor in the fact that in a revolution the 
fleet goes to greater extremes than the army (it is 
sufficient to recall the events in the fleet during the 
great French Revolution and the revolutions in Russia 
and Germany). No, I attribute the particularly dif- 
ficult position of the officers in the fleet, especially in 
the Baltic Fleet, to the fact that contrary to the situa- 
tion in the army, the entire naval officer corps re- 
mained almost intact throughout the War. The regu- 
lar officer corps in the army was very quickly diluted 
in the mass of reserve and militia officers, and it melted 
away still quicker in the fire of the bloody battles early 
in the War. The active campaigning, the stream of 
new impressions constantly flowing into the minds of 
the troops contributed to the eradication of old griev- 
ances in the hearts of many soldiers. The fleet re- 
mained almost untouched and unchanged by the War. 
With the exception of minor shifts in personnel and 
the presence of naval reservists called into service with 

[ 157 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


the outbreak of the War, few changes occurred. When 
the thunderbolt of revolution struck in the navy there 
was no place for people to go, where to hide from old, 
painful questions, from old grievances and the peril 
of long-postponed reckonings. On the contrary, with 
each succeeding hour and each succeeding day every- 
thing served to recall to mind the bitter past. ;I am 
quite certain that had not the general crash come on 
March twelfth there would have been a great mutiny 
in the fleet before the end of the summer. - The entire 
atmosphere in the fleet, so far as the men were con- 
cerned, was surcharged with electricity. If in the army 
there remained some semblance of authority and dis- 
cipline,;' in the navy these disappeared altogether im- 
mediately upon the collapse of the old regime, j If in 
the army the commanders and officers were put merely 
under control, in the navy they were taken at once by 
the crews under open or secret suspicion. The officers’ 
quarters were immediately transformed into prison 
cells by the crew committees. 

A navy officer said to me : 

“On the morning of the 1 Revolution I summoned 
my men, informed them of the upheaval, declared that 
the officers had joined the Revolution and had placed 
themselves under the authority of the Temporary 
Committee of the Duma, and requested the men to do 
likewise. The men replied: ‘All right, as you com- 
mand, your honor.’ On the same day, in the evening, 
the crews summoned me, demanded the surrender of 
my sword, declared their allegiance to the Soviet of 
Workmen and Soldiers and proclaimed the authority 
of their own committee on the ship.” 

All this, accompanied by the slaughter of officers, 
took place on March thirteenth or fourteenth, before 
the issuance of the much discussed “Order No. I.” 

[ 158 ] 



RESTORATION OF THE FRONT 

Generally speaking, the developments in the Baltic 
Fleet illustrate well the spontaneity of the movement 
against the officers. Here everything happened before 
any instructions or directions could arrive from any 
revolutionary center in Petrograd. : It is necessary, once 
and for all, to put an end to the silly legend that the 
collapse of authority and discipline in the army and 
navy, with all its tragic accompaniments, followed upon 
some signal from the Soviet of Workmen and Soldiers 
or from me personally in agreement with the Soviet. 
All this is nonsense and invention! 

The anarchy in the army was already a fact when 
the Provisional Government assumed power on March 
sixteenth. This was true also of the entire country. 
The Provisional Government did not create the 
anarchy, but had only to deal with its consequences. 
Neither did the Soviet of Workmen and Soldiers play 
any conscious part in fomenting the disintegration or 
in the movement against the officers. I emphasize the 
word “conscious” because the Soviet did make some 
fatal mistakes, due, however, to the conditions prevail- 
ing in the Petrograd garrison in the first days of the 
Revolution, mistakes which had grievous repercussions 
in the entire army. 

I have already mentioned these conditions in pass- 
ing, in my description of the first four days of the 
Revolution. I wish now to come back to them in de- 
tail. I spoke of the disappearance of all officers from 
the barracks in Petrograd with the outbreak of the 
garrison’s revolt. I want to show now how this fact 
was reflected in the consciousness and action of all the 
revolutionary leaders in the Tauride Palace, from Rod- 
zianko to Stekloff inclusively. One must not forget 
that although the Revolution destroyed Czarism with- 

[ 159 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 

out difficulty and without serious resistance, the actual 
difficulties and possibilities of the situation could not 
have been known to us in the Tauride Palace on that 
day of March twelfth, when everything was in a state 
of flux and uncertainty. It was impossible for us under 
the circumstances to have any clear conception of the 
progress and probable outcome of the struggle. We 
even did not know what was happening outside of 
Petrograd, nor were we certain of whether the capital 
itself was ours. We had no idea of the plans of the 
old government, nor had we any positive knowledge 
of the attitude of the officers, especially those in the 
rear. Nor did we have any means of finding out what 
the disappearance of the commanding body of the 
Petrograd garrison meant. Was it fear, perplexity, 
a passive withdrawal from the scene in watchful wait- 
ing upon developments, or was it something worse ? 

The entire Tauride Palace did not trust the Petro- 
grad officers in the first moment of the Revolution. 
This is a positive historical fact. 

Note the spirit and contents of orders and declara- 
tions issued by men belonging to that wing of the 
Revolution quite opposite to the one occupied by the 
Soviet. For instance, on March twelfth, Rodzianko 
issued instructions “to the officers of the Petrograd 
garrison and to all officers now in Petrograd,” calling 
upon them to report, not later than March fifteenth, 
to the Military Commission of the Duma “to obtain 
passports for unrestricted movement, to register and 
to carry out the orders of the Commission with regard 
to the organization of the troops who have joined 
the people’s representatives for the defense of the 
metropolis.” 

Rodzianko’ s instructions continued: 

[ 160] 



RESTORATION OF THE FRONT 


Any delay in the appearance of officers •will un- 
avoidably prejudice the interests of the officer 
class. At this moment, in the face of the enemy 
striking at the very heart of Russia and ready to 
take advantage of her momentary weakness, it is 
urgently necessary to make all efforts to restore 
the organization of all military units. The blood 
of our comrades who have fallen in the past two 
and a half years of the War places a duty upon 
us. Gentlemen officers do not lose a single min- 
ute of precious time. 

On the same day appeared the declaration of Colonel 
Engelhardt, temporary commander of the Petrograd 
garrison, which ran as follows: 

Owing to rumors alleging that officers in the 
regiments are depriving the soldiers of arms, 
which rumors, after investigation in two regi- 
ments, have proven groundless, the commander 
of the Petrograd garrison hereby declares that 
the most decisive measures will be taken to pre- 
vent such action by officers, not excluding the 
execution of those guilty. 

“order NO. i” 

It was at this very time of complete absence of au- 
thority in the Petrograd garrison that there appeared 
the famous “Order No. i,” which has created so much 
stormy discussion. It remains to this day one of the 
chief points of accusation on the part of the Russian 
reactionaries against the Provisional Government. 
“Order No. i,” they maintain, promulgated allegedly 
by the government, destroyed the army. i 
The truth of the matter is as follows : 

Late in the evening, March fourteenth, a delegation 
[ 161 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


of the newly formed soldiers’ section of the Petrograd 
Soviet appeared before the aforementioned Colonel 
Engelhardt, a colonel of the General Staff and a mem- 
ber of the Duma, at the office of the Military Commis- 
sion of the Duma. The soldier delegates requested 
the colonel to collaborate with them in formulating 
an order to the tens of thousands of troops of the 
Petrograd garrison, who had no idea of how to con- 
duct themselves, having been deprived suddenly of 
their commanders. 

Following consultation with some members of the 
Military Commission, Colonel Engelhardt refused to 
take a hand in drafting the order, it being his opinion 
that the first order to the troops of the Petrograd 
military district should be left to the new minister of 
war, who, he believed, was to assume his duties within 
a day or two. 

Engelhardt’s refusal produced a vexing impression 
upon the soldier delegates. They left him with words 
of defiance: “Very well, if you refuse, we’ll draft it 
ourselves.” 

On the same night, in the tense atmosphere of the 
Tauride Palace, “Order No. i” was drawn up at a 
casual meeting of the Soviet. In the morning it was 
published. This hothouse product of the soldier mind, 
created in cooperation with some civilian members of 
the Soviet, who merely edited the grammar of the 
soldiers’ demands, was from a military point of view 
not only unsuccessful but also detrimental. Neverthe- 
less, it corresponded to the Petrograd atmosphere of 
the moment. So far as the officers were concerned it 
was considerably milder than the aforementioned order 
threatening executions issued by Colonel Engelhardt, 
chairman of the Military Commission of the Duma, a 

[rda] 



RESTORATION OF THE FRONT 


political figure belonging to the most conservative wing 
of the revolutionary upheaval. 

Here is the text of “Order No. i”: 

March 14, 1917. To the garrison of the 
Petrograd Military Police. To all soldiers of the 
Guards, the army, the artillery, and to the navy, 
for immediate and precise execution, and for the 
information of the workers of Petrograd: 

1. All companies, battalions, regiments, artil- 
lery parks, batteries and individual units of all 
categories and on vessels of the navy are to choose 
committees of elected representatives from the 
rank and file of the aforementioned military units. 

2. All military units which have not yet chosen 
representatives to the Soviet of Workmen’s Dep- 
uties are to do so, on the basis of one representa- 
tive for each company, who is to appear with a 
written certificate in the Duma building, at ten 
o’clock in the morning, March seventeenth. 

3. In all their political activities military units 
are to regard themselves as subordinate to the 
Soviet of Workmen’s and Soldiers’ Deputies and 
to their respective committees. 

4. All kinds of arms, such as rifles, guns, 
armored automobiles, etc., must remain in the 
hands and under the control of district and bat- 
talion committees and must under lio circum- 
stances be placed at the disposal of officers, even 
upon their demand. 

5. In the execution of their service duties and 
in their respective units, soldiets must maintain 
the strictest military discipline, but outside the 
service, in their political, civic and private life, 
soldiers cannot in any way be restricted in their 
rights, such as are enjoyed by citizens. 

6. Simultaneously, all titles in addressing of- 
ficers are abolished, such as “Your Excellency,” 

C 163] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


“Your Honor,” etc., being substituted by the 
salutation: “Mr. General,” “Mr. Colonel,” etc. 
Impolite and rough behavior towards soldiers on 
the part of officers of all ranks, including the 
salutation “thou,” is forbidden, and all violations 
of this, as well as all misunderstandings between 
officers and soldiers are to be brought by the lat- 
ter to the attention of the company committees. 

The present order is to be read to all com- 
panies, battalions, regiments, crews, batteries and 
other commands. 

(Signed) Petrograd Soviet of 
Workmen's and Soldiers’ Deputies 

This complete text of the order destroys, first of all, 
the legend concerning the participation of the Pro- 
visional Government in its formulation, for the 
Provisional Government was formed on the night of 
March fifteenth, whereas the order was written on the 
night of March fourteenth. Second, as will be seen 
from the heading of the order, it applied exclusively 
to the troops of the Petrograd garrison, and, finally, 
the order contains no reference whatever to the right 
of the soldiers to “choose” their commanders, but, on 
the contrary, it summons the soldiers to the “strictest 
military discipline” while on duty. 

So far as the newly proclaimed civil rights of the 
soldiers are concerned, the order was likewise in har- 
mony with the spirit of the first days of the Revolu- 
tion. In proof it is only necessary to cite the eighth 
point of the manifesto issued by the Provisional Gov- 
ernment upon its assumption of office. This mani- 
festo, representing the basic program of the new gov- 
ernment, was signed by Rodzianko as president of the 
Duma, Premier Lvoff and all the ministers. The point 
in question read: 


[ 164] 



RESTORATION OF THE FRONT 


“Hand in hand with the preservation of the strictest 
military discipline in the ranks and in the exercise of 
military duty, all limitations circumscribing the enjoy- 
ment of civil rights by soldiers are abolished.” 

Even the creation of elected committees and their 
representation in the Soviet was not the result of any 
one’s personal or party notions, but was the expression 
of the general attitude, cropping up at times in quar- 
ters where it was most unexpected. The same Colonel 
Engelhardt in his first communication to the garrison 
wrote : 

“It is suggested to all troops of the Petrograd gar- 
rison to introduce immediately in their units a system 
based on new principles. Each unit is to delegate to 
the Military Commission of the Duma one representa- 
tive from the officers and men, accompanied by cer- 
tification of his identity.” 

I have just mentioned that in the Baltic Fleet the 
committees appeared before the promulgation and, at 
any rate, before the receipt at Helsingfors of “Order 
No. i.” On the Rumanian Front, very distant from 
Petrograd, there developed a circumstance even more 
characteristic, proving vividly that the Russian army, 
after the destruction of the old administrative ap- 
paratus, had to pass inevitably through some sort of a 
new phase on the basis of “new principles.” There, 
the commander of the sixth army, General Tsurikoff, 
without awaiting instructions from Petrograd, intro- 
duced the committee system among the troops and 
telegraphed to the authorities in the capital urging the 
desirability of the measure, in the light of circum- 
stances. 

But the historical inevitability of developments does 
not, of course, affect the attitude assumed towards 
them by contemporaries. A report from General 

[ 165 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


Alexeyeff, from General Headquarters, received on 
the second or third day of the life of the Provisional 
Government, to the effect that “Order No. i” (wired 
to the front by persons whose identity has never been 
discovered) was creating great mischief all along the 
line, provoked an immediate reaction in the cabinet. 

On March nineteenth, Premier Lvoff and War Min- 
ister Gutchkoff published a proclamation to the army, 
making it clear that “Order No. i” was not meant for 
the army as a whole and that the troops must give 
obedience only to the orders and instructions of their 
commanders, acting under the authority of the new 
government. A similar communication was addressed 
to the army by the Petrograd Soviet, signed by Vice- 
President Skobeleff, a Social-Democrat, and counter- 
signed by Gutchkoff. In addition, the Petrograd Soviet 
promulgated the so-called “Order No. 2,” which 
stated clearly that the Soviet had issued no instructions 
regarding the election of officers and that “Order No. 
1,” promulgated previous to the formation of the 
Provisional Government, concerned only the troops 
of the Petrograd district. Such are the facts. 

The legend concerning “Order No. 1,” formed and 
circulated subsequently, is simply evidence of how peo- 
ple, stricken and shaken by extraordinary events, can- 
not refrain from trying to find concrete and detachable 
sources of their misfortunes. To them the whole 
tragic history of the disintegration of the old, imperial 
Russian army is simply the result of some one’s deliber- 
ate plans, of the mischief and intrigues — of the Soviet, 
the Provisional Government, Kerensky, etc. 



CHAPTER FI 

DISSOLUTION OF THE ARMY 

J UST as the old administrative machinery disap- 
peared suddenly, unexpectedly, almost miracu- 
lously, in the country, so were the millions at the 
front left without a governing apparatus. The very 
spirit of the army was gone and its heart — the moving 
force of the word of command — ceased to beat. 

j Immediately after the Revolution the Russian army 
ce&sed to fight, for the soldiers ceased to obey and 
the officers lost the capacity to command. , The power 
and authority of the officers disappeared. 

All those who had the opportunity to observe the 
Russian Front in the last year before the Revolution, 
all those who had any more or less clear conception of 
the atmosphere at the front felt the deadly peril that 
was advancing upon the army together with the dis- 
solution of the old regime. But no one expected all 
these symptoms of exhaustion and decay to culminate in 
the shocking picture of chaos that arose after the 
Revolution. 

Of course, one must not paint the entire Russian 
Front as it appeared after the March explosion in one 
shade of black. Those troops who had won victories 
in the past or who had as commanders men of the less 
reactionary type, men who had shown sympathy with 
the more progressive circles of the country and had 
fought for the liberation of the government from the 
meshes of Rasputin, as well as the troops farthest re- 

[ 167 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


moved from the poisonous influence of Petrograd — 
in the Caucasus, in the Southwest (Galicia), in Ru- 
mania, and the Black Sea Fleet — preserved their 
organization and their fighting capacity. 

In every individual army the measure of dissolution 
was likewise uneven. As a rule, the artillery and all 
the specialized branches, containing the more intelligent 
and cultural elements of the army, the elements that 
had been regarded with suspicion under the old regime, 
remained after the Revolution but little touched by the 
wave of disintegration, or, if disintegration did appear, 
the process was a slow one. ■' 

Above all, it was the infantry which lost the ca- 
pacity to fight and to obey. This is explainable. First 
of all, the Russian infantry in 1916-17, following the 
terrible defeats of 19 14-15, no longer represented a 
regular army, but a poorly trained militia. The va- 
rious infantry divisions were no longer coordinated 
harmonious bodies. The raw recruits from the vil- 
lages, who had found their way hurriedly and ac- 
cidentally into the various regiments, had no knowl- 
edge or conception of their respective regimental 
traditions. Frequently this was the case also with 
the commanders, the wartime lieutenants, who, after 
two or three months of ephemeral training, were 
hurled from their student desks or office swivel chairs 
into leadership of the strange gray masses of soldiery. 

But even in the infantry the measure of disorganiza- 
tion was varied. jThe principal fields for the dis- 
integrating propaganda and activity of Bolshevist and 
German agents were the so-called “third” divisions, 
the formation of which was begun in January, 1917. 
The transformation of the army corps on the basis of 
three instead of two divisions to a corps — a most unfor- 
tunate reform, which had met with sharp disapproval 

[168] 



DISSOLUTION OF THE ARMY 

from General Alexeyeff and the majority of the Gen- 
eral Staff officers — was carried out by General Gurko, 
temporary chief of staff of the commander-in-chief, 
the Emperor Nicholas II, at the time when General 
Alexeyeff was on furlough in the Crimea because of 
illness. These “third” divisions, consisting of units of 
which commanders of already existing divisions had 
sought to rid themselves, because of their uselessness, 
represented accidental masses of people without any 
organization and discipline, and operating under the 
very poorest material and technical conditions. Sub- 
sequently, during my inspection of the various fronts, 
I heard loud complaints against these accursed “third” 
divisions, which had become the carriers of cowardice, 
anarchy and disintegration. It was in the infantry 
where the Bolshevist and German agents concentrated 
their work. Only here did they have any real success. 
Only the very darkest, most ignorant and out and out 
reactionary sections of the Russian army came to the 
assistance of these worst enemies of Free Russia. 
Here all the slogans of the Revolution merged into 
one solid, brutal roar: “To the devil with the War! 
Let us go home! You have drunk enough of our 
blood!” The only language which these lower depths 
of the army could understand was the language of 
/orce. And as soon as this force was restored by the 
Provisional Government, it was put into effect. 

j DREAMS OF PEACE 

I But, at the beginning, in the first weeks of the 
Revolution, there were also other sentiments, in the 
army, as well as among the people. Russia was not 
only physically tired of the War; New Russia revolted 
spiritually against further bloodshed., She sought, per- 

[169] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


haps naively, but honestly and sincerely, a way out of 
the seemingly hopeless impasse into which all warring 
Europe had fallen. 

To many revolutionary enthusiasts, in the rear as 
well as at the front, it appeared only natural that the 
Russian Revolution, having freed Russia from all the 
evils of the old regime, would bring spiritual emancipa- 
tion to the rest of suffering humanity. An immediate 
and fair peace for all the belligerent nations was the 
unrealizable but luring, almost hypnotic, struggle 
dominating the heart. 

On March twenty-seventh the Petrograd Soviet of 
Workmen’s and Soldiers’ Deputies voted its celebrated 
“Address to all Peoples of the World,” with an appeal 
for action for immediate peace. “It will come 1” was 
the confident promise. For only the “imperialist gov- 
ernments” were at war with one another, while the 
peoples were compelled merely to obey. Now that the 
Russian democracy has entered as an “equal” into the 
“family of free peoples,” it has renounced all the im- 
perialist past of Czarist Russia. There is nothing, 
therefore, to prevent other peoples, acting “over the 
heads of their governments,” from following the ex- 
ample of Free Rqssia and putting an end to the frat- 
ricidal slaughter. And, first of all, must Germany do 
away with her imperialist reaction. Wilhelm must be 
deposed, thus piercing the heart of world imperialism. 
And then, in the blinding light of truth and justice, will 
the neiw sun of peace and love ascend over Europe. 
The enemies of yesterday will unite in fraternal em- 
brace. | Thus ran the appeal of the Soviet. 

To the Western world these words appeared to be 
naive, childish prattle. There not only the govern- 
ments but the peoples themselves were engaged in a 

[ 170 ] 



DISSOLUTION OF THE ARMY 

war to the death. They saw no way out of the war 
through revolution at home. The representatives of 
Russia’s Soviet democracy soon learned this from the 
lips of Socialists and Laborites who had come to visit 
us from Paris and London. 1 They soon learned that 
their struggle for peace, if it was to be successful, must 
needs be founded not on rhetoric but upon the solid 
force of a restored front* However, already on March 
twenty-seventh, at the moment of the greatest in- 
fatuation with the faith in a European miracle, the 
leaders of the Russian proletarian democracy began 
to feel certain disquieting misgivings. They called 
upon the German workers to follow the example of 
their Russian comrades and put an end to the ab- 
solutism of the Hohenzollems. But apparently they 
were not quite sure that their appeal would be heard, 
for among the pleading words of the Soviet’s address 
there resounds unexpectedly the cry of warning: “The 
Russian Revolution will not retreat before the bay- 
onets of conquerors and will not permit itself to be 
crushed by outside military power.” 

“Peace” with Ludendorff! But imperialist Ger- 
many, dominated by the dictatorship of Ludendorff, 
had no intention of threatening the “democratic con- 
quests” of the Russian Revolution by resorting to 
“bayonets.” The German General Staff was well in- 
formed about the sentiments of the Russian democracy 
and the rank and file of the Russian army in the first 
weeks of the Revolution. We find it, therefore, chang- 
ing its strategy on the Eastern Front with a speed and 
farsightedness worthy of a genius. Instead of directing 
its heavy artillery and the blows of bayonets against 
Russia, it let loose a storm of proclamations more 
poisonous than the most poisonous gases. 

C 17O 



THE CATASTROPHE 


The Russian Revolution wants peace. Then 
why tarry? Why overthrow Wilhelm when His 
Royal Highness, Prince Rupprecht of Bavaria 
himself, Commander-in-Chief of the Eastern 
Front, thinks of nothing else than helping the Rus- 
sian workers and peasants, attired in soldier 
uniforms, the Russian proletarians oppressed by 
their own and the Anglo-French capitalists, to 
throw off the hated yoke of the international 
bankers, and by establishing firmly the reign of 
the toiling masses in Russia to bring eternal peace 
between Russia and Germany. 

These were the actual contents of the German 
proclamations distributed among the Russian troops. 

The proclamations of His Royal Highness to the 
Russian troops were not the only means utilized by the 
Germans in conveying their promise that not a single 
shot would be fired by the Germans without the prov- 
ocation of an offensive by the Russians. Imperial 
Germany carried still further her diabolical play on the 
primitive naivete of the Russian soldiers. Here and 
there from the German trenches “peace delegations,” 
bearing white flags, moved towards the Russians. 
These “delegations” were driven away by Russian ar- 
tillery fire. This provoked indignation in the Russian 
trenches, while new German proclamations spared no 
words of righteous wrath against the unwillingness of 
the Russian generals to give ear to Germany’s peace 
proposals. General Dragomiroff then gave orders to 
receive one such German delegation and bring it before 
him. In the presence of delegates from the army com- 
mittees the chief German parliamentarian was ques- 
tioned. He had, of course, no peace proposal to make. 

This local episode, however, passed by without salu- 
tary effect. Having provided themselves with such a 

[ 172] 



DISSOLUTION OF THE ARMY 


powerful ally in their struggle for “peace at any price” 
our soldiers met every effort of their commanders to 
move them to action with indescribable resentment. 

The Russian Front grew still. A gravelike silence 
ensued along the hundreds of miles of our lines. Rus- 
sian soldiers were received as guests by the Germans. 
A wave of fraternization ensued, accompanied by in- 
terminable meetings. There was plenty of time for 
that, for the Russian troops refused even to clean their 
rifles. A virtual armistice was established on the Rus- 
sian Front, while the friends of the Russian Revolution 
in the German General Staff were hurrying their 
Eastern divisions to the French Front. 

STOKHOD 

It is difficult to say what the result of this situation 
might have been. But in the very midst of the game 
staged by the Germans there occurred' a slight mistake. 
The heyday of the touching friendship between Prince 
Rupprecht and General Ludendorff with our illiterate 
Russian peasants in the trenches came to a sudden 
end. 

jAt the moment of the greatest inactivity on the 
Russian Front the German troops suddenly assumed 
the offensive on the Stokhod. The quick blow pro- 
duced great results. The Russian regiments, far re- 
moved from any idea of fighting, were caught un- 
awares. Great masses of artillery and 25,000 prisoners 
constituted the German booty — the first result of the 
“struggle for peace” through fraternization, carried 
on in accordance with the instructions of Ludendorff 
and Lenin.f 

The impression produced by the Stokhod attack on 
that portion of the Russian democracy which was sin- 

[ 173 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


cerely engaged in the struggle for an immediate, just 
peace was in truth shattering. Ludendorff, as he him- 
self admits in his memoirs, quickly perceived the mis- 
take of the German High Command. At German 
Headquarters it was decided not to permit the repeti- 
tion of unfortunate accidents. There will be no more 
German attacks on the Russian Front, was the informa- 
tion conveyed to our trenches by the German command. 
This promise was kept by Ludendorff. 

However, fortunately for us, the impression pro- 
duced by the Stokhod offensive could not be eradicated. 
Somewhere in the subconsciousness of the soul of the 
Russian (democracy occurred a deep and profound 
change. 

With the Stokhod attack ended what may be called 
the pacifist period of the Russian Revolution. A new 
period, the period of defense, began. The Russian 
Revolution itself, and not the “imperialist” Provisional 
Government alone, determined to continue the War 
as long as circumstances demanded it. Of course, this 
new psychology of defense, which began to develop in 
the consciousness of the masses, did not appear in full 
force immediately after the Stokhod attack. On the 
contrary, the outer picture of the situation at the front 
and in the rear seemed more hopeless than ever and in- 
soluble. At any rate, it was thus that the situation 
was regarded by Alexander Gutchkoff, the first war 
minister of the Provisional Government, and by his 
closest associates. 



CHAPTER VII 

GUTCHKOFF 


ALEXANDER GUTCHKOFF was one of the 
/-A most colorful and interesting political figures 
-*• A. of pre-revolutionary Russia. A prominent so- 
cial and commercial leader of Moscow, a typical repre- 
sentative of the Moscow merchant world, Gutchkoff 
was to a large extent a self-made man. His career was 
most original. In the Boer War he dropped his busi- 
ness and went to fight on the side of the Boers. In the 
Russo-Japanese War he covered Manchuria as a rep- 
resentative of the Red Cross and there had opportunity 
to observe the defects of the old Russian bureaucratic 
military machine. A participant in the moderate 
liberation movement, the height of the revolutionary 
disturbances of 1905 found him on the right flank of 
the zemstvo and municipal reform organizations. 
Breaking with the liberals of the type of Miliukoff, 
he became the leader of the conservative Octobrist 
party (the first constitutional manifesto of Nicholas 
II was issued October 17, 1905). 

This party became the constitutional support of the 
Stolypin government after the dissolution of the first 
Duma, in the summer of 1906, and the suppression of 
the popular anti-government movement. Gutchkoff 
himself assumed the role of intimate friend and ad- 
viser of the all-powerful premier. 

In the ultra-conservative third Duma he was elected 
president, and as such had opportunity to study closely 

C 175 ] 



•THE CATASTROPHE 


not only the bureaucratic apparatus of the Russian em- 
pire, but the Czar himself and his entourage. Inde- 
pendent and courageous, possessed of great political 
intuition, Gutchkoff entered upon a sharp struggle 
with the “dark forces” surrounding the throne, directed 
at first against the irresponsible influence of the 
Grand Dukes, then against the all-powerful Rasputin. 

Gutchkoff concentrated his energy mainly on ques- 
tions of a military nature. Soon there formed around 
him a circle of capable young officers of the General 
Staff. This provoked suspicion and bitter hostility at 
the Court. The military figures close to Gutchkoff 
were nicknamed by the Empress Alexandra Feodorovna 
the “Young Turks.” These “Young Turks” (includ- 
ing the generals Gurko and Polivanoff), together with 
several members of the Duma, accomplished a great 
deal for the reorganization of the Russian army and 
$he improvement of the national defense. 

- ’ But in time Gutchkoff and his friends became con- 
vinced that further serious work in the interest of the 
nation, particularly for the national defense, was well- 
nigh impossible under the existing regime. 5 

The appointment of the utterly incapable Sukhom- 
linoff to the post of war minister, the constantly grow- 
ing influence of the semi-illiterate peasant, Rasputin, 
in the handling of the most fundamental problems of 
the state, killed all hope in Gutchkoff for a peaceful, 
evolutionary solution of the constantly growing crisis of 
absolutism. 

Nevertheless Gutchkoff did not desire to see the 
rise of an elemental revolutionary mass movement. 
Openly proclaiming his uncompromising hostility to 
the existing regime, the Octobrist leader stood aloof, 
however, from • the country’s growing revolutionary 
tendencies. He disapproved of them. In his opinion 

[ 176 ] 



GUTCHKOFF 


revolutionary chaos could be averted only by a struggle 
for political power on the part of the moderate and 
conservatively liberal middle classes of Russian society. 
Already before the War, in 1913, in the period of the 
fourth Duma, he summoned his party to this struggle. 
At the beginning of the War Gutchkoff appeared in 
East Prussia as a representative of the Red Cross. 
There he witnessed the first catastrophe of the Russian 
army and saw the destruction, near Soldan, of General 
Samsonoff’s entire army and the crushing of the finest 
Guard Regiments, due to the criminal inefficiency and 
ne glig e nce of General Rennenkampf. 

When he delivered his parting address, as minister 
of war in the Provisional Government, before the 
conference of delegates from the front, in the Tauride 
Palace, on April twelfth, Gutchkoff said: 

“Already, in the autumn of 1914, I returned from 
the front a revolutionist.” 

Testifying before the Extraordinary Inquiry Com- 
mission of the Provisional Government, on August 
15, 1917, Gutchkoff declared: 

“When in the months preceding the Revolution some 
of my friends and I sought a way out of the situation, 
we believed that it was impossible under the existing 
circumstances to bring about, in any normal way, a 
change in the government and its reconstruction by the 
enlistment of public men commanding the confidence 
of the country, and that it was necessary to make a 
sharp turn in the direction of the removal of him who 
wielded supreme power. Too much guilt had ac- 
cumulated on the shoulders of the Emperor, the Em- 
press and those inextricably bound to them. Their 
characters gave no hope of the possibility of moving 
them to a wholesome political change. jlAll this made 
it dear to me that the Emperor must vacate his throne.”- 

C 177] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


In the winter of 1916-17 Gutchkoff was not merely 
thinking of revolt but was actively engaged in prepar- 
ing it in cooperation with M. I. Terestchenko, a noted 
millionaire and philanthropist and the future minister 
of foreign affairs in the Provisional Government. To- 
gether with General Krimoff, organizer of the sub- 
sequent Komiloff rebellion, he promoted plans for a 
coup d’etat, sensing the advance of a catastrophe. 
The execution of the plans was delayed, and instead 
of a change of the reigning monarchs, the entire 
dynasty was swept away by the uprising of the people. 

It was naturally impossible after that for Gutchkoff 
and his friends to remain aloof from the Revolution. 

With this moment began Gutchkoff’s personal trag- 
edy which, however, exemplified with particular clarity 
the tragedy experienced by all the people of his circle 
ajnd his class in the Revolution. 

tThey had expected a political upheaval which, by 
changing the system of government, was to transfer 
all political power into the hands of the centrist, the 
moderate-conservative and liberal elements of Rus- 
sian society, which up until March 12, 1917, dominated 
the whole political life of the country, in the Duma, 
in the zemstvos, in the cities and in the press. In- 
stead, Russia went through a social earthquake, which 
shook and shattered all the strata of the social order. 
Not only the conservative part but the whole of liberal 
Russia suddenly appeared as a mere fragmentary rem- 
nant of the destroyed monarchy. A new force, the 
democracy, and not so much the political, as the social 
and labor democracy, came into power, although it 
was not yet able to. take this power into its hands{ 

In the chaos of the new political tendencies and as- 
pirations, which were only beginning to take form, 

[178] 



GUTCHKOFF 


Gutchkoff found himself alone, a stranger to all. He 
himself did not think of his past, but many others did, 
for in the broad, popular historical consciousness 
Gutchkoff was remembered mostly as the instigator of 
the cruel Stolypin reaction which followed upon the 
dissolution of the first Duma. 

Before the Revolution the object of an uncompro- 
mising hatred on the part of the Empress Alexandra 
Feodorovna, Rasputin and Yyroubova, Gutchkoff 
after the Revolution immediately fell under the suspi- 
cion of the. representatives of the Soviet democracy and 
their adherents. } Yet the basic problem of the state 
after the Revolution consisted in the quickest possible 
restoration of authority in the land. ; An old, tradi- 
tional government can continue, for a long time, to 
govern the state by mere mechanical force and inertia 
of the administrative apparatus. But here, too, a 
psychological break with the population, the absence 
of confidence in the government and in the genuineness 
of its intentions, in the long run bring about the end 
experienced by France in 1789, by Russia in 1917 and 
by Germany in 1918. But a government born of 
revolution or of a coup d’etat — it makes no difference 
which — and not possessing as yet any apparatus of 
compulsion, exists in reality only in so far as it finds a 
living contact with the country, only in so far as it is 
trusted by the people themselves and its orders and 
instructions are accepted by the millions not because 
of the conviction of force but by the force of convic- 
tion. 

The austere, retiring, strange and uncouth Gutch- 
koff was least of all capable of convincing the multitude. 
He was not believed, and he realized this painfully. 

Between Gutchkoff, as war minister, and the army 
there developed at once an unhealthy and abnormal re- 

C 179 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


lationship. It had been the belief that Gutchkoff, being 
close to high army circles (at any rate to many of the 
more talented officers of the General Staff), would 
administer the army well. It soon became clear, how- 
ever, that what was necessary was not the usual kind 
of administration on the basis of the accepted prin- 
ciples of command and obedience, but first and fore- 
most the restoration of the lost authority of the officers. 
It was necessary to place between subordinates and 
commanders, between the soldier and the officer, some 
kind of a third, connecting force. To do this it was 
essential first to gain the confidence of the troops. 
How was this to be done ? ! As Gutchkoff saw it, it was 
to be done by deeds, by showing that the first war 
minister of the Revolution stood for a new order in 
the army. : 


MILITARY REFORMS 

All the so-called reforms in the army, after the 
Revolution, were carried out during Gutchkoff’s in- 
cumbency of the War Ministry, in cooperation with a 
special commission which included representatives of 
the Soviet and army committees, and was headed by 
General Polivanoff, who had been for a time minister 
of war during the War and the assistant war minister 
under the third Duma| 

Polivanoff, as I have already indicated, was a mem- 
ber of Gutchkoff’s circle. For that reason he had been 
regarded at Court with unconcealed hostility. A man 
of unquestionable ability and a brilliant administrator, 
Polivanoff, after sensing the prevailing revolutionary 
sentiments, joined Gutchkoff in the struggle for the 
restoration of the discipline and fighting capacity of 
the army, but with methods extremely dangerous. He 

[180] 



GUTCHKOFF 


set out to gain the confidence of the troops in the new 
War Minister by the maximum of possible and, some- 
times, impossible concessions to demands presented not 
so much by committees from the front, as by the Petro- 
grad Soviet. In these concessions Polivanoff went 
further than the War Minister. 

In reality, all the' reforms promoted by Gutchkoff 
and Polivanoff constituted merely the affirmation of 
what was already the existing order in the army after 
the Revolution. Naturally, the registration of all the 
revolutionary “conquests” in the army, as reflected in 
the work of Polivanoff’s commission and the revolu- 
tionary orders of the War Minister, did not raise by a 
single iota the authority in the army of the representa- 
tives of the new government. 

fl repeat : the crux of the situation - lay not in reforms 
but in the want of confidence in the new government* 
In the absence of the* moral authority necessary to 
force a change in the sentiments of the masses there 
remained only the solution of drifting along with the 
current, in the hope that somehow, by means of some 
miracle, a “strong” man would appear, who, at one 
or two blows, supporting himself upon two or three 
old, solid traditions of his regiments, would disperse 
this whole “revolutionary canaille.” 

But the- “strong” man was not in sight. General 
Korniloff, appointed the first commander of the Petro- 
grad military district, was unable to handle the gar- 
rison, and early in May he' returned to the front. 
Meanwhile the policy of adjustment even to the most 
moderate demands of the rank and file of the army, 
which had lost all equilibrium, was destroying the au- 
thority of Gutchkoff and Polivanoff in those circles 
where they could possibly have had it— the high com* 
mand of the army. 


[1*1] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


gutchkoff's resignation 

After two months of tragic misunderstanding Gutch- 
koff and his military assistants found themselves in an 
impasse. There were no more moves left for them. 
The final fruit of Polivanoff’s creation — “the Declara- 
tion of the Rights of Soldiers” — already actually in 
force, was rejected by Gutchkoff, who refused to sign 
it. As a matter of fact the declaration was an artificial 
attempt to steer the sentiments of the army in the only 
way Gutchkoff could follow. 

On his own initiative, without informing the Pro- 
visional Government, the Minister of War called a 
conference of all the army commanders, headed by 
General Alexeyeff, as commander-in-chief. The con- 
ference, which was to meet on or about May fifteenth, 
was to express its confidence in the War Minister who 
was about to resign, in a form closely resembling an 
ultimatum. 

On May twelfth, exactly two months after the official 
beginning of the Revolution, Gutchkoff submitted his 
resignation in a letter to Prince Lvoff, the Premier. 
The letter produced a very painful impression on the 
public. Its main point was that the Minister of War 
could no longer carry the responsibility for the further 
destruction of the country. On the same day, in his 
final address as war minister, before the first con- 
ference of delegates from the front, Gutchkoff drew a 
shocking picture of the past and present of the Russian 
army, expressing his despair frankly and courageously. 
It would be sheer madness, he declared, to follow any 
longer the road taken by the Russian Revolution in the 
first two months. Speaking of the reforms in the army, 
the departing minister admitted openly: “We have 

[182] 



GUTCHKOFF 


now reached the fatal point beyond which lies not the 
rehabilitation of the army but its destruction.” 

I must say that despite the difference in our political 
past and our position in the Revolution I did not want 
Gutchkoff’s departure, for I valued in him his great 
political intuition and the ability to approach the solu- 
tion of political problems in a manner free from all 
dogmatic and partisan considerations. Only such men 
were then needed in Russia. The psychological change 
which had begun to mature in the soul of the revolu- 
tionary democracy after the experience on the Stokhod, 
gave me firm confidence that together with the healthy 
development of a national consciousness in the masses 
would come also the strenthening of confidence in the 
War Minister. 

Accidentally, on May twelfth, as I was on my way to 
a meeting of the conference of delegates from the front, 
at which Gutchkoff was to speak, my automobile over- 
took that of Gutchkoff and I decided to make an effort 
to persuade Gutchkoff not to leave the Provisional 
Government. I changed into his machine and began 
to plead with him. But my pleading was in vain. 

Nothing came of the second part of Gutchkoff’s 
strategic maneuver. He resigned, but the conference 
of army commanders, which met in Petrograd, May 
sixteenth to seventeenth, refused to support Gutchkoff 
in his complaints against the Provisional Government. 
This first effort to bring the “strong will” of the fight- 
ing generals to bear upon the “lack of will-power” of 
the revolutionary government failed. 

MY FIRST DAYS IN THE WAR MINISTRY 

However, this effort did not end favorably for me. 
I was compelled to assume the war portfolio, with 

[183] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


the difficult legacy left behind by Polivanoff and Gutch- 
koff. I realize now that it was perhaps the premoni- 
tion of this, my greatest trial, which prompted me in 
my effort to prevail upon Gutchkoff not to leave the 
Provisional Government. Of course, if there had been 


a single man among the commanders at the front pos- 
sessing the unqualified confidence of the rank and file, 
the question of finding a successor to Gutchkoff would 
have been easily settled. But the modern war of 
anonymous communiques had not produced such a hero. 
General Headquarters, headed by General Alexeyeff, 
as well as the entire commanding corps, demanded the 
appointment of a civilian as war minister. 

! Does not this demand of the generals illustrate 
better than anything else the abnormality of the posi- 
tion occupied at that time by the army commanders 
at the front and the fact that they themselves under- 
stood it? What was required then was a buffer be- 
tween the commanding corps and the rank and file. It 
became my fate to be the buffer, with all the inevitable 
consequences confronting any one who puts his head 
between the hammer and the anvil. 


But there was no time to do much thinking then. 
Moreover, all considerations were quickly ended. In 
reply to the question of Prince Lvoff as to whom, 
among the civilians available, the high command would 
recommend for the War Ministry, General Alexeyeff 
replied: “The first candidate of the high command is 
Kerensky.” 

fThe task placed upon me as War Minister by the 
Provisional Government was in brief this : restoration 


by all means at hand of the fighting capacity of the 
army. To accomplish this I was to move the army to 
an offensive, sparing no efforts! 

Of course my task would have been quite impossible 

[184] 



GUTCHKOFF 


if at that time, in the middle of May, there had not 
appeared in the masses the marked evidences of the 
deep psychological change produced by the Stokhod ex- 
perience. The resolutions of various Soviets, army 
committees and the declarations of delegations arriv- 
ing in Petrograd from the fron tj all spoke of but one 
thing: the imperative need of restoring the fighting 
capacity of the army and the productive capacity of the 
workers, as essential prerequisites to the defense of the 
country .j 

To be sure, these healthy political and national tend- 
encies did not affect all the active forces of the nation. 
The propaganda of the! Bolsheviki and the work of 
German agents — which frequently meant one and 
the same thing — the war weariness and, above all, the 
prolongation of the War, which we could not stop, 
continued to batter and to shatter the country. A 
feeling of despair frequently gripped every one of us. 
Immediately preceding my appointment as minister 
of war, on the very day of Gutchkoff’s resignation, 
I declared before the same conference of army dele- 
gates at which Gutchkoff delivered his swan song: 

“Is it really possible that Free Russia is only a coun- 
try of mutinous slaves ? I grieve that I did not die two 
months ago, in the first hour of the Revolution. For 
then I would have departed in the belief that a new life 
had at last come upon Russia, that we had learned to 
govern our country without the knout and the dub, in 
mutual respect, and not as we used to be governed.” 

But from such emotion of despair grew and matured, 
parallel with the forces of dissolution, new sodal 
bonds. New creative possibilities were bom, sum- 
moning all to work and effort. Then possibilities 
gave us faith in the triumph of reason over the dark 
madness of some and the deliberate treason of others. 

[185] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


'On assuming my duties at the War Ministry, I first 
of all issued an order to the sulking members of the 
commanding corps forbidding the resignation of any 
officers of the army in the field. ; This measure nipped 
in the bud the intention of certain high commanders 
to resign by way of protest against the official publica- 
tion of the “Declaration of the Rights of Soldiers.” I 
believed that discipline was to be demanded first from 
people who by virtue of their position should have 
served as models of the performance of duty. More- 
over, it was quite impossible to stop publication of the 
notorious declaration, first, because it had already long 
been published by the Izvestia of the Petrograd Soviet, 
and second, because Polivanoff and Gutchkoff had 


made the official and categorical promise to the Soviet 
and army committees that the declaration would be 
put into effect, stating that the delay in doing so was 
due entirely to causes of a technical nature. 

After putting a stop to the sulking attitude of the 
generals, I immediately published the “Declaration of 
the Rights of Soldiers.” But, under my revision of it, 
the declaration received an interpretation which 
promptedl Lenin, in the Pravda , to term it the “Dec- 
laration of the Lack of Rights of Soldiers’^ and to 
begin a mad -campaign against the new war minister^ 
The fourteenth point of the declaration, excluded orig- 
inally by General Polivanoff, on the demand of the 
Soviet, but restored by me, declared : 

“At times of action the commander has the right to 
apply any measures, including the use of armed force, 
against subordinates who fail to obey his orders.” 

This point was the first move towards restoration 
of the power and authority of commanders. But even 
the most courageous officers did not for a long time 
venture to use this power. In addition to this funda- 

[ 186] 



GUTCHKOFF 


mental change, the eighteenth point of the revised dec- 
laration placed the right of appointment and removal 
exclusively in the hands of commanders, and omitted 
the clause of the Polivanoff original which vested the 
army committees with the right of recommendation 
and rejection of appointees. Thus I did away with 
the right of subordinates to participate in the appoint- 
ment of their superiors. 

Finally, in the very first days of my duties as War 
Minister, an end was put to the “dual authority” pre- 
vailing in the administration of the Petrograd garrison. 

During the two months of General Korniloff’s serv- 
ice as commander of the Petrograd military district, 
the Military Commission of the Duma and the sol- 
diers’ section of the Soviet exercised jointly the right 
of control over the Petrograd garrison. All the 
efforts made by Gutchkoff and Korniloff to put a stop 
to this truly inadmissible interference of public bodies 
in the activities of the district military staff resulted 
in failure. On the contrary, the meddling of the Soviet 
in the business of the commander grew hand in hand 
with the growing lack of confidence in the War Min- 
ister. General Korniloff made all sorts of concessions 
to the Soviet. On one occasion he announced in the 
press that he “does not undertake a serious move in 
the matter of the inner administration of the garrison 
without previous agreement with the Soviet of Work- 
men’s and Soldiers’ Deputies, through the instrumen- 
tality of its executive organ.” He agreed also to the 
establishment of a kind of controlling agency by the 
Soviet, which was attached to the staff. But all this 
led to nothing. On May twelfth, the day of Gutch- 
koff’s resignation, |the Soviet, through the represen- 
tatives of its executive committee, laid claim to the 
function of countersigning all orders of the district 

[ 187 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 

commander concerning the movement and transfer of 
troops. | 

This was the demand that broke General Korniloff’s 
patience. He resigned. 

My desire to free the staff of the Petrograd mili- 
tary district from interference by the Soviet was soon 
carried out. 

From the very beginning of the Revolution, the 
D um a, followed by the Soviet, began dispatching its 
representatives to the front, where their function was 
to explain events in Petrograd and help promote con- 
tact between the army and the forces of the Revolu- 
tion. The Duma representatives had little success 
among the soldiers at the front and they soon ceased 
their activities. But the Soviet representatives became, 
to all intents and purposes, Soviet commissars in the 
army. 

J This decline of the authority of the Duma’s repre- 
sentatives at the front, simultaneously with the rise of 
the authority of the Soviet’s representatives, together 
with the experience suffered by Colonel Engelhardt, 
who saw the various regulations and orders promul- 
gated by him paralleled by similar measures by the 
Soviet, shows that all organizations born of the Revo- 
lution resorted to the same measures and that the 
result was different only because the influence wielded 
by organizations of the Duma fell, in the course of the 
revolutionary developments, to zero, while that of the 
Soviet rose to the boiling pointjj 

The preservation at the front of the institution of 
Soviet commissars was likewise intolerable, for under 
the relations which had developed between the rank 
and file and the officers, the commissars, in the summer 
of 1917, had to carry altogether too great a responsi- 
bility. For that reason these commissars had to be 

[188] 



GUTCHKOFF 


made responsible, while at the front, directly to the 
government. This became a fact with my assumption 
of the war portfolio. 

1 Finally, in the very first days of my work as Min- 
ister of War I stopped the stream of revolutionary 
reforms emanating from General Polivanoff’s commis- 
sion by the simple device of abolishing it. , 

My further work in the Ministry of War and 
Marine consisted in the gradual liquidation of the 
* ‘revolutionary” measures of General Polivanoff. 
Beginning with the middle of May, the army began 
to return gradually to a normal military order. 

At first glance my “conservatism,” coming upon the 
“radicalism” of GutchkofF, may appear paradoxical. 
As a representative of the Left, the normal procedure 
would have been for me to pursue a radical policy. 
But what may appear abnormal under normal condi- 
tions, becomes in the abnormal revolutionary situation 
but a normal development of events. My entrance 
into the War Ministry marked the end of the period 
of destruction and the beginning of the period of con- 
struction, not only in the army, but in the country as a 
whole. 

All my initial measures were undertaken merely 
with the object of clearing the field for my basic activ- 
ity, the bringing about of a sharp change in the atti- 
tude and sentiment of the army. This required my 
presence* at the front and not in Petrograd. From 
the first day of my appointment as Minister of War 
and up to my assumption of the premiership, after 
the first Bolshevist uprising, July sixteenth to twenti- 
eth, I spent the greater part of my time on various 
parts of the front, taking no part, on my brief returns 
to Petrograd, in the work of the Provisional Govern- 
ment so far as internal matters were concerned. 

[189] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


It is now the fashion not only in conservative, but 
also in Bolshevist circles, to refer to me ironically as 
the “persuader-in-chief.” 

I do not see anything opprobrious, ridiculous or 
insulting in this term. For, if I was compelled for 
weeks at a time to devote myself to the inspection of 
army after army, corps after corps and division after 
division, if in addition to the regular work of a war 
minister at the front I was obliged to waste time in 
conversations with soldiers and in addresses before 
thousands of troops, I did so not on my own volition, 
but on the insistent and, at times, tearful demands 
of the high commanders. 

I remember particularly one incident on the Galician 
Front, in the region of the eleventh army, involving a 
certain Guard division. This division was beyond all 
hope of redemption. What it required was not per- 
suasion but the application of armed force. After 
inspecting a neighboring division and addressing the 
troops, I flatly declined to visit the division in ques- 
tion, realizing that it would be a waste of time to enter 
into discussions with its Bolshevist agitators. The 
old, gray-haired general, commander of the division, 
who had come to invite me to visit his command, lost 
all self-control, grew pale and began to tremble. 

“Mr. Minister,” he pleaded, “if you do not come 
they will say it is my fault. There will be no living for 
me then. In God’s name do come to us.” 

What was there left for me to do, considering my 
“weakness” and “lack of will-power”? Naturally, I 
visited the hopelessly infected division and, in the inter- 
ests of the safety of the commanders, addressed the 
troops, quite conscious of the uselessness of my effort 
in this case. Several days later the commissar of the 
war minister attached to the division, was obliged to 

[ 190] 



GUTCHKOFF 


use force in dissolving it, as should have been done 
from the very beginning. 

No doubt the position of the commanders at the 
front was quite intolerable — to command troops after 
having lost the capacity to command; to prepare the 
soldier mass for action at a time when all such prep- 
aration was regarded by the soldiers almost as “trea- 
son to the new order” and as “counter-revolution”; 
to be compelled to tolerate the stream of poisonous 
Bolshevist slander; to feel the suspicion of the repre- 
sentatives of the Soviet democracy — all this was suffi- 
cient to undermine the equilibrium of and infuriate any 
man. Add to this the fact that in the spring of 1917 
the Russian officer corps was already undermined and 
crippled by three years of bitter, unsuccessful fighting 
and you have some conception of the situation. 

'The Revolution turned its back on the regular offi- 
cers. This was perhaps historically inevitable but 
extremely tragic for those who were compelled to 
experience it. And it undoubtedly had a fatal effect 
on the development of the events of the Revolution. 
kThe overwhelming majority of Russia’s officers took 
no part in preparing the Revolution. The revolution- 
ary tempest surprised them to a greater extent than 
was the case with those civilians who were at least in 
some measure able to sense the political and socnl 
sentiments of the country. But, as I have already 
said, psychologically the officers were prepared for a 
break with the dynasty. For this reason, although 
they did not greet the new situation gladly, they 
accepted it, at any rate, without resistance. Soon 
after, however, every officer went through what was 
really a repetition of the spiritual tragedy of Gutch- 
koff and his immediate assistants. There was, how- 
ever, one difference, namely — the attitude of distrust on 

[191] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


the part of the troops in the trenches towards their 
officers did not express itself in the resolutions and dec- 
larations, but very frequently in direct, brutal and 
humiliating action. 

Losing heart, as General Brusiloff was wont to say, 
suddenly perceiving in the soldier a strange and even 
hostile creature, the officers sought the aid of the 
civilian rear, hoping there to find a new road to the 
soldier’s soul. 

More than once did I receive from various com- 
manding generals urgent telegrams requesting the dis- 
patch of a commissar to his troops, indicating at the 
same time a preference for former “political offend- 
ers,” who could not possibly be suspected of “counter- 
revolutionary schemes,” even when demanding the 
restoration of discipline and exorting the troops to 
action. 



CHAPTER VIII 

FIRST VISITS TO THE ARMY 


A FTER short trips to the Caucasus Front at the 
very beginning of the War and to the West- 
X JL ern Front in 1915, I again saw the army in 
May, 1917. Having repaired to some extent the min- 
isterial machine and reorganized the administration 
of the Petrograd military district, I left, on May twen- 
tieth, for the Galician Front, where General Brusiloff 
was in command. 

This front had remained in a better state of pres- 
ervation than any other after the revolutionary explo- 
sion, but here, too, one beheld a terrible picture of 
destruction. 5 It seemed as if the army had forgotten 
the enemy and turned its face towards the interior of 
the country, its attention riveted on what was going 
on there| 

There was neither the crack of machine guns nor 
the exchange of artillery fire. The trenches were 
deserted. All preparatory work for offensive opera- 
tions had been abandoned. With their uniforms in 
ludicrous disorder, thousands of troops were devot- 
ing their time to interminable meetings. Most of the 
officers seemed completely confused. The local Gali- 
cian population was looking on in surprise and amuse- 
ment. 

But beneath this discouraging picture of destruc- 
tion there was already being kindled a new will to 
action. Like General Brusiloff, the officers who had 
retained their self-possession and ignored the countless 

[ 193 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 

blows to their self-respect, continued to toil with 
immeasurable enthusiasm and self-sacrifice for the cre- 
ation of new spiritual and human contacts between the 
commanders and the troops. From morning till night 
many commanders strove to gain the ear of their sol- 
diers, in an effort to convince them of the necessity of 
fighting for the preservation of the country and its 
newly won liberty. The commissars of the War Min- 
istry and the local army committees were working 
feverishly in the same direction. In general, the 
Galician army, while not capable of active operations, 
was rapidly developing the will to action. 

I remember the army conference at Kamenetz- 
Podolsk, General Brasiloff’s headquarters. The huge 
hall was filled with hundreds of soldier delegates, sent 
from the most remote comers of the front. I beiheld 
weary faces, feverish eyes, extraordinary tension. It 
was quite clear that before me were people who had 
experienced a great shock and, having lost the capacity 
to reason normally, were seeking for some sort of new 
justification of their continued sojourn in the trenches. 
In listening to the speeches of the delegates and the 
representatives of the army committees, of Brusiloff 
himself, and of the Bolsheviki who were led by the 
subsequently notorious Krilenko, I felt as if I were 
putting my hand to the very heart of the army. What 
the army was experiencing at that time, in the very 
deepest recesses of its consciousness, was a great, irre- 
sistible temptation, too great for human powers to 
endure. 

After three years of the crudest Suffering, the mil- 
lions of soldiers, exhausted to the last degree by the 
tortures of war, found themselves confronted suddenly 
with the questions: “What are we dying for? Must 
we die?” 

[ 194 ] 



FIRST VISITS TO THE ARMY 


To put these questions to a man who must be ready 
and willing to die at any moment, to put before him 
anew, and in the midst of war, the question of the 
meaning of his sacrifice implied the paralysis of his 
will to action. Man can endure war and remain in 
the trenches under artillery fire only when he does not 
reason, when he does not think of the aims or, to be 
more correct, when he is animated by an unshakable, 
almost automatic conviction of the inevitability and 
necessity of sacrifice, for the sake of an already clear 
and established purpose, no longer subject to discus- 
sion. It is too late to think of war aims and to build 
up an “ideology of war” when you are already being 
called upon to stop the enemy’s bullets. 

No army can withstand such a temptation without 
grievous consequences. Everything else which was 
destroying the army — persecution of the officers, 
mutinies, the Bolshevization of various units, the inter- 
minable meetings, etc., was only the painful expres- 
sion of that terrible struggle for life which gripped 
the soul of every soldier. He suddenly perceived an 
opportunity to justify morally his human weakness, 
his well-nigh unconquerable, instinctive desire to run 
away from those disgusting, horrible trenches. For 
the army to fight again meant to conquer anew the ani- 
mal in man, to find anew some sort of unquestionable 
slogan of war that would make it possible again for 
everybody to look death in the face calmly and 
unflinchingly. 

For the sake of the nation’s life it was necessary to 
restore the army’s will to die. 

“Forward to the battle for freedom I I summon 
you not to a feast but to death 1” 

These were the words I used before the conference 
at Kamenetz-Podolsk. These words were also the 

[ I9S] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


keynote of all my addresses before the troops in the 
front line positions. 

“We call you to social revolution ! We summon you 
not to die for others but to destroy others, to destroy 
your class enemies in the rear!” 

This counter slogan of Lenin carried with it terrible 
force, for it justified beforehand the animal fear of 
death which lurks in the heart of even the bravest. It 
supplied the mind with arguments in support of every- 
thing that was dark, cowardly and selfish in the army. 

There is nothing remarkable in the fact that in the 
end, after months of bitter struggle, the most ignorant 
of the masses preferred murder and rapine and fol- 
lowed the leaders of the Bolshevist counter-revolution. 
The remarkable thing was the mighty wave of patri- 
otic self-abnegation which swept the army at the front 
in the summer of 1917. 

Incidentally, the German General Staff sensed at 
once the change on the Russian Front. Immediately 
upon my appointment as Minister of War, the transfer 
of German troops from the Eastern Front to the West 
was stopped. By the end of May the movement and 
concentration of the German forces was in the oppo- 
site direction. 

.Accompanied by several officers, General Brusiloff 
and I made an inspection of the army by automobile. 
Our problem was the examination of those forces 
which in about a month were to take the offensive. In 
two or three days we covered scores of positions. 

The mode of inspection was always the same : We 
walked down the line, swinging around into the heart 
of the ranks to an improvised platform. On our 
mounting the platform, came the word of command 
and from all sides thousands of troops would rush 
towards us, surrounding the platform in a huge circle. 

[196] 



FIRST VISITS TO THE ARMY 

The commanders spoke first, followed by committee 
delegates. Then I came, and then the discontented, 
hesitating mass of armed human beings in gray, con- 
fused in mind and weary in body and spirit, would 
become animated by a kind of new life. Their souls 
would become aglow with enthusiasm which at times 
reached the peaks of mad ecstasy. It was not always 
easy to escape from this raging sea of human beings 
to our automobile and speed away to the next 
inspection. 

Of course, the new mood would not last long. But 
something of it remained. And wherever there were 
capable men among the commanders, commissars and 
army committees, strong centers of new discipline and 
a revived military psychology were created. 

The majority of the troops were divided into two 
categories. On one side were men strong of will and 
eager for heroic action. From these were formed vol- 
untary units calling themselves “Battalions of Death,” 
“Detachments of Exemplary Sacrifice,” etc. On the 
other side were whole units who were dominated by 
Bolshevist agitators. However, they gave us real 
trouble only when led by officers of the character of 
the notorious Dzevaltovsky, who managed, on one 
occasion, to bring under his unbridled influence the 
entire Grenadier Regiment of the Guards. Such dan- 
gerously infected units were to be found all along the 
front, and my commissars were compelled to wage real 
war against them, resorting even to artillery bombard- 
ment. 

The officers at the front were divided into three 
groups. The majority were well-intentioned but con- 
fused and unable to lead ; the minority were men who 
grasped the new situation and managed to find a way 
of approaching the heart and mind of the soldier; and, 

C 197 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


finally, there was a group hostile to the Revolution as 
a whole, gloating over its failures and sabotaging its 
successes. .Among this group in particular were to be 
found, more frequently than anywhere else, men who, 
foreseeing future developments, quite cynically ad- 
justed themselves to the new committee regulations, 
without regard to their calling as officers and their 
self-respect. 

On the eve of my departure from the Galician Front 
for Odessa and Sebastopol, I was returning with Gen- 
eral Brusiloff from a tour of inspection. We were in 
an open automobile, in a heavy downpour, drenched 
and weary. General Brusiloff was not a politician, but 
“by the grace of God” a leader of great courage and 
will-power. He was not given to much conversation, 
but he understood well the character of the soldier and 
sensed quickly every change in the spirit of the army. 
Under the unceasing beating of the rain, we discussed 
long and intimately that which at that time was stir- 
ring and torturing the army and all Russians. 

Of course, like every strong man, Brusiloff was 
rather vain. I suppose that, to some extent, he was 
trying to impress me by playing up to my own views, 
as he described clearly and vividly the general situation 
at the front, his plans and the characteristics of the 
military commanders. But Brusiloff loved Russia too 
much to misrepresent fundamentals. And the funda- 
mentals, as he saw them, coincided not only with my 
own sentiments, but with those of all who were strug- 
gling desperately to bring the Russian army back to 
life and action. It was not enough to talk, to analyze 
and engage in criticism (as General Alexeyeff, then 
commander-in-chief, was doing) . It was necessary to 
create, to act and to take risks. 

[ 198] 



FIRST VISITS TO THE ARMY 


Here, in the automobile, on the road from the front 
to Tarnopol, we definitely decided upon the offensive. 
I also made up my mind that with the beginning of 
the offensive General Brusiloff would no longer be on 
the Galician Front, but at General Headquarters at 
Mohileff. As commander-in-chief, I did not mention 
the matter to Brusiloff, as it was necessary first to 
obtain the consent of the Provisional Government to 
the removal of General Alexeyeff. 

From the Southwestern Front I went to Odessa, and 
thence to Sebastopol, to adjust differences between the 
crews of the Black Sea Fleet and Admiral Kolchak, 
the commander. 

THE BLACK SEA DRAMA 

Admiral Kolchak was a brilliant sailor, the darling 
of the officers, and loved by his men. At the begin- 
ning of the Revolution he quickly oriented himself in 
the new environment and saved the Black Sea Fleet 
from the horrors experienced by the Baltic Fleet. Of 
course, in Sebastopol, as everywhere else, committees 
were formed. There was the Central Committee of 
the Blade Sea Fleet, backed by a network of commit- 
tees on the various vessels and among the commands 
on shore. But these committees consisted of both offi- 
cers and men. Admiral Kolchak’s own relations with 
the Central Committee were excellent. 

The sentiments prevailing in the Black Sea Fleet can 
be gleaned from the fact that as late as at the end of 
May, when I came to Sebastopol, there were many, not 
only among the officers but also among the men, who 
were eager for a landing operation on the Bosporus. 
The commands of the Black Sea Fleet remained an 

[ 199 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


impregnable fortress against the propaganda of Ger- 
man and Bolshevist agents. It was from the shores 
of the Black Sea that the first calls to duty and disci- 
pline were sent to the army. And from the Black Sea 
Fleet came whole delegations to the front for propa- 
ganda of defense and in support of the offensive. In 
view of this attitude of the respective commands, any 
disagreement between Kolchak and the committees 
seemed impossible. Nevertheless, quite unexpectedly, 
a conflict developed. 

I cannot recall now the issue in question. I believe 
it concerned some interference, on the part of the Cen- 
tral Committee, in the admiral’s administrative duties. 
Moreover, the exact issue is not important. The 
important thing was the actual cause. Accustomed to 
general admiration and to absolute authority, the 
admiral could not reconcile himself to the realization 
that now he had a competitor — the Central Commit- 
tee. The disagreement was not so much political as 
psychological. < 

With all his great energy, Admiral Kolchak was 
somewhat effeminate, capricious and slightly hysteri- 
cal. En route in a destroyer from Odessa to Sebasto- 
pol, closeted in a small cabin, we had a long conversa- 
tion. All the reasons he brought forth in support of 
his opinion that there was nothing for him to do but 
to resign did not bear criticism. All his complaints 
were trifles compared with the difficulties being experi- 
enced by the commanders at the front and in the Baltic 
Fleet. One by one I combated his conclusions. And 
only at the very end of the conversation did he give 
vent to a cry that came from the depths of a broken 
heart : 

“To them [i.e., to the sailors] the Central Commit- 
tee means more than I do, and I no longer wish to have 

[ 200 ] 



FIRST VISITS TO THE ARMY 

anything to do with them. I do not love them any 
more.” 

The stern eyes of the admiral filled with tears. 

On my arrival at Sebastopol I became convinced that 
the leaders of the Central Committee, officers and men 
alike, were far removed from any thought of Kol- 
chak’s departure. “He must only realize,” the com- 
mittee members told me, “that for the present we are 
absolutely necessary to him and that it is quite impos- 
sible to dissolve the committee. Such action would 
mean the beginning of disorganization of the com- 
mands, an unexpected victory for the Bolsheviki.” 

This time my mission was successful. Admiral Kol- 
chak made peace with the Central Committee and it 
seemed that everything remained as it was. But it only 
seemed so. A breach remained, and in exactly one 
month it widened into a gulf which forever parted 
Admiral Kolchak from his beloved fleet. A crisis 
began to develop in the soul of the brilliant sailor 
from which he emerged on land as the downright reac- 
tionary “dictator” of Siberia. 

1 1 have described this Kolchak episode in detail, in 
order to make it clear how even the best of the com- 
manders were unable to reconcile themselves to the 
unavoidable difficulties of the transitional revolution- 
ary period. \ Speaking in general, we may say that if 
the enlightened, cultured upper elements of Russia had 
shown greater patience at the beginning of the Revolu- 
tion, the Bolsheviki would have perhaps found it more 
difficult to destroy Russia. After all the experiences 
of the Bolshevist terror for the past ten years, the 
“excesses” of the Revolution, which provoked such a 
storm of anger and resentment among many political 
and military leaders of Russia in the summer of 1917* 
appear now as mere trifles. 

C 201 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


ON THE NORTHERN FRONT 

From Sebastopol I went to Kiev, where a sharp 
collision with the Ukrainian separatists was brewing. 
From Kiev I proceeded to General Headquarters at 
Mohileff, where my conversations with General Alex- 
eyeff convinced me finally of the necessity of a change 
in the post of commander-in-chief. From Mohileff I 
returned to Petrograd for one day, where I put 
through Brusiloff’s appointment, and departed imme- 
diately for the Northern Front. 

Here, in the region of the eleventh army, occupying 
a position in the direction of Mitau, occurred an inci- 
dent which illustrates vividly the subconscious proc- 
esses at the front. 

The commander of the eleventh army was the Bul- 
garian, General Radko-Dmitrieff, hero of the Balkan 
War of 1912-13, who had joined the Russian service. 
He was a grizzled warrior, who loved the soldier and 
knew how to handle him. Nevertheless, after the Rev- 
olution, he felt the sudden rise of a wall between him- 
self and his troops. And frequently, to his surprise, 
his jocular words of encouragement to the soldiers 
provoked only irritation instead of the previous merri- 
ment and laughter. J 

“Right in this neighborhood, not very far from 
here,” said the general to me as we were returning 
from the front line trenches, “in a certain regiment, 
there is an agitator. We cannot handle him. He is 
demoralizing the whole regiment with his discussions 
about the land. Won’t you ple&se tackle him?” 

We entered a dugout unobservable from the enemy 
positions and called a number of troops from the 
trenches. 

Weary, growling faces surrounded us in a ring. We 
[ 202 ] 



FIRST VISITS TO THE ARMY 


began to converse. Standing aloof, the little soldier 
who had won the ear of the regiment, made no effort 
to reply. His comrades thereupon pushed him for- 
ward. Voices : 

“Well, what’s the matter? Here is your chance to 
speak in the presence of the minister himself.” 

Finally the little soldier spoke up: 

“What I want to say is this : You say we must fight, 
so that the peasants may have the land, but of what 
use is the land to me, for instance, if I am killed?” 

I realized immediately that all discussion and logic 
were of no use in this case. What confronted me here 
was the dark inside of a human being. The case was 
one in which personal interest, in its most naked form, 
was being preferred to sacrifice for the common good. 
The desirability and wisdom of such sacrifice does not 
lend itself to proof by word or reason. It can only 
be felt. The situation was rather difficult. To leave 
the little soldier without a reply was unthinkable. 
Where the logic of reason seemed powerless it was 
necessary to resort to the logic of emotion. 

Silently I took a few steps forward in the direction 
of the little soldier. Turning to Radko-Dmitrieff I 
said: 

“General, I order you to remove this soldier imme- 
diately. Pack him off at once to his village. Let his 
fellow villagers know that the Russian Revolution has 
no need of cowards.” 

My surprising reply created a moving impression 
on all those present. The! little soldier himself stood 
trembling, dumb and pale. And then he fell into a 
deep faint. Soon after I received a request from his 
officers to countermand the order for his removal. A 
profound change had come upon him. He was now 
an example of service to others. 

[203 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


From the eleventh army I proceeded to the region 
of the seventh army, where General Yurii Daniloff was 
in command, who for the first eighteen months of the 
War had been quartermaster general to the Grand 
Duke Nicholas Nicholayevitch, then commander-in- 
chief. 

This general had not only strategic talent but con- 
siderable political acumen. He was one of the first 
and few among the high commanders to grasp the new 
soldielr psychology at the front and managed to coop- 
erate in constructive manner with the sound and patri- 
otic majority of its army committee. 1 

At that time General Daniloff found the front com- 
mittees of great value, for in the neighboring fifth army 
there had arisen, early in the summer, a considerably 
strong Bolshevist propaganda organization. Particu- 
larly active in the destructive work of this organiza- 
tion, by means of promoting fraternization and the 
sowing of hostility against officers, was a certain hith- 
erto unknown regimental surgeon, Skliansky. 

At a big meeting in Dvinsk, of representatives of all 
the committees of the fifth army, and in the presence 
of the commander and his staff, I was called upon to 
speak. It was expected by all, from the commander 
to the privates, that “comrade” Skliansky, who had 
been so actively engaged in haranguing the committee 
and soldiers, would take this opportunity of fighting a 
verbal duel with the Minister of War. 

The meeting proceeded. First the commander 
spoke, then the leaders of the army committee, fol- 
lowed by delegates from the trenches* But Skliansky 
kept silent. He not only showed no desire to expose 
the “imperialist” and “reactionary” efforts of the Pro- 
visional Government but stubbornly sought to keep as 

[ 204 ] 



FIRST VISITS TO THE ARMY 


far as possible from the center. The incident appeared 
very much like a repetition of my experience -with the 
little soldier in the eleventh army. 

And, sure enough, the incomprehensible and inex- 
plicable silence of the doctor finally angered the sol- 
diers, particularly those from the trenches, who had 
been most subjected to the temptations of Bolshevist 
demagogy. I observed some kind of a movement 
around Skliansky. 

Soon we noticed that a quiet but rather energetic 
exchange of remarks was in progress between him and 
his neighbors. Apparently the doctor was being called 
upon to do something which he refused to do. 

At last it became clear what the scene was about. 
The soldiers were trying to force Skliansky to speak. 
Gradually they pushed him forward toward the com- 
manders. 

“Oh, no,” we heard, “you will be kind enough to 
speak hete. If what you’ve been telling us is the truth 
there is no need of fear. We’ll hear now what you 
have to say.” 

“Comrade” Skliansky stood sheepishly confused 
amid peals of laughter. Finally, the hesitating leader 
of a world revolution from the fifth army was pushed 
on to the platform. 

jHe was compelled to speak. What he said was the 
usual Bolshevist nonsense, but there was no emotion, no 
fire, no conviction in his words; 

The end of the episode was very sad for “comrade” 
Skliansky and his lieutenants. His duel with the War 
Minister became known throughout the army, and in 
a light rather ridiculous so far as the Bolsheviki were 
concerned. Subsequently, the brave revolutionist Skli- 
ansky became assistant to the Commissar of War, 
Leon Trotsky. 


[205] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


After my tour of the front and two inspiring days 
in Moscow I returned on June fourteenth to Petro- 
grad. It was necessary to finish some important gov- 
ernment business and to return by the end of June to 
the Galician Front, for the offensive. 



CHAPTER IX 

THE OFFENSIVE 
ITS INEVITABILITY 

W E no longer find to-day the unanimity of 
opinion concerning our offensive of July, 
1917, that prevailed then both in Russia 
and among the Allies. Due apparently to a miscon- 
ception, some even consider that offensive as the last 
blow that killed the Russian army. Others believe 
that the operation was determined not by the interests 
of Russian but was “dictated” to us by our Allies. A 
third group is inclined to see in it a particular mani- 
festation of “light-headedness” and irresponsibility on 
the part of the government in having permitted itself 
to be carried away by love of rhetoric. 

The last opinion deserves no reply. The fact is that 
the resumption of active operations by the Russian 
army after two months of paralysis was dictated abso- 
lutely by the inner development of events in Russia. 
To be sure, the representatives of the Allies insisted 
on the execution by Russia, at least in part, of the stra- 
tegic plan adopted at the Inter-Allied conference in 
Petrograd, in February, 1917. But the insistence of 
the Allies would have been of no avail if the necessity 
for the offensive had not been dictated by our own 
political considerations. The insistence of the Allies 
(France and England) played no part, if only because 
they no longer considered themselves bound by any 
obligations to Russia after the Revolution. As I have 

c 207 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


already said, the German General Staff having stopped, 
according to plan, all active operations on the Russian 
Front, there ensued a condition of virtual armistice. 
It was the plan of the German High Command that 
this armistice be followed by a separate peace and the 
exit of Russia from the War. Berlin’s efforts to come 
to a direct agreement with Russia were begun as early 
as April. Of course, these efforts failed to make any 
impression on the Provisional Government and the 
whole Russian democracy, which were determined on 
peace as quickly as possible, but a general, not a 
separate peace. Von Bethmann-Hollweg, or, rather, 
Ludendorff, did not, however, lose hope of achieving 
Germany’s purpose. They directed their attention 
upon the Soviet circles. 

About the middle of June there appeared in Pet- 
rograd, among other foreign socialists who were pay- 
ing frequent visits to Russia, one of the leaders of the 
Swiss Social-Democratic party. His name was Grimm. 
Despite his definite anti-Allied attitude, the Provisional 
Government permitted him to enter Russia on guaran- 
ties given by certain leaders of the Soviet who main- 
tained a strong attitude in favor of continuing Russia’s 
defense. However, on his arrival in Petrograd, 
Grimm immediately launched a propaganda along pro- 
German lines. Soon after we intercepted a letter 
addressed to Grimm by Hoffman, of the Swiss Federal 
Council, which, by way of instruction to Grimm, de- 
clared : 

“Germany will undertake no offensive on the East- 
ern Front as long as there remains a possibility of 
agreement with Russia.” 

Thus it was not possible to rely upon a new blow 
from Germany that would definitely bring the Russian 
democracy, dreaming of peace, to the realization of 

[ 208 ] 



THE OFFENSIVE 


the bitter facts of the situation.! It was necessary to 
make a choice — to accept the consequences of the vir- 
tual demobilization of the Russian army and capitu- 
late to Germany, or to assume the initiative in military- 
operations. ! Having rejected the idea of a separate 
peace, which is always a misfortune for the country 
concluding it, the return to new action became unavoid- 
able. For no army can remain in indefinite idleness. 
An army may not always be in a position to fight, but 
the expectancy, at all times, of impending action con- 
stitutes the fundamental condition of its existence. To 
say to an army in the midst of war that under no cir- 
cumstances would it be compelled to fight is tantamount 
to transforming the troops into a meaningless mob, 
useless, restless, irritable and, therefore, capable of 
all sorts of excesses. For this reason and to preserve 
the interior of the country from the grave wave of 
anarchy threatening from the front it was incumbent 
upon us, before embarking upon the main problem of 
army reorganization and systemtaic reduction and 
readjustment of its regular formations, to make of it 
once more an army, i.e., to bring it back to the psy- 
chology of action, or of impending action. 

The Russian army was, of course, no longer capable 
of carrying out in any measure the plan of a general 
offensive worked out in January. If during the three 
years preceding the Revolution the Russian troops 
failed to win a single decisive victory over the German 
armies (only on the Austro-Galician and the Caucasus 
fronts were there any victories) , it was quite futile to 
think of victory now, in the summer of 1917. 

But a victory was not necessary I As President Wil- 
son declared categorically before Congress, it was the 
Russian Revolution which made it possible for America 
to enter the War and thus alter fundamentally the 

[ 209] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


ratio of the contending forces in the War. As late as 
January, 1917, the war situation made it imperative for 
Russia and her Allies to bend all their energies to bring 
the War to an end by the autumn of 1917. But in the 
summer of 1917 it became necessary only to keep going 
until the arrival of the American army on the West- 
ern Front, with all its tremendous resources. This gen- 
eral Allied task expressed itself, so far as Russia was 
concerned, in a new strategic aim: we were no longer 
required to engage in a general offensive, but to com- 
pel the Germans to keep as many divisions as possible 
on the Russian Front until the conclusion of the cam- 
paign of 1917, i.e., until the autumn. As I will show 
later, this task was carried out in full by the Russian 
Revolution, and all the contentions of English and 
French politicians to the effect that not only the Bol- 
sheviki but also the Provisional Government and Rus- 
sia in general failed to carry out Russia’s obligations to 
the Allied Governments, and thus delivered a blow to 
the Allied cause, are either a grave mistake or a con- 
scious falsification of the facts, in contradiction with 
all conceptions of honesty and honor in international 
relations. 

In general, the Allies throughout the existence of 
the Provisional Government — towards which they 
maintained a critical attitude — failed to understand 
that the material weakening of Russia, after the fall of 
the monarchy, was compensated in full measure by the 
effect of the Russian Revolution on the internal situa- 
tion in Germany, Austria, Bulgaria and Turkey. 

The most important effect of the Russian Revolu- 
tion, in my opinion, was the fundamental change in the 
attitude and sentiment of Austria’s Slav population, 
as well as the sharp change in the orientation of Pii- 

[ 210 ] 



THE OFFENSIVE 


sudsky’s Polish lemons, which up until the moment of 
the Russian Revolution were fighting in the ranks of 
the Austro-Hungarian army against Russia and her 
Allies. 

1 In Austria-Hungary the centrifugal movement in 
the Slav regions was acutely accentuated.’ On the front 
itself the Austro-German command was forced to 
transfer many Slav troops to thei Italian and French 
fronts, substituting these on the Russian front with 
picked German divisions. In the ranks of the Russian 
army appeared the extremely well-trained Czecho- 
slovak forces. The abandonment by the Provisional 
Government of the old Czarist claim to Constantinople 
created a very favorable impression among the ruling 
elements in Turkey. Shortly before summer success- 
ful negotiations with Turkey for her exit from the War 
had already become possible. The same was true of 
Bulgaria, whose troops on the Russian Front had 
become quite demoralized. 

Finally, on the extreme* north of the endless Rus- 
sian Front, the politico-military situation was likewise 
altered to Germany’s disadvantage. In Sweden the 
anti-German sentiment promoted by Branting and his 
group was given a powerful impetus, while in Finland 
the local activists, i.e., the politico-military groups 
seeking to achieve Finland’s independence by aiding 
Germany, abandoned their policy, at least temporarily. 
To be sure, all these military and political disadvan- 
tages were balanced in some measure by the German 
General Staff through the work of the Bolsheviki and 
the Ukrainian separatists. But the necessity forced 
upon Germany of returning German divisions and Ger- 
man artillery from the West to the Russian Front and 
increasing the number of German forces in the East 
made it impossible for Ludendorff, in the spring of 

[211 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


1918, to deliver a decisive blow in the West, before 
the arrival of the American troops. 

s, But leaving aside all these political and international 
considerations, the restoration of the fighting capacity 
of the Russian army by the resumption of active opera- 
tions was, in the spring; of 1917, demanded by Russia’s 
national consciousness.^ I could cite an endless list of 
decisions, resolutions, demands and orders for the 
resumption of the offensive. At the very beginning of 
the Revolution General Brusiloff telegraphed to the 
Provisional Government concerning the absolute need 
of an offensive. At the same time, Field Marshal 
Haig, in an order to the British army, announced re- 
ceipt of a telegram from General Alexeyeff informing 
him that the Russian troops were preparing for an 
offensive. 

The need of an offensive to “wipe out the shame” 
was constantly emphasized in its resolutions by the 
Temporary Committee of the Dumai The first con- 
ference of the Cadet party (Miliukoff’s party) spoke 
likewise. The official organ of this party and the 
liberal press in general waged a campaign for an of- 
fensive, at times with even too much energy. The 
first conference of officers, meeting at General Head- 
quarters in the middle of May, after presenting, in a 
resolution, a most critical picture of conditions in the 
army at the end of the Gutchkoff-Alexeyeff administra- 
tion, insisted categorically on the need of resumption of 
action at the front. I may mention in passing that 
the officers’ conference at General Headquarters laid 
the foundation for the Officers’ Union in the army, a 
distinctly political body around whose executive com- 
mittee was bom the future military conspiracy headed 
by Komiloff. 

Simultaneously with the conference at General 
C 212 ] 



THE OFFENSIVE 


Headquarters, the conference of democratic officers 
was in progress in Petrograd, which likewise demanded 
restoration of the fighting capacity of the Russian 
army. Delegations of front and army committees 
which came to Petrograd for “contact” with the gov- 
ernment and the Soviet, after the German blow on the 
Stokhod, also insisted categorically on the resumption 
of the offensive by the army. The first congress of 
front delegates, in session at the time of Gutchkoff’s 
resignation, gave expression to the same demand in the 
name of all the troops in the front lines. In the middle 
of April, the Petrograd Soviet, followed soon there- 
after by the Executive Committee of the Congress of 
Soviets, took the same stand, although with certain 
reservations and ambiguities. 

VIn short, there was not in the whole of Russia a 
single political group and social organization (with the 
sole exception of the Bolsheviki) which did not realize 
that the restoration of the fighting capacity of the 
Russian army and its assumption of the offensive was 
the immediate .fundamental, imperative national task 
of Free Russia.? For the sake of her future Russia had 
to perform this act of heroic sacrifice. And this act 
was performed, thanks to the popular enthusiasm, the 
will to sacrifice and the truly revolutionary enthusiasm 
which gripped the country. 

THE SOVIETS, THE BOLSHEVIKI AND THE OFFENSIVE 

A month after the departure of Gutchkoff from the 
War Ministry and of Alexeyeff from General Head- 
quarters, a profound change had taken place at the 
front and a considerable change in the country. “The 
War Ministry,” wrote the semi-Bolshevist Novaya 
Zshisn, on May seventeenth, “is working with extraor- 

[213] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


dinary energy, in cooperation with all the bourgeois and 
the majority of the democratic forces, for the restora- 
tion of the discipline and the fighting capacity of the 
army, and there is no longer any doubt of its aim: 
unification of the Allied front and an offensive against 
the enemy.” 

Neither was there any doubt in Berlin concerning 
the successful work of the Provisional Government. 
The transfer of German divisions to our front was 
greatly stimulated. The propaganda activity of the 
august commander-in-chief on the German Eastern 
Front, Prince Rupprecht, was likewise extended and 
intensified. The Bolshevist press, as well as the special 
sheets printed behind the enemy lines for distribution 
in the Russian trenches, developed a campaign of 
monstrous slander and misrepresentation against me 
and General Brusiloff. 

On June fifteenth, the All-Russian Congress of 
Soviets opened in Petrograd. I will cite only one 
episode to sho\y the sentiments of the delegates, par- 
ticularly of the soldiers from the front. Some Bol- 
shevik, in an effort to fan demagogic and anarchist in- 
stincts, began quoting from two “reactionary” orders 
of the ProvisiQnal Government, which had just been 
promulgated, tin a fury of resentment he cited the 
particularly emphatic passages from a circular issued 
by Premier Lvoff calling upon all responsible elements 
throughout the country to combat the Bolshevist cam- 
paign of anarchy. | To the astonishment and wrath of 
all the Bolsheviki in the hall, the Congress greeted 
every word of the circular with a storm of applause. 
Thereupon the Bolshevist orator took up my “Order 
No. 17,” just published, dealing with measures for 
stopping desertion. At this point the Congress could 

[214] 



THE OFFENSIVE 


no longer restrain itself. The assembly rose as one 
man in a stormy ovation. 

In the face of the definite patriotic attitude of the 
first Congress of Soviets it was quite easy for me to 
put through my resolution approving the operations 
which were to begin at the front two weeks later. 
The resumption of the offensive was approved by the 
Congress, the Bolsheviki alone voting in the negative. 
This order was supplementary to the very severe anti- 
desertion law of the Provisional Government, adopted 
several days before. Having attained tremendous pro- 
portions in the last months of the Czarist regime and 
assumed the nature of an epidemic in the first two 
months of the Revolution, desertions in the army 
ceased by the beginning of military operations in the 
summer. According to official figures, the number of 
desertions in various parts of the front had been re- 
duced by that time to between 200,000 and 500,000 
men. 

Incidentally it was at this Congress that I met Lenin 
for the first and only time. He was accompanied by 
his entire staff. Present were Kameneff, Zinovieff, 
Lunacharsky, as well as Trotsky, who, while still 
hesitating about joining the Bolsheviki, was already 
quite openly flirting with them. Sensing the violent 
opposition of the Congress, Lenin did not, however, 
restrain himself from offering a very simple method 
of solving the complex social problems. He sug- 
gested the “arrest of one hundred of the biggest capital- 
ists.” All the rest would then care for itself 1 This 
ingenious proposal, which evoked the enthusiasm of 
the street mobs assembled daily before the balcony 
of the Ksheshinskaya Palace, occupied by Lenin and 
his staff, brought only laughter and ridicule at the 
Congress. But those assembled here were the few, 

[21S] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


the best, the picked elements of the people and of the 
army, whereas there, outside the doors of the Congress, 
remained the dark, infuriated thousands of declasse 
elements, performing under conditions of war and 
revolution the role of the “class-conscious proletariat” 
in the shops and factories. On taking the floor to 
reply to Lenin, I was struck not so much by the effect 
produced by him on the delegates as by the realization 
of the destructive influence he wielded over audiences 
of another character. 

I do not know what Lenin felt while listening to me. 
I do not even know whether he did listen to me or 
whether his ear was attuned principally to the senti- 
ments of the audience. But he did not remain to 
the end of my address. Picking up his brief case, with 
head bent, he stole out of the hall sidewise, almost 
unnoticed. Howefver, Lenin and his close lieutenants 
had more important business before them than the 
Congress of Soviets. Over the heads of the leaders of 
the democracy, who had “sold themselves to the 
bourgeoisie,” they decided to appeal directly to the 
Petrograd proletariat, having planned to bring pres- 
sure to bear on the Congress by preparing another 
armed demonstration. The date set for the demonstra- 
tion, if I recall aright, was June twenty-fourth. Ac- 
cording to Lenin’s plan, this demonstration, if success- 
ful, was to have been transformed into an armejd 
uprising. The slogans of the movement were “Bread, 
Peace, Liberty”; “Away with the Capitalists”; “Re- 
vision of the Rights of Soldiers” and “Down with the 
Ten Capitalist Ministers.”’ The tenth among these 
“enemies of the proletariat” and of the toiling masses 
was Kerensky. The remaining five ministers, all so- 
cialists, were for the present accorded mercy by Lenin. 

The brazen effort to provoke new street riots was 
[216] 



THE OFFENSIVE 


frustrated by the energetic action of the Soviet leaders. 
But the activities of the Bolsheviki in seeking to force 
disturbances in Petrograd at exactly the moment when 
the interests of the German General Staff at the front 
demanded it, gave rise to an interesting coincidence. 

The Bolsheviki failed, however, in thwarting the 
offensive. But next month, on July sixteenth, the new 
operation undertaken by the Bolsheviki in Petrograd, 
in support of the German Staff, proved more success- 
ful. 


WITH THE ARMY BEFORE THE OFFENSIVE 

After carrying through the necessary resolution at 
the Congress of the Soviets, after visiting the Cossack 
Congress and receiving from the regimental commit- 
tees of the Petrograd garrison the solemn promise 
that they would not take advantage of my absence to 
deal a treacherous blow to the Revolution, I left, on 
June twenty-sixth, for that part of the front where 
the offensive was to begin. In Tarnopol the military 
representatives of all the Allied staffs entered my car. 
In the name of the King of England, the British rep- 
resentative accredited to the Russian General Head- 
quarters promised that the British armies would sup- 
port our offensive. For reasons still unknown to me 
this promise was not kept. In Tarnopol I made public 
my order to the troops for the advance. The whole 
of Russia was tense with expectation. Would the 
troops advance? No one ventured to answer the 
question. 

Beyond Tarnopol began the real, active front. How 
different was the situation now, as compared with that 
at the end of May, on my first visit to General Brusil- 
off! Then there was deadly silence and emptiness. 

[ 217 3 



THE CATASTROPHE 


Now there was life, movement, action preparatory for 
the great effort. The regiments were marching, am- 
munition boxes bumping, field kitchens thundering by 
toward the front lines. Artillery was roaring in the 
distance. At night, here and there over our positions, 
were to be seen the burning rockets of the Germans. 

Slowly, with a kind of triumphant air, my train 
pulled up to the headquarters of General Hutor, com- 
mander of the Galician Front, near the small, out-of- 
the-way town of Kshivy, a short distance from the 
positions of the seventh army, which was to have 
moved first in the direction of the Brjezany. 

Hutor, who succeeded Brusiloff as front com- 
mander, was not a particularly remarkable general. 
But he had a first-class chief-of-staff in General Duk- 
honin, one of the very best of Russia’s officers, who 
had a brilliant career during the War and knew how 
to retain the respect of his soldiers in the very heat 
of the Revolution, without sacrificing in any way the 
honor of his uniform or the dignity of an honest citizen. 
Soon after the Bolshevist coup d’etat, Dukhonin, at 
that time already chief of the General Staff, was 
lynched at the Mohileff station at General Head- 
quarters, on the incitement of Krilenko. 

On June twenty-sixth began the artillery preparation 
for the drive. For two days our artillery poured its fire 
on the enemy trendies. The reply of the watchful 
enemy was silence. The front line of their trenches 
had been deared by the Germans. Their well camou- 
flaged artillery was awaiting its hour. To be sure, not 
everything was quite in order in the spirit of the 
seventh and eleventh armies, which had been desig- 
nated for the offensive. There were divisions in a 
state bordering on mutiny. There were regiments 

[218] 



THE OFFENSIVE 


showing only perfunctory obedience. There were of- 
ficers quite without “heart” and some who were frankly 
sabotaging the preparatory operations. 

On June thirtieth, I inspected the positions. It is 
difficult now to describe our state of mind. High 
tension, determination and, at times, a feeling of im- 
pending triumph! A great deal of thought and feel- 
ing had been experienced by the army. Both officers 
and men were now going into battle not with the old 
emotions. We felt clearly their effort to overcome 
something in themselves, to free themselves from sen- 
sations unusual on the eve of battle. There was more 
depth, more spirituality, but less of concentrated 
harmony. The troops seemed to feel that the dent in 
their insides had not quite been removed. To the very 
last moment the officers did not know whether the 
soldiers would follow them in the attack. The sol- 
diers were not quite sure whether it was necessary to 
die when there, in the rear, the fond dreams of genera- 
tions were being realized. 

On that day, in our final address to the troops before 
the battle, every one of us who spoke was particularly 
stirred. For were not our speeches the last greeting 
before death? The soldiers and many of the officers 
drank in every word, seeking to find in them the an- 
swer to the painful question which stirred their simple 
souls to the very last moment.’ 

I remember a throng of soldiers in the region of the 
eleventh army, near a dugout, who attracted the at- 
tention of the German artillery. We had to talk under 
the music of the flying shells. But no one moved, no 
one ventured to seek shelter, no one even bent his 
head. 

Again, I recall a trip late at night. Rain and storm. 
At one spot regiments which had just come up from the 

[ 219] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


rear were awaiting us. \Under the terrific downpour, 
to the accompaniment of thunder and lightning, 
drenched through and through, the thousands did not 
move, anxious to find, in my words, faith in the justice 
of their coming sacrifice of death. 



CHAPTER X 

THE BATTLE 


Jk T last, July first 1 The general air is that of Pas- 
sion Week: solemn, prayerful, sorrowful. We 
JL move towards the observation point, situated 

on a hill of a chain of elevations running along the line 
of our positions. The heavy artillery roars incessantly. 
Over our heads the monstrous shells scream pitifully 
on their way to the enemy trenches. 

Our artillerists are confused : many of the guns sent 
us by the Allies have failed to withstand two days’ 
work. Apparently our Allies have acted according to 
the old Russian saying: “Take, oh, God, what is of no 
use to us.” 

We are now at the observation point. From here 
we see the field of battle as clearly as if it were on the 
palm of our hand. But for the present all is emptiness. 

There is no one to be seen. 

The artillery roars on. 

With growing impatience we look at our watches. 

Finally, sudden, complete silence. A suggestion of 
fear! 

Are the troops attacking? 

The troops are attacking! 

There, before the first enemy line, are some barely 
visible, running dots. They increase! The battle is 
developing furiously. Almost in the very center ap- 
pear our English armored cars. The German artillery 
begins to pound thein. Ours Is now silent. 

[ 221 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


i Especially difficult is the situation on the left flank 
of the enemy. There, our troops must capture a slope, 
dubbed, for its shape, the “flatiron.” 

Through our field glasses we see clearly how the 
little black figures of our men slip down over it and 
how at a certain spot the German artillery begins to 
strike them. A thud. Dense smoke and debris. In 
place of the little figures — a shell hole. From below, 
the figures climb again. But why is our artillery 
silent? Above our heads enemy shells begin to whistle 
gently. We must stop our hurried breakfast in the 
shade of some old oak trees and move into the dugout 
of the observation point, proceeding further along a 
line of connecting trenches and not, any longer, along 
the direct line of the wood. 

On the first day of the battle we captured 10,000 
prisoners and several cannon, but failed to break 
through the line towards Brjezany. Indecisive also 
were the battles on our right flank, where the eleventh 
army was in action. Guns, prisoners, but not a step 
forward ! 

There where last year Brusiloff attacked the Aus- 
trian Slavs were now only German and Hungarian 
divisions, with an admixture of Turks. 

But on the left flank, where the eighth army was in 
action, our troops in a few days achieved a brilliant 
success. After breaking through the Austrian Front 
at Kalusch, the troops of General Korniloff and Gen- 
eral Tcheremisoff broke through deep into the enemy 
lines, capturing, on July tenth, the old city of Galitch. 

The success at Kalusch was facilitated by the fact 
that on this part of the front there were many Slavs 
in the enemy’s ranks. In addition, our command had 
succeeded in obtaining, a few d!ays before the battle, 
all the necessary information concerning the disposition 

[ 222 J 



THE BATTLE 

of the enemy troops and the plans of the enemy’s 
command. 

i The offensive of the Russian troops occurred exactly 
four months after the outbreak of the Revolution, 
midway between March and November. 

The operations begun by us in Galicia were later 
extended to the Western Front commanded by General 
Deniken and to the Northern Front. Very soon they 
lost their offensive character and became purely de- 
fensive actions. The failures of the Russian armies 
thereupon became one of the sharpest and most poison- 
ous weapons in the struggle against the Provisional 
Government conducted by the leaders of the Korniloff 
military conspiracy, which matured in September. But 
this utilization for political purposes of the restoration 
of the fighting capacity of the Russian army cannot, 
looked at objectively, belittle its historical significance. 

At the very height of the venomous campaign waged 
against the Provisional Government under the camou- 
flage of diplomatic flirtation by the official ruling circles 
of England and France, the staff of our commander-in- 
chief forwarded to the Allied staffs, under date of 
October second or third, the following report, which, 
by the way, was suppressed by the Allied authorities : 

“More than six and a half months have passed since 
the beginning of our Revolution, but our armies con- 
tinue to hold, as before, the forces of the enemy. 
Moreover, these forces have not decreased during that 
period, but on the contrary have increased in num- 
ber. On the day of the resumption of the offensive by 
our troops in Galicia, July first, the number of enemy 
divisions on the Russo-German Front was equal to that 
on March twelfth [i.e., the last day of the monarchy — 
A.K.]. And at the height of the battles in Eastern 

[ 223 1 



THE CATASTROPHE 


Galicia and Bukowina the forces of the enemy in- 
creased by nine and a half infantry divisions. This 
increase consisted entirely of Germans, while the num- 
ber of Austrians and Turks was reduced. The enemy’s 
artillery had been increased during that period by 640 
guns of various calibers. The Caucasus front is not 
taken into consideration in this report.” 

Thus, after the first moments of military weakening, 
Russia after the Revolution continued to hold the 
enemy on her front, in numbers at least equal to the 
pre-revolutionary period. Thanks to the psychological 
influence exerted by the Russian Revolution on the 
populations of the Central Empires, to which I have 
already referred, Ludendorff was compelled to concen- 
trate purely German divisions on the Russian Front in 
numbers yet unprecedented during the entire period of 
the War. 

The strategic task on the Russian Front in the year 
1917 was carried out in full: the liquidation of the 
War through German victory, pending the entrance of 
the United States into active operations, became im- 
possible. 

This fundamental consequence of the restoration of 
the fighting capacity of the Russian army did not in any 
way depend on the measure of success of the Russian 
operations, in the narrow, technical sense of the word. 
For this reason, with the moment of the revival of the 
army’s activity, the front ceased to be the point of 
concentration in the internal policy of the government.! 

Our attention was now transferred to the interior 
of the country, where, by utilizing the psychological 
effect of the army’s resurrection, it was necessary to 
stimulate with all the power available the convalescence 
of a national consciousness and the strengthening of 
the new state born of the Revolution. 

[ 224] 



THE BATTLE 


CON SOLID ATION OF THE STATE 

With the beginning of the summer, the Provisional 
Government, through the ministers of the Left, began 
building a strong dam against the anarcho-Bolshevist 
stream. 

As I have already said, the Provisional Government 
was quite alone during the first two months of the 
Revolution in its struggle for the restoration of gov- 
ernmental authority, for the proponents of a “strong 
government” in the Duma had no influence whatever 
on the masses. They merely sought to supply wise 
guidance, while the leaders of the Soviet, playing the 
role of a loyal opposition, succeeded only in undermin- 
ing the authority of the governments 

But now, with the participation of these leaders in 
the government, the struggle for the establishment of 
real authority, for the restoration of national political 
discipline was launched within the Soviets, within the 
ranks of the revolutionary democracy themselves. 
Having assumed ministerial portfolios the opponents 
of yesterday, who had carried no responsibility in their 
opposition, found themselves under the blows of the 
most irresponsible demagogy on the Left. 

From the point of view of anarchy and the negation 
of all normal processes of government, all the parties 
of the Left represented in the Provisional Government 
were taking a- clearly “counter-revolutionary” position. 
(To expose the “reactionary” or counter-revolutionary 
crimes of the Soviet ministers, to accuse them of “con- 
spiracy with the capitalists” against the proletariat and 
of “treason to the Revolution” became now the chief 
task of the Bolsheviki in their -propaganda and press. 
Lenin felt clearly that the chief obstacles in the strug- 

[>25] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


gle of the Bolsheviki for power were not the liberal 
parties, which had lost all foundation of influence, but 
the socialist and democratic parties, particularly the 
socialist parties, which controlled almost all the 
political power but which accepted the War as a tragic 
but unavoidable struggle, t 

LENIN 

Did Lenin believe sincerely that the leathers of the 
Russian democracy, with many of whom he had worjked 
shoulder to shoulder for many years against Czarism, 
were really “betraying” the people, their own past and 
all the traditions of the Russian liberation movement 
in general? 

Of course, not! 

In his very first speech before the Petrograd Soviet, 
on the evening of April seventeenth, immediately after 
his arrival from Switzerland, Lenin, in summoning the 
soldiers to fraternization and the workers to seizure 
of the factories, admitted’ that with the fall of the 
monarchy Russia had become “the freest” country in 
the world and that no one in Russia would dare to 
threaten the interests of the Russian working classes.* 
More than that : already at that moment Lenin under- 
stood very well that no socialist experiments were pos- 
sible in Russia, an agricultural country, with a weak 
industry almost entirely ruined by the War. The 
leaders of the Russian Revolution were aiming to 
consolidate and' to strengthen political democracy on 
the basis of comprehensive social reforms. This task 
could not be opposed by Lenin in so far as the question 

♦At the beginning of November, on the very eve of the Bolshevist 
coup d’dtat, Lenin repeated in the Pravda his statement of April 
seventeenth. 

[226] 




THE BATTLE 


at issue concerned Russia alone, because up to the War 
he had been himself a supporter of democracy. 

"*But the fate of Russia was the least consideration 
of Lenin and his friends in 1917. * With the stubborn 
blindness of a sick fanatic, viewing the World War 
through the narrow window of a remote comer of 
Switzerland, Lenin had as early as 1915 reached the 
utterly groundless conclusion that the European War 
would end in a social revolution in the industrial, cap- 
italist countries of Western Europe considered ripe 
for socialism. 

As Lenin saw it, the coming of this world social 
revolution was to be stimulated by the speediest possible 
transformation of the “exterior war of peoples” into 
an “internal war of classes.” And in order to facilitate 
this transformation, said Lenin, it was incumbent upon 
all “true” revolutionists in all belligerent countries 
“to promote the defeat of their own fatherlands.” As 
the first step in this task, Lenin argued, it was neces- 
sary to strive for the defeat of the “Czarist monarchy,” 
the “most barbarous and most reactionary of all gov- 
ernments.” 

SThus, the promotion of the defeat of his own coun- 
try, Russia, became for Lenin and his closest associates 
not shameful treason and disgusting crime but a kind 
of revolutionary duty, a policy dictated by his “social- 
ist conscience.” Russia must be smashed as the chief 
foundation of European reaction, and his backward 
agricultural country, as Lenin himself described it, 
must become the base of operations of the “vanguard 
of the proletarian world revolution,” pending the social 
revolution which was to develop at any moment in 
the industrial countries of the West. 

On leaving Switzerland early in April, 1917, for 
Russia via Germany, in a train readily placed at his 

[ Z27 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 

disposal by Ludendorff and Chancellor V on Bethmann- 
Hollweg, Lenin, in his parting declaration to his Swiss 
socialist friends, wrote that Russia was for him only 
the springboard for social revolution in Western 
Europe. Already then, in the spring of 19x7, the half- 
mad fanatic saw clearly the German workers closing 
their ranks for the “final conflict” against capitalism. 
In November, 1917, Lenin and Zinovieff expected 
that within six months the Revolution would be under 
way in the West. 

Such was the substance of the “revolutionary” pro- 
gram which matured in Lenin’s brain. One must point 
out that nowhere in Europe, except in Russia, is it pos- 
sible to find such a type of political leader, ?one so ut- 
terly devoid of any feeling of country.^ Under Czarism 
the people were accustomed to regard the state itself 
as hostile. The monopoly on all outer expressions of 
patriotism arrogated to itself by absolutism perverted 
in the people the very feeling of patriotism. To be 
sure, national consciousness did exist in Russia and 
consciously or unconsciously it permeated the entire 
being of the overwhelming majority of Russians. But 
the deadly oppression of the old regime, destroying 
the country not only materially but also spiritually, 
brought forth here and there a disease extremely 
dangerous to the very existence of the nation: the 
atrophy of the sense of nationhood, of the sense of 
patriotism. 

Lenin was the most extreme expression of that 
spiritual ulcer of injured patriotism which for decades 
had been poisoning the national consciousness of the 
Russian intelligentsia. There is hardly a person 
among cultured Russians who has not, at one period 
or another of his life, suffered more or less acutely 
from this disease of spiritual or, rather, intellectual 

[228] 



THE BATTLE 


estrangement from his country. In this sense alone 
are Lenin and his friends unquestionably the product 
of the Russian past, of Russian history. 

THE BOLSHEVIKI AND THE GERMAN STAFF 

Lenin’s treason to Russia, committed in the very 
heat of the War, is an historically unquestionable and 
undeniable fact. 

Of course, Lenin was no common agent of Ger- 
many, in the ordinary sense of the word. He did not 
regard the bourgeois motherland as his own and felt 
himself bound by no obligations toward it. The gen- 
eral defeatist theory invented by him and his desire 
for the defeat of the Czarist monarchy in particular 
prepared him psychologically for the practical realiza- 
tion of his theory by the resort to methods which, in 
the common language of bourgeois politics, are con- 
sidered betrayal and treason. 

One must admit that the very monstrosity of Lenin’s 
crime rendered it so improbable to the consciousness 
of the average human being that to this very day many 
people cannot accept it as true. Yet it is a fact, con- 
firmed by the frank admissions of Hindenburg, Luden- 
dorff and General Hoffman, chief of German operations 
on the Russian Front, and by the expose of Edward 
Bernstein, noted leader of the German Social-Demo- 
cratic party. I will not cite here all the data from the 
writings of the three aforementioned German generals. 
It is sufficient to quote the following few words from 
Lpdendoxff’s memoirs: 

! “In sending Lenin to Russia our government took 
upon itself a very great responsibility. This journey 
was justified from the military point of view: it was 
necessary that Russia should collapse.” 

[ 229] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


So far as I was concerned, it was not necessary for 
me to await the German admissions, made later, after 
the War. The Provisional Government, in the summer 
of 1917, had established clearly the betrayal of Russia 
by Lenin and his lieutenants. The situation was as 
follows : 

Like all belligerent countries, with the exception of 
Russia, which was quite backward in her method's of 
promoting the dissolution of the enemy’s morale, Ger- 
many, even before the Revolution, recruited spies 
among her Russian prisoners, transporting them to the 
Russian frontiers, where they appeared in the role 
of war “heroes” who had “fled” from their captivity. 
The number of such spies greatly increased in the first 
weeks of the Revolution, for during that period the 
Finnish frontier was left virtually unguarded, the en- 
tire Russian machinery of military intelligence being 
destroyed. One of these volunteer spies came directly 
to me. He explained that he had accepted the espion- 
age offer with the idea of discovering the ways and 
means whereby the traitors who had come to Russia 
were communicating with their German chiefs. He 
outlined to me the entire technique of this communica- 
tion. The man’s revelations were of no particular 
value, however, and offered no opportunity for the 
study and exposure of the German espionage apparatus 
at work in Russia. 

But information obtained from another informant 
produced facts of very great value and established 
conclusively the relations of the Bolsheviki with the 
German staff and’ the ways and means employed in 
maintaining the contact. 

In April there came to General Alexeyeff at Gen- 
eral Headquarters a Ukrainian officer named Yermol- 
enko, who had “fled” from a war prisoner’s camp in 

[ 230] 



THE BATTLE 


Germany, after having fictitiously accepted the role 
of a German agent. The task meted out to him on 
his return to Russia consisted in propaganda in the 
rear in behalf of Ukrainian separatism. He was sup- 
plied with full information concerning ways and means 
of communication with the German authorities, the 
banks through which the necessary funds were being 
transferred, and also with the names of several other 
important agents, among whom were a number of 
Ukrainian separatists and Lenin.* 

\ On my visit to General Headquarters in May, 
shortly after my appointment as Minister of War, 
General Alexeyeff and General Denikin, his chief-of- 
staff, presented to me a report and a special memoran- 
dum which contained the exact lines of communication 
connecting the Russian traitors with their highly placed 
German friends. ? 

The Provisional Government was thereupon con- 
fronted with the difficult task of exploring the lines 
indicated by Yermolenko, shadowing the agents con- 
necting Lenin with Ludendorff and seizing them in 
the act, with all possible incriminating material. The 
least possible publicity, of course, would have com- 
pelled the German staff to change the means of com- 
munication, while under the conditions of absolute 
freedom of press then prevailing in Russia, excluding 
virtually even the application of military censorship, 
Yermolenko’s expose would have become public prop- 
erty had the slightest information concerning the mat- 
ter penetrated even into the most reserved and most 


♦Because of lack of space I have excluded from this book the 
story of the separatist movement in the Ukraine and the struggle of 
the Provisional Government against it, as well as the general question 
of national minorities and other basic problems of the Revolution, as 
they appeared in 1917. — A. K. 

[ 231 ] 




THE CATASTROPHE 


responsible political circles. Even within the Provi- 
sional Government it was necessary to confine the very 
grave information to a limited number of ministers 
and officials. 

General Alexeyeff and I decided to confide the task 
of following up Yermolenko’s information concerning 
the activities of the Ukrainian separatists to a special 
agency, under the direct supervision of General Head- 
quarters, while the Provisional Government took upon 
itself the task of mvestigatingf'the connection of Lenin 
with the German staff. Only two ministers, in addi- 
tion to myself and Prince Lvoff, knew of this — Min- 
ister of Foreign Affairs Terestchenko and Minister of 
Communications Nekrassoff. Within this circle the 
execution of the task was placed upon Terestchenko, 
while the rest of us tried, as far as possible, not to 
interfere in the details of the work. The task was 
extremely difficult, complex and long, but the results 
were most deadly for Lenin. The means of Lenin’s 
communication with Germany were clearly determined, 
as well as the identity of the persons (Fuerstenberg- 
Ganetsky in Sweden and Kozlowsky and Mme. Sumen- 
son in Petrograd) through whom money transfers 
were made and the names of the banks in question 
(the Diskonto Gesellschaft in Berlin, the Nya Bank 
in Stockholm and the Siberian Bank in Petrograd). 

On his arrest, during the Bolshevist uprising in 
July, Kozlowsky did not deny receiving large sums 
from abroad, when confronted with the incriminating 
documents. In defense this man, who at one time 
had enjoyed a decent reputation as a member of the 
Polish Socialist party, declared brazenly that together 
with Ganetsky and Mme. Sumenson he had been carry- 
ing on a contraband trade during the War, importing 
into Russia articles of women’s apparel. 

[ 232 ] 



THE BATTLE 


On July eighteenth or nineteenth, exactly at the 
time of the Bolshevist uprising, Ganetsky was to ar- 
rive in Petrograd, across Finland. The Bolshevist- 
German agent from Stockholm, with documents on his 
person constituting decisive evidence of Lenin’s con- 
nection with the German staff, was to have been ar- 
rested by the Russian authorities on the Russo-Swedish 
border. The documents were fully known to us. How 
it happened that Ganetsky was not arrested and why 
the two months’ work of the Provisional Government 
(in the main that of Terestchenko) , in connection with 
the investigation of the Bolshevist activities, ended in 
failure will be told later. At this point, fully conscious 
of my responsibility before history, I can only repeat 
the words of the district attorney of Petrograd, in the 
report made public by him immediately after the July 
uprising and edited by me : 

Whatever may have been the motives of Lenin 
and his closest associates, they formed within the 
Bolshevist Party in the spring of 1917 an or- 
ganization which, in order to give aid to the na- 
tions at war with Russia in their belligerent acts 
against her, entered into an agreement with the 
agents of the aforementioned nations to promote 
disorganization of the Russian army and of the 
country, for which purpose, with the financial 
means obtained from these nations, it organized, 
propaganda among the population and in the 
army. 


THE BOLSHEVIST UPRISING 

\ From this it will be seen that the struggle against the 
Bolsheviki was for the Provisional Government but a 
part of the military struggle against Germany.| And, 

[ 233 ] 3 



THE CATASTROPHE 


had Lenin not had the backing of the entire material 
and technical power of the German propaganda ma- 
chine and espionage service, he never would have suc- 
ceeded in destroying Russia. r 

In saying this I do not wish to place the responsibility 
for Russia’s destruction on Germany. The recent 
European War not only introduced in all the belligerent 
countries the use of poison gases and the practice of 
all possible measures for the physical annihilation of 
the enemy, that war also introduced, on a scale never 
known before and as a regular means of warfare, the 
resort to the poison gases of propaganda and bribery 
for the moral disintegration of the enemy’s rear. The 
data concerning this service already made public in 
England and Germany show, first, that everywhere 
the moral laws of man’s social life were abolished in 
the promotion of the spiritual poisoning and disin- 
tegration of the enemy, and, second, that the German 
propaganda service differed in no wise from that of 
the Allies in this respect. 

Both in Russia and abroad the Provisional Govern- 
ment is criticized' because of the admission of Lenin 
into Russia after his journey across Germany and the 
failure to arrest him on the frontier. It should be re- 
membered, however, that Lenin’s agreement with 
Ludendorff was not contingent upon the route of his 
journey from Switzerland to Russia. At first Lenin 
sought permission to come to Russia through France 
and England. -The permission to cross Germany was 
granted to him by Ludendorff during the War, before 
the Revolution^ In this respect Lenin’s journey across 
Germany was, indeed, the first warning to those who 
immediately perceived' its implications, i Moreover, 
how could we have kept Lenin out of Russia when at 
that time (April 15-16, 1917) the Russian customs 

[ 234 ] 



THE BATTLE 


and frontier guard service had not yet been restored? 
At the meeting of the Provisional Government at 
which the question of the admittance of political emi- 
grants coming through Germany was discussed, Premier 
Lvoff and War Minister Gutchkoff declared categor- 
ically that they did not have at hand the technical 
means of preventing their crossing of the frontier. 

But even had the Provisional Government possessed 
these means it could not, in all probability, have used 
them, for the right of returning to Russia for all polit- 
ical emigrants, regardless of their political opinions, 
was at that time the clear and determined wish of the 
entire country. 

Now, after many years, it is difficult to believe that 
even the Rietch, the chief newspaper of the Constitu- 
tional-Democratic party, welcomed the appearance of 
Lenin in Petrograd despite his journey across Ger- 
many. As the liberal-democratic mouthpiece expressed 
it, “Such a generally recognized socialist leader \i.e., 
Lenin] must be in the arena of the struggle, and his 
arrival in Russia, regardless of what we may think of 
his views, must be welcomed.” 

I So far as the Bolsheviki themselves were concerned, 
they could no longer halt their advance along the path 
of destruction even had the air of Russia awakened 
in Lenin, Zinovieff and the others some feeling of 
honor and conscience. Every one of their steps was 
controlled by Ludendorff’s representatives and the un- 
limited material means for their propaganda of “social 
revolution” would have been taken away from the 
Bolsheviki by the German staff at the first inclination on 
the part of the Central Committee of their party to 
abandon its defeatist program.} Thus, speaking quite 
objectively, there could be no peace or agreement be- 
tween the Bolsheviki and the forces of the Russian 

[ 235 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


democracy. Open war between them was inevitable, 
as was the struggle between Russia and Germany at 
the front. And, indeed, the assumption of the offensive 
by the Russian troops against Germany was accom- 
panied by the offensive of the Bolshevist staff against 
revolutionary Russia in the rear of the Russian army. 

On July fifteenth, on my brief return to Petrograd 
from the front, to attend to some urgent business, it 
was already evident that very serious and decisive 
developments were impending. During the two months 
of my uninterrupted travels over the front the political 
atmosphere in Petrograd had changed completely. 
The first coalition government itself was experiencing 
a crisis at the end of the second month of its existence. 
Three Constitutional-Democratic ministers resigned. 
The ostensible reason for their resignation was the 
alleged unjustified concessions granted by the Provi- 
sional Government to the Ukrainians.; The actual 
reason, however, was the excessive dependence of the 
Provisional Government on the will of the Soviets and 
the alleged consequent violation of the principle of 
coalition, of the equality of the bourgeois and socialist 
elements in the government, with the resultant reflec- 
tion on the authority of the Provisional Government. 
This was how the Central Committee of the Constitu- 
tional-Democratic party formulated the question. 

The unfounded dissatisfaction of the Cadet minis- 
ters was of no particular significance and, under calmer 
and more normal conditions, the crisis would in all 
probability have been adjusted' quickly and without 
trouble. 

* The crisis was not in itself important but the den- 
parture of the bourgeois ministers gave the Bolsheviki 
a convenient excuse for a new mutiny, under the slogan : 
“All power to the Soviets I” >' 



THE BATTLE 


On July sixteenth came grave news from Korniloff’s 
army; the eighth army had been compelled to evacuate 
Kalusch under increasing pressure from the enemy. 
On the Western Front of General Denikin, whose army 
was now to take the offensive, the situation was like- 
wise serious. It was absolutely imperative that I 
leave for the front and my departure had been set for 
the same day, July sixteenth. 

Immediately, before my departure from the capital, 
motor lorries filled with unidentified armed men ap- 
peared in the streets of Petrograd. Some of these 
motor lorries were canvassing the barracks, calling 
upon the soldiers to join in the armed uprising already 
under way. Others scurried about the city looking 
for me. One of these bands broke through the gate 
of Premier Lvoff’s office, on the ground floor of the 
Ministry of the Interior, almost immediately after I 
had left the place. And my train had hardly left for 
the front when another motor lorry rushed up to the 
station. The armed band carried a red flag with the 
inscription: “The first bullet for Kerensky.” 

On July seventeenth, while inspecting our front line 
positions in the company of General Denikin and rep- 
resentatives of the army committee, disquieting tele- 
grams began to pour in upon me. The uprising in Pet- 
rograd was spreading. Some regiments were joining 
it openly. Others, of the better type, like the Preo- 
brajensk, Somenovsk and Izmailovsk regiments, had 
proclaimed themselves “neutral” in the fight of the 
Bolsheviki against the Provisional Government. The 
government meetings were transferred to the building 
of the district military staff. The Tauride Palace, seat 
of the All-Russian Executive Committee of the Con- 
gress of Soviets and of the Executive Committee of the 

[ 237 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


Petrograd Soviet, was surrounded by mutinous soldiers 
and red guards. These “class conscious proletarians” 
sought to lynch some of the leaders (Tseretelli, 
Chernoff and others) of the majority of the Soviets, 
which had refused to help in the transfer of all political 
power into the hands of the Soviets. 

The tremendous significance of the enlistment in the 
Provisional Government of representatives of the 
socialist parties and the Soviet became particularly 
clear in these critical moments, for the socialist min- 
isters and the leaders of the Soviet majority in general 
at the Tauride Palace were the ones who bore the 
main burden of the pressure of the soldiery and the 
proletarian riff-raff incited and infuriated by the Bol- 
sheviki. 

\ It was precisely in these critical hours of July seven- 
teenth, that the process begun early in May reached 
its completion : between the Bolsheviki and the Russian 
democracy occurred the final, decisive break. The 
overwhelming majority of the Russian democracy 
emphatically repudiated the slogan, “All power to the 
Soviets!” This luring slogan became now only the 
tactical mask of the Bolsheviki in their fight for the 
dictatorship of their party .| 

The difficult and uncertain situation around the 
Tauride Palace/ wasi resolved by the appearance on the 
scene of government troops rushed to relieve the Soviet 
majority. On their way to the palace the govern- 
ment’s Cossacks were suddenly fired upon, seven of 
them being killed and thirty wounded. These were 
the only victims of the government’s “repressions.” 
The mutinous mobs surrounding the Soviet dispersed 
at the first shot fired into the air by the government 
troops. 

It is not difficult to imagine the effect produced at 

C 238 ] 



THE BATTLE 


the front by the uprising in the capital. In reply to 
the telegrams pouring in upon me from Pefcrograd I 
demanded the immediate application of severest meas- 
ures for suppression of the mutiny. I insisted upon 
the immediate arreist of all the Bolshevist leaders. 
But nothing came of my telegrams. I then decided to 
hasten back to Petrograd for a few days. En route, 
near Polotzk, my train barely escaped being wrecked, 
when it collided with a locomotive sent by some one in 
a direction towards my speeding train. Our engineer 
managed to reduce the speed of the train in time so 
that only the forward platform of my car was de- 
molished. 

At Polotzk I was met by Terestchenko, who came 
into my car and reported in detail the events in Petro- 
grad on the l^.st day of the Bolshevist uprising (July 
eighteenth). {There was one development in all this, 
however, which, despite the positive, wholesome effect 
it had on the troops, was to both of us a real catas- 
trophe.! 

Late in the evening, July seventeenth, Minister of 
Justice Pereverzeff released to the press that part of 
the material collected by the Provisional Government 
concerning the treason of Lenin, Zinovieff and other 
Bolsheviki which had' already been placed in the hands 
of the prosecuting officials. On July eighteenth, this 
material was widely published in the newspapers, after 
being distributed during the night, in leaflet form, 
among the Guards regiments. The expose produced 
a shattering impression on the troops. The hesitant 
regiments immediately dropped their hesitation and 
came, to the support of the government, while those 
supporting the Bolsheviki Iost.all their “revolutionary” 
ardor and energy. |On July eighteenth, the uprising 
was quickly suppressed and) Lenin’s own citadel, the 

[239] 



THE CATASTROPHE 

Ksheshinsky Palace, was occupied by government 
troops. ' 

' But we of the Provisional Government lost forever 
the possibility of establishing Lenin’s treason in final 
form, supported by documentary evidence., 1 For Fuer- 
stenberg-Ganetsky, then approaching the Finnish 
frontier, where he was to have been arrested on his 
way to Petrograd, turned back to Stockholm. With 
him went back also the decisively incriminating docu- 
ment which we knew he had on his person. Imme- 
diately upon Pereverzeff’s release to the press of the 
confidential data in his possession, on the eve of my 
return from the front, Lenin himself and Zinovieff 
likewise managed to escape from Petrograd into Fin- 
land. 

In defense of the action of the Minister of Justice 
it can only be said that he did not know of the prepara- 
tions for Ganetsky’s arrest, which was to have sealed 
the fate of the Bolsheviki. But, even under the cir- 
cumstances, the release for publication of material of 
such tremendous importance without the consent of the 
Provisional Government was quite unpardonable. 
After a very spirited conversation on this matter, Min- 
ister of Justice Pereverzeff was compelled to resign 
from the government. It is quite certain that all the 
later events of the summer of 1917 and Russian his- 
tory, in general, would have taken quite a different 
course if Terestchenko had been able to conclude his 
difficult task of exposing Lenin and if, in consequence, 
it had been proved in court, by all the rules of evidence, 
that Lenin was committing the monstrous crime of 
treason. 

_ At six o’clock in the evening, July nineteenth, I ar- 
rived from the front at Czarskoselsky railway station 
in Petrograd. Into my service car came my as- 

[240] 



THE BATTLE 


sistant at the War Ministry, General Polovtzoff, com- 
mander of the Petrograd military district and other 
officials. On receiving General Polovtzoff’s report I 
immediately requested his resignation because of the 
confusion exhibited by him during the uprising and his 
failure to obey my demands for extreme measures 
against the traitors. (Urgent measures had finally 
been taken by Assistant War Minister Jakubovitch.) 

From the station we went directly to the Staff Head- 
quarters of the Petrograd military district, where the 
Provisional Government was in session, surrounded by 
bivouacs. On the way we were greeted with joyous 
cheers by multitudes of people. 

We arrived at the staff building. The order for the 
arrest of the leaders of the uprising had not yet been 
given. Without going upstairs into the room where 
Prince Lvoff and other members of the government 
were, I immediately ordered the staff officers in au- 
thority to prepare a list of the Bolsheviki subject to 
arrest, to submit it to me for approval and to begin at 
once the search for and imprisonment of the leaders of 
the traitorous mutiny. 

Then Terestchenko and I went upstairs to see Prince 
Lvoff. The publication in the press of the partial ma- 
terial concerning the treason of the Bolsheviki had 
created in the leading socialist circles of the Soviet 
quite a different impression than that provoked among 
the troops on the critical night of July sixteenth. 

The absence, in the published material, of con- 
clusive documentary proof of Lenin’s treason and the 
publication of the data in newspapers hostile not only 
to the Bolsheviki but to the Soviets as well to the sur- 
prise of the socialist ministers who had had no knowl- 
edge as yet of the nature of the material and the ex- 
treme patriotic wrath aroused by the revelations among 

[ 241 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


the population had greatly excited the Soviet leaders. 
This excitation was accentuated by the physical ex- 
cesses committed by soldiers and officers against the 
Bolshevist traitors first to be taken into custody (such 
as Kozlowsky), and the appearance in the streets of 
volunteer bands of officers and military cadets in search 
of Bolsheviki. All this put the Soviet leaders on 
guard. In these militant excesses of injured patriotism 
they saw distant visions of some advancing “counter- 
revolution.” 1 An acute fit of fear seized the Soviet 
circles, which soon took on the form of a veritable 
panic. ■ 

The Bolsheviki themselves, in the Tauride Palace, 
naturally kept strict silence. But certain persons from 
the Left wing of the Social-Democratic and Socialist- 
Revolutionist parties, close to the Bolsheviki, imme- 
diately set up a tumultuous cry of “slander,” saying that 
the “misled but honest” fighters were being slandered 
by counter-revolutionists hiding behind the Provisional 
Government and the district military staff. In con- 
sequence, the All-Russian Executive Committee of the 
Congress of Soviets passed a resolution declaring that 
the arrest of the Bolshevist leaders would be pre- 
mature, pending investigation of the facts mad© public 
in the press. In other words, the Soviet leaders de- 
cided to prevent, if possible, the arrest of Lenin and 
his lieutenants. For this purpose a delegation had been 
dispatched to the government at Staff Headquarters. 
And, indeed, upon my entering Prince Lvoff’s office, 
I found in the room a number of prominent members 
of the All-Russian Executive Committee of Soviets and 
of the Executive Committee of the Congress of 
Peasants, who were “maintaining contact” with the 
government in an effort to. prevent the arrests in ques- 
tion. 

[ 242] 



THE BATTLE 


I said nothing concerning the order I had just given 
below, knowing that, in view of the attitude of staff 
officers, the necessary arrests would be made as quickly 
as possible. The rest did not interest me then and I 
was ready to assume all the consequences of my move. 
In the event of an open conflict between the govern- 
ment and the Soviet representatives on the question of 
the arrests, we would have had the support not only 
of the army at the front but also of the entire revolu- 
tionary garrison in the capital itself. Of this there 
could be no doubt. 

During our conversation I managed to inform Prince 
Lvoff quickly of the preparations for the arrests and, 
of course, received his full approval. Among those 
ordered arrested as traitors were Lenin, ZinoviefF, 
Kozlowsky, Mme. Sumenson, Fuerstenberg-Ganetsky, 
the German citizen Helfandt (Parvus), Alexandra 
Kollontay and the military leaders of the uprising, 
Lieutenant Ilyin (Raskonlinkoff), Roschal and Sub- 
Lieutenant Semashko. All these persons were arrested, 
with the exception of Lenin and Zinovieff, who, as I 
have already said, had fled into hiding after the pub- 
lication of the incriminating material, and of Parvus 
and Ganetsky, who were outside of Russia. In a few 
days Trotsky and Lunacharsky were also arrested, 
j At midnight I received the first telegram from the 
Southwestern Front telling of the break by the Ger- 
mans through our line at Zlotcheff, in the direction of 
Tarnopol. j With the’ telegram, in my hands I returned 
to the room where the Provisional Government was 
meeting. The. representatives of the Soviet were also 
present. Controlling myself with difficulty I read aloud 
the entire telegram and turning to the Soviet delegates, 
I asked them: “I trust that now you will no longer 
object to the arrests?” 

[ 243 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


There was no reply. 

But the silence was more eloquent than any possible 
answer. All of them now realized quite clearly the 
connection between the blow at the front and the at- 
tempt at an explosion in the interior of the country. 

Several days later, on my inspection of our front 
lines at Molodchno, on the eve of the offensive of Gen- 
eral Denikin’s army, occurred the following unsavory 
incident. Passing a line of trenches we noticed a small 
group of soldiers, huddled together in a corner, busily 
engaged in reading something. On observing our ap- 
proach the soldier who had in his hands some kind of 
a leaflet hastily sought to hide it. One of my ad- 
jutants managed, however, to spring forward in time 
and seize the mysterious leaflet. It was a copy of the 
Tovaristch * dated two weeks before the Bolshevist 
uprising in Petrograd, but which the paper in our hands 
reported as an already accomplished fact. Of course, 
the article reporting the uprising contained' no details 
but told how the proletariat and garrison of Petro- 
grad, indignant at the “unnecessary blood-shedding” 
by Kerensky and Brusiloff at the front, had risen 
against the Provisional Government, and of the enthusi- 
asm and sympathy which the uprising had provoked in 
Moscow and other Russian cities. 

Running somewhat ahead in my narrative I may say 
here that the same thing happened at the beginning of 
November. From Stockholm we received copies of 
proclamations telling of the Bolshevist uprising in 
Petrograd about ten days before it had actually begun. 


* Tovaristch — Comrade — was one of the publications issued by the 
German command on the Russian Front for distribution in the Rus- 
sian trenches. It was printed in Vilna, occupied by the Germans in 


CHAPTER XI 

THE NATION’S VICTORY 


I N looking back on the events of July, I must say 
that the failure of the Bolshevist uprising, to- 
gether with the rapid retreat of our troops in 
Galicia, contributed to the strengthening of the feeling 
of patriotism and national responsibility among 
the masses of the people and in the leading circles of 
the Left, socialist, anti-Bolshevist parties. * 

The course of events in Russia between March and 
November, 1917, is usually conceived as a process of 
one color, of gradual but unceasing and constantly in- 
creasing disintegration of the country. In reality, how- 
ever, Russia moved in those months along a zigzag 
line. \ Up until the middle of September (the period of 
the Komiloff rebellion) Russia advanced forward, with 
the line of progress accompanied by some drops and 
setbacks, but marked by steady diminution of revolu- 
tionary chaos and the development of political 
strength and wisdom. After the crushing of the Bol- 
sheviki, in July, the process of convalescence gathered 
exceptional momentum. But it was halted suddenly 
by the madness of honest but politically ignorant and 
impatient generals. From the middle of September 
Russia began to move back with equally exceptional 
speed to dissolution and chaos. 

Together with the new defeat of the Russian troops 
at the front came a nation-wide wave of anti-Bolshevist 
assaults. Bolshevist committees and newspapers were 
being wrecked everywhere in the interior. In all the 

C 245 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


provincial centers the Soviets were firmly in the hands 
of defensivist elements, patriotic, constructive and 
eager to restore the national structure. The repre- 
sentation of the Bolsheviki in the Executive Committee 
of the Soviets and in the All-Russian Executive Com- 
mittee of the Congress of Soviets was reduced almost 
to zero. Hand in hand with the removal of all Bol- 
sheviki from the Soviet machinery, it was becoming in- 
creasingly recognized by the Soviet leaders that the 
Soviets were not and could not be organs of govern- 
ment hut were merely instruments useful in the process 
of transition to a new, ordered, democratic state. 

The new laws worked out by the first cabinet of 
the Provisional Government, providing for a compre- 
hensive system of municipal and zemstvo self-govern- 
ment, on the basis of universal, proportional, equal 
suffrage, including woman, suffrage, came into force. 
At the beginning of August we find municipal dumas 
in two hundred cities already elected on the basis of 
the new law. At the end of September six hundred and 
fifty of the seven hundred cities of Russia had elected 
such new municipal dumas. Not quite so rapidly, due 
to rural conditions, but nevertheless at good speed 
moved the reorganization of the zemstvos along broad, 
democratic lines. The tremendously powerful develop- 
ment of the cooperatives, stimulated by the Provi- 
sional Government’s cooperative law, created an ex- 
tremely sound basis for the growth of a democratic 
state. The initial anarchic period of irresponsible 
proletarian action was being transformed gradually 
into a healthy trade-union movement, in which the 
Bolsheviki occupied a position of little influence on the 
extreme left flank. The authority of the government 
commissars in the army was growing steadily, in ac- 
cordance with the government’s plan of bringing the 

[ 246 ] 



THE NATION’S VICTORY 

army back through the agency of the commissars, as 
connecting links from the committee system as estab- 
lished in March, to normal unity of command. 

On July twenty-first, I again repeated my last order 
for the merciless application of armed force against 
insubordination at the front. I called the attention 
of the commissars and commanders to the Provisional 
Government’s proclamation of July nineteenth, pro- 
hibiting agitation against the government and the War 
among the troops. Simultaneously I telegraphed an 
order to General Headquarters demanding “the re- 
moval and prosecution of commanders showing the 
slightest reluctance to apply force.” On July twen- 
tieth I had arrested the delegation of the General 
Committee of the Baltic Fleet, upon its arrival in 
Petrograd to help the Bolsheviki “arrest Minister of 
Justice Pereverzeff and Assistant Minister of the Navy 
Dudyrenko.” The rule adopted by the government 
upon its formation, in the first days of the Revolution, 
not to disarm or to remove from Petrograd the mili- 
tary units which had taken part in the revolutionary 
movement, a rule tending to disorganize and pervert 
the garrison, was abolished. Henceforward the gov- 
ernment granted commanders the right to reorganize 
the regiments of the Petrograd garrison and send them 
to the front. On July twenty-first an order was made 
public, by unanimous decision of the Provisional Gov- 
ernment, restoring capital punishment and providing 
for the establishment of court-martial at the front. At 
the same time the government restored military cen- 
sorship, giving to the Minister of the Interior, by agree- 
ment with the Minister of War, the right to suppress 
newspapers and fly-by-night sheets, to prohibit meet- 
ings, make arrests without the usual court warrants, 
to expel from Russia by executive order persons con- 

[ 247 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 

sidered dangerous to the safety of the nation and in 
general to take the measures found necessary in the 
interest of national security and defense. 

|Of course, these measures for the strengthening of 
the government did not meet with instant approval by 
everybody. In the minds of many political figures 
who were removed from sympathy with the Left, the 
strengthening of the revolutionary Government’s ad- 
ministrative power aroused unpleasant memories of 
the police lawlessness of the old regime. Particularly 
disquieting to public opinion were the measures effect- 
ing the press. ' 

The suppression of Bolshevist papers, particularly 
at the front, naturally met with universal approval. 
But when the situation reached a point where it was 
necessary to forbid the further publication of two big 
newspapers in the capital — Maxim Gorky’s ultraradical 
Novaya Zshisn and the extremist-conservative Novoye 
Fremia — there arose a cry of sharp protest from all 
political and literary circles, without exception. People 
said that Kerensky wished to restore for the press the 
regime of Pleve (the universally hated minister of 
the interior under Nicholas II, assassinated at the be- 
ginning of the Russo-Japanese War). The right of 
administrative arrest actually became one of the causes 
of the dispute between the Provisional Government 
and the representatives of the Constitutional-Demo- 
cratic party at the time of the new cabinet crisis, fol- 
lowing the Bolshevist uprising. 

Faithful to the doctrine of government by law, the 
liberal jurists protested emphatically against the “law- 
lessness the government was legalizing.” To be sure, 
the same party demanded from the government ex- 
treme lawlessness, Le., the widest possible administra- 
tive struggle against the Bolsheviki, but the partial 

[ 248 ] 



THE NATION’S VICTORY 


inconsistency was determined by the fact that the pro- 
posed administrative expulsions from Russia and the 
administrative arrests threatened principally at that 
time, in August, not revolutionists on the Left but 
opponents on the Right, who had begun with increasing 
boldness to speak up in favor of the developing move- 
ment for a military dictatorship.* 


MY ASSUMPTION OF THE PREMIERSHIP 

On July twentieth, the day after my return from the 
front, Prince George Lvoff left the Provisional Gov- 
ernment. The situation had become too difficult for 
his mild manner of governing. At the same cabinet 
meeting at which the resignation of the prince was ac- 
cepted, I was named premier, retaining also my post 
of minister of war and marine. 

) The new government crisis began to develop seri- 
ously only after the departure of the prince. 1 

On July twenty-second, the All-Russian Executive 
Committee of the Congress of Soviets and the Execu- 
tive Committee of the Congress of Peasants, in a joint 
manifesto to the country,! proclaimed the Provisional 
Government as “the government for the Salvation of 
the Fatherland and the Revolution.” The manifesto 
called upon the soldiers, peasants and workers to grant 
full confidence and obedience to the united, national 
people’s government.} At the same time, a general 
meeting of the regiments of the Petrograd garrison 


♦The opposite was also true: Some sections of the Left, socialist 
press, while demanding draconic police repressions against “counter- 
revolutionists” on the Right, expressed bitter indignation at the gov- 
ernment’s “lawlessness” with regard to the Bolsheviki. A curious 
picture was presented as a result, with the Provisional Government 
being simultaneously under “pressure” of both extreme flanks. — A. K. 

[249] 




THE CATASTROPHE 


unanimously adopted a resolution expressing confi- 
dence “only in the Provisional Government.” 

However, confidence in the Provisional Govern- 
ment on the part of the revolutionary and democratic 
organizations was not enough. It was essential to re- 
store the union of all the live forces of the country, 
upon which depended the quick rehabilitation of the 
nation. The places left vacant by the resignation of 
the three Cadet ministers had to be filled by men of 
the same political and social ideas. In July this was 
even more important than it was in April or May, for 
now behind the Constitutional-Democratic party were 
organized all the political and social forces of the 
country representing the interests of the propertied 
classes, of the high command, the remnants of the old 
bureaucracy and even fragments of the aristocracy. 
By this I do not wish to accuse in any way the party 
headed by Miliukoff — which had in the past performed 
great service in the cause of Russian liberation — of 
having “changed its program and entered the service 
of reaction,” as the Bolshevist demagogues put it. The 
Constitutional-Democratic party had retained its entire 
ideology. Only the human material filling its ranks 
had changed radically, f It must be remembered that 
all the parties to the right of the liberal center had 
disappeared after the Revolution, while the Cadet 
party itself had become the right flank of Russian 
political life.*? 

It was quite evident that the formation of a national 


•The left flank was occupied by the Bolsheviki and the extreme 
elements of the Mensheviki and Soci alists-Revolutionists. The center 
was composed of Menshevist Social-Democrats, Laborites, Populist- 
Socialists, backed by the cooperatives, the majority of municipal 
dumas chosen on the basis of universal suffrage, the front and army 
committees, etc. 

[250] 




THE NATION’S VICTORY 

government standing above all parties and partisan- 
ship required the inclusion of responsible representa- 
tives of the right flank of the political spectrum, in 
the persons of those members of this group who after 
the upheaval of March twelfth had adopted an out- 
spoken republican attitude. 

The spokesmen of the Socialist parties and the 
leaders of the Soviets quite frankly expressed the aim 
of filling the vacant posts in the Provisional Govern- 
ment, after the exit of Prince Lvoff, without resort 
to the Constitutional-Democrats. The cabinet situa- 
tion' remained uncertain from July twentieth to July 
twenty-sixth, for on the very day of my appointment 
as premier I had to return to the front. Upon my 
return from Denikin’s army, on or about July twenty- 
seventh, all the ministers placed their portfolios at 
my disposal. This collective resignation cleared the 
road for filling the ministerial vacancies. 

At first, after the outbreak of the Revolution, the 
Provisional Government was seemingly appointed by 
the Temporary Committee of the Duma and it had 
to seek agreement with the Executive Committee of 
the Petrograd Soviet. ,The second cabinet of the 
Provisional Government was formed in cooperation 
with representatives of the respective parties, the 
Soviet and the Temporary Committee of the Duma. 
Now the formation of the new cabinet of the Pro- 
visional Government was placed solely in the hands 
of its premier, which naturally made the future cabi- 
net more independent of exterior party pressure.^ 

The negotiations between the Premier and the cen- 
tral committees of the respective parties continued for 
ten days. Once more there were interminable program- 
atic disputes. Long letters were written, in which 
the points at issue between the respective parties 

[ 25i ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


were purposely accentuated for bargaining purposes. 
Naturally this served only to irritate the opponents 
but in no way changed the substance of the discussion. 
Moreover, although formally I was given complete 
freedom of action in the selection of the ministers, 
I found myself confronted by ultimatums from the 
respective parties and organizations objecting to some 
candidates or demanding the appointment of others; 

I personally was placed in quite a strange position : 
under the political circumstances of the moment I bore 
full responsibility for the fate of the nation, yet I did 
not have the simple right to choose freely my immedi- 
ate coworkers, for whose activity in the government 
I could really and with a clear conscience hold myself 
responsible before the people. My situation became 
all the more difficult because both the contending 
camps (the bourgeois and the democratic) maintained 
equally that it was absolutely essential that I assume 
the premiership of the Provisional Government. In 
fact, they saw no other candidate acceptable for the 
post. All the parties collectively wished to work with 
me, but every one of them individually placed before 
me conditions obviously unacceptable to the others. 
The party bargaining for the vacant ministerial seats 
continued to grow more and more heated. *, Mean- 
while, the prolongation of the cabinet crisis aggra- 
vated the already difficult situation in the country 
and particularly at the front, where the pressure of 
the German troops served to stimulate what on the 
whole was a natural and wholesome feeling of pa- 
triotic concern, though it did not at all moments as- 
sume proper form among the officers. 

It became evident that the Russian political parties, 
with none of which I was completely in agreement and 

[252] 



THE NATION’S VICTORY 


among all of which I had friends and supporters, had 
to be placed before a clear alternative: either they 
themselves assume full responsibility for the fate of the 
nation or they must give me at least some measure 
of freedom to do what I considered necessary for the 
country, regardless of party doctrines and self-interest. 

-• On August third I divested myself of all offices and 
titles, turned over all current affairs to the Vice- 
Premier and left secretly for Tsarskoye Selo. Imme- 
diately the central committee of all the parties sent 
out urgent invitations to a meeting of extraordinary 
political importance. On the evening of the day of 
my departure an historic meeting of responsible repre- 
sentatives of all the parties upon which the govern- 
ment supported itself took place in the Malachite Hall 
of the Winter Palace. I do not wish to describe that 
which I did not witness. I know only that the meeting 
lasted all night, adjourning at four o’clock in the 
morning. Finding themselves face to face with the 
question of responsibility for the country no one of 
those present ventured to take the responsibility upon 
himself. ,,'The meeting adjourned finally with the de- 
cision to entrust me again with filling the posts of the 
Provisional Government as I saw fit, without being 
hampered by ( pressure, claims or demands from any 
of the parties! To be sure, this decision was immedi- 
ately violated by both sides — the Left and the Right. 
By both sides I was informed “quite privately” : “Of 
course, you are entirely free to choose the members of 
the government, but if you invite this or that person 
the central committee of our party will consider this 
participation in the government a matter concerning 
only himself.” ! In other words I was “privately” 
threatened with militant hostility by the parties. 

[ 253 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


i Such party duplicity naturally had an extremely 
detrimental effect on the activity of the Provisional 
Government as constructed by me. ' It deprived the 
government of that unity so essential in such an ex- 
traordinarily difficult time. I resolved, however, to 
return to power, believing that the realization by all 
parties of the need of my participation in the govern- 
ment would give, for a time at least, an opportunity 
to fight for the restoration of Russia. Perhaps it was 
a cardinal mistake on my part to return to power at 
that moment. Perhaps I should have retired for the 
time being at the moment when outside of the central 
committees of the various parties and the circles of 
professional politicians, my prestige and popularity 
in the country were very great. Perhaps by preserving 
my authority with the people I might have saved 
something which would have been of use to Russia 
in the darkest days that were still ahead.; 

Perhaps? I do not know. At any rate it certainly 
would have been salutary so far as I myself was con- 
cerned. Contrary to the assertions of my adversaries 
on the Right and on the Left I had no “thirst for 
power.” More than once I suggested to the unre- 
strained critics of the policy of the Provisional Gov- 
ernment that they assume formal responsibility for 
the country, provided they did so without resort to 
uprising and mutiny.? My return to the Winter Palace 
was motivated by the realization of my duty to the 
country. 

Under the prevailing circumstances, when the 
country is threatened by internal dissolution and 
external disintegration [I wrote officially on 
August sixth, to the Vice-Premier] I consider it 
impossible to shirk the grave duty placed upon 
l>54 ] 



THE NATION’S VICTORY 


me by the representatives of the principal social- 
ist, democratic and liberal parties. 

In the same letter I laid down what to my mind 
were the guiding lines requisite for governing the 
country. 

As the basis of the solution of this problem I 
place my unshakable conviction that the salvation 
of the Republic demands abandonment of party 
quarrels and that the national work of the salva- 
tion of the country, which concerns the people as 
a whole, must proceed under conditions and in 
forms pictated by the severe necessity of continu- 
ing the War, supporting the fighting capacity of 
the army and restoring the economic power of 
the nation..! 

After a night of mental and spiritual anguish, ex- 
perienced likewise by all the participants of the meet- 
ing, I formed the new cabinet within twenty-four 
hours. ' Contrary to the practice of the first months 
of the Revolution, the members of the government, 
the bearers of supreme authority, were now formally 
released from any dependence or party committees, 
Soviets, etc. Their responsibility was now “only to 
the country and' their own conscience.’; There were 
no more Soviet or Duma ministers. There were 
Q.nly ministers of the Russian government. The prac- 
tice of collective, long ministerial declarations, of use 
only to the extreme party dogmatists, was likewise 
abandoned now. 

’ The composition of the new cabinet corresponded 
to the nonpartisan, national governmental programs 
Of the sixteen ministers only three were opponents 
of a bourgeois-democratic coalition. Two of these 

[ *55 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 

(Yureneff and Kokoshkin, representing the Constitu- 
tional-Democratic party) favored a purely bourgeois 
government, while the other (Minister of Agriculture 
Tchemoff, leader of the Socialists-Revolutionists) 
wanted a purely socialist government. All the other 
ministers were firm supporters of a government com- 
bining within itself all the creative political forces of 
the nation, regardless of party or class distinction. 

The very marked change of popular attitude after 
the crushing of the Bolsheviki — the strengthening of 
the state and the independence of the governmental 
machinery from partisan political organizations — was 
evidenced by the fact that of the sixteen members of 
the government only two (Tchernoff, Socialist-Revo- 
lutionist, and Skobeleff, Social-Democrat, were con- 
nected closely with the Executive Committee of the 
Petrograd Soviet. 

The new situation was summarized well by Irakli 
Tseretelli, one of the noblest and most talented leaders 
of the Russian Social-Democracy (afterwards leader 
of the Georgian Social-Democratic party). With 
characteristic courage this leader, devoted disinterest- 
edly to the cause of the democracy as a whole, recog- 
nized frankly the fundamental change that had come 
about in the correlation of the country’s political and 
social forces. 

“We have just experienced not only a cabinet crisis 
but a crisis of the Revolution,” he said at a meeting of 
the All-Russian Executive Committee of the Congress 
of Soviets and before the Executive Committee of the 
Peasant Congress. “A new era in the history of the 
Revolution has begun. Two months ago the soviets 
were stronger. Now we have become weaker, for the 
correlation of forces has changed to our disadvan- 
tage.” 


[256] 



THE NATION’S VICTORY 


Tseretelli urged’ full confidence in the government, 
realizing that the change that had taken place was 
entirely to the advantage of the country as a whole, 
for it strengthened the national consciousness of the 
people as well as the power and prestige of the state. 



CHAPTER XII 

THE EX-CZAR AND HIS FAMILY 

I N the foregoing chapter I made reference to some 
of the measures taken by the Provisional Govern- 
ment which really made it possible for it to 
govern, i.e. } to command. 

I will not undertake to enumerate here the many 
symptoms of convalescence in the administrative appa- 
ratus which were in evidence everywhere at the end 
of the summer of 1917. I will only say that govern- 
ment orders were now being executed as they were 
before the Revolution. The principle of departmental 
confidence, of political trust, without which no adminis- 
trative machine can function properly, was restored. 

The secret preparations for the equally secret trans- 
fer of the former Emperor and his family from 
Tsarskoye Selo to Tobolsk, Siberia, may serve as a 
striking illustration of the smooth operation of the 
administrative machine by the summer of 1917. 

At the beginning, before the Revolution had evolved 
its burning problems, the masses were especially con- 
cerned about the fate of the Czar and his family. The 
press also began to discuss extensively, and with much 
relish, all Court matters which it had been forbidden 
to mention under the old regime. Although there was 
great excitement about the members of the imperial 
family after the Revolution had been well under way, 
they soon were almost forgotten. It seems incredible 
now that, after signing his abdication at Pskoff, the 

[ 258 ] 



THE EX-CZAR AND HIS FAMILY 


Czar was able to proceed quite freely to General 
Headquarters at Mohileff “to take leave of his staff.” 
The Provisional Government was in no way concerned 
about the Czar’s movements and Prince Lvoff readily 
gave his consent to the Czar’s journey. We remained 
so calm and unapprehensive because we were certain 
that he would find no sympathy or support anywhere 
in the army, and that he would make no effort to 
rally a following. 

But, of course, this state of affairs could not last 
long. The former Emperor’s prolonged sojourn at 
General Headquarters gave rise to rumors that his 
suite was negotiating with Germany for the dispatch 
of several German army corps into Russia, to save the 
autocracy. Absurd as they were, these rumors gained 
widespread circulation, and about a week after the 
crash an outburst of fury and hatred broke loose 
against the imperial family, particularly against the 
former Empress, Alexandra Feodorovna. On my visit 
to Moscow on March twentieth or twenty-first, the 
local Soviet angrily demanded a detailed account of 
the measures taken by the Government against the 
former Emperor and his family. The Soviet was so 
insistent that I finally said : 

“As general public prosecutor I have the power to 
decide the fate of Nicholas II. But, comrades, the 
Russian Revolution is unstained by bloodshed and I 
will not permit it to be disgraced. I refuse to be the 
Marat of the Russian Revolution.” 

At the moment when I was saying this in Moscow, 
the Provisional Government in Petrograd was decid- 
ing to arrest Nicholas II and Alexandra Feodorovna. 
Following is the government’s resolution ordering the 
arrest: 


[ 259 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


1. That the ex-Emperor Nicholas II and his 
•wife be deprived of their liberty and that the 
former be taken to Tsarskoye Selo. 

2. That the deputies Bublikoff, Vershinin, 
Gribunin and Kalenin be delegated to go to 
Mohileff and request General Alexeyeff to place 
at their disposal a guard to act as escort for the 
former Emperor. 

3. That the Duma members delegated to ac- 
company the former Emperor from Mohileff to 
Tsarskoye Selo present a written report of the 
mission entrusted to them and 

4. That this decision be made public. 

Once under arrest, the former autocrat was to come 
under my immediate custody and jurisdiction. As far 
as I remember he was arrested on March twenty-sec- 
ond. Alexandra Feodorovna had been under arrest in 
the Alexandrovsky Palace at Tsarskoye Selo since 
March fourteenth. I may mention incidentally that 
the former Emperor’s parting visit to General Head- 
quarters had made a very bad impression on the rank 
and file of the army, inspiring the soldiers with dis- 
trust of the General Staff and especially of General 
Alexeyeff, and stimulating their suspicions of the 
counter-revolutionary sympathies of the high com- 
mand. The leavetaking between Nicholas II and the 
staff was said to have been very touching. Many were 
even moved to tears. However, it did not occur either 
to the former Czar, or to those who saw him off, to 
resist his arrest or to protest against it. It was indeed 
remarkable how quickly the “faithful subjects” and 
most of the immediate attendants of the Czar and his 
family deserted them. Even the Czar’s children, who 
were ill at that time, were left without any one to nurse 

[ 260] 



THE EX-CZAR AND HIS FAMILY 

them and the Provisional Government had to provide 
the necessary help. 

Deserted by most of those upon whom they had 
showered favors, the Czar’s family was left helpless 
and miserable, at our mercy. I had hated the Czar 
when he was all-powerful and had done all I could to 
bring about his downfall. But I could not revenge 
myself upon a fallen enemy. On the contrary, I 
wanted this man to know that the Revolution was 
magnanimous and humane to its enemies, not only in 
word but in deed. I wished that for once in his life 
he should feel ashamed of the horrors that had been 
perpetrated in his name. This was the only revenge 
worthy of the Great Revolution, a noble revenge, 
worthy of the sovereign people. Of course, if the 
judicial inquiry instituted by the government had 
found proof that Nicholas II had betrayed his country 
either before or during the War, he would have imme- 
diately been tried by jury, but he was proved beyond 
doubt innocent of this crime. The Provisional Gov- 
ernment had not yet finally decided the fate of the 
Czar and his family. We took it for granted that if 
the judicial inquiry into the conduct of the Rasputin 
clique should establish the innocence of the former 
Emperor and' Empress, the whole family would be 
sent abroad, probably to England. I mentioned this 
suggestion in Moscow and it aroused great indigna- 
tion in the Soviets and in the Bolshevist press. The 
demagogues represented the suggestion as an actual 
decision and even as an accomplished fact. 

The Executive Committee of the Petrograd Soviet 
had received “reliable” information that the Czar’s 
departure had been fixed for the night of March 
twentieth and there was general confusion. The 
Committee sent out orders along all the railways to 

[261] 



THE CATASTROPHE 

have the Czar’s train stopped and that night the Alex- 
androvsky Palace at Tsarskoye Selo was surrounded 
by troops in armored motor cars and searched. I 
heard that the leader of the searching party had in- 
tended to remove the Czar, but changed his mind at 
the last moment. All these plans had been kept secret 
from the government in order to catch us in the act! 
Of course, the Soviet expedition failed to reveal any 
preparations for the Czar’s departure but, neverthe- 
less, on the following day the Soviet issued a long 
report describing its triumph over the “underhand 
dealings” of the government. 

The Soviet demagogues kept up a recurrent agita- 
tion about the condition of the imperial family. They 
even demanded persistently that the whole family, or 
at least, the Czar and the Czarina be transferred to 
the Fortress of SS. Peter and Paul. Other demands 
called for the treatment of the imperial family as 
ordinary prisoners, or for their transfer to Kronstadt, 
there to be under the guard of the Kronstadt crews. 
The guards at Tsarskoye Selo were criticized for their 
alleged carelessness and leniency, whereupon the 
guards themselves, who had considered it a particular 
honor to watch over the former Czar, lost their heads 
and, in turn, demanded more severity towards the 
prisoners. 

I remember clearly my first interview with the 
former Emperor, which took place at the end of 
March, at the Alexandrovsky Palace. On my arrival 
at Tsarskoye Selo I inspected the entire palace thor- 
oughly and inquired into t,he regulations of the guard 
and the general regime under which the imperial family 
was being kept. On the whole I approved of the 
situation, making only a few suggestions for improve- 
ment to the commandant of the palace. Then I asked 

[a6a] 



THE EX-CZAR AND HIS FAMILY 

Count Benkendorff, former marshal of the Court, to 
inform the Czar that I wished to see him and the Em- 
press. The miniature Court, composed of the few 
retainers who had not deserted the former monarch, 
still kept up the ceremonial. The old count, sporting 
a monocle, listened to me and answered: “I will let 
His Majesty know.” He treated me as if I were 
some one come, as in the old days, to be presented 
to the Czar, or a minister reporting for an audience. 
In a few moments he returned and announced 
solemnly: “His Majesty has consented to receive you.” 
This seemed a trifle ridiculous and out of place, but 
I did not want to destroy the count’s last illusions, so 
I did not explain to him that his manner was some- 
what behind the times. He still considered himself 
First Marshal to His Majesty the Emperor. It was 
all they had left. I did not disturb it. 

To tell the truth, I had been looking forward to 
the interview with the former Czar with some anxiety, 
and feared I might lose my temper when I came face 
to face for the first time with the man I had always 
hated. Only the day before, leaving for Tsarskoye 
Selo, I had said to a member of the Provisional Gov- 
ernment, apropos of the abolition of capital punish- 
ment : “I think, the only death warrant I could beiar to 
sign would be that of Nicholas II.” But I was anx- 
ious that the ex-Emperor should meet with nothing but 
the most scrupulously correct treatment from me. 

I was trying to pull myself together as we passed 
through an interminable succession of apartments, pre- 
ceded by a flunkey. At last we came to the children’s 
rooms. Leaving me before the closed door leading 
into the inner apartments, the count went in to an- 
nounce me. Returning almost immediately, he said: 

[263 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


“His Majesty invites you.” He threw open the door, 
himself remaining on the threshold. 

My first glimpse of the scene, as I was approaching 
the Czar, changed my mood altogether. The whole 
family was standing huddled in confusion around a 
small table near a window in the adjoining room. A 
small man in uniform detached himself from the group 
and moved forward to meet me, hesitating and smil- 
ing weakly. It was the Emperor. On the threshold 
of the room in which I awaited him he stopped, as if 
uncertain what to do next. He did not know what 
my attitude would be. Was he to receive me as a 
host or should he wait until I spoke to him ? Should 
he hold out his hand, or should he wait for my saluta- 
tion? I sensed his embarrassment at once as well as 
the confusion of the whole family left alone with a ter- 
rible revolutionary. I quickly went up to Nicholas II, 
held out my hand with a smile, and said abruptly 
“Kerensky,” as I usually introduce myself. He shook 
my hand firmly, smiled, seemingly encouraged, and led 
me at once to his family. His son and daughters were 
obviously consumed with curiosity and gazed fixedly at 
me. Alexandra Feodorovna, stiff, proud and haughty, 
extended her hand reluctantly, as if under compulsion. 
Nor was I particularly eager to shake hands with her, 
our palms barely touching. This was typical of the 
difference in character and temperament between the 
husband and wife. I felt at once that Alexandra 
Feodorovna, though broken and angry, was a clever 
woman with a strong will.| In those few seconds I 
understood the psychology of the whole tragedy that 
had been going on for many years behind the palace 
walls. My subsequent interviews with the Emperor, 
which were very few, only confirmed my first impres- 
sion^ 

[ 264 ] 



THE EX-CZAR AND HIS FAMILY 

I inquired about the health of the members of the 
family, informed them that their foreign relatives were 
solicitous about their welfare and promised to trans- 
mit, without delay, any communications they might 
wish to send to those relatives. I asked if they had 
any complaints to make, how the guards were behaving 
and whether they needed anything. I begged them not 
to be anxious or distressed but to rely on me. They 
thanked me and I began to take my leave. Nicholas II 
inquired about the military situation and wished me 
success in my new and difficult office. Throughout the 
spring and summer he followed the War, reading the 
newspapers carefully and interrogating his visitors. 

This was my first meeting with “Nicholas the 
Bloody.” After the horrors of the Bolshevist reaction, 
this appellation sounds ironical. We have seen other 
tyrants bathing in blood, tyrants more revolting be- 
cause they come from the people, or even from the 
intelligentsia, and who have raised their hands against 
their own brethren. I dp not mean to say that Bolshe- 
vism justifies Czarism. * No, the autocracy was the 
original cause of the Communist tyranny. It is the 
consequences of the autocracy which have brought such 
suffering upon the people,' 

Nevertheless, I think that the Red Terror has 
already made some people, and will make many others, 
reconsider their judgment about the personal responsi- 
bility of Nicholas II for all the horrors of his reign. 
I for one do not think he was the outcast, the inhuman 
monster, the deliberate murderer I used to imagine. I 
began to realize that there was a human side to him. 
It became clear to me that he had acquiesced in the 
whole ruthless system without being moved by any 
personal ill will and without even realizing that it was 
bad. His mentality and his circumstances kept him 

[265 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


wholly out of touch with the people. He heard of the 
blood and tears of thousands upon thousands cftily 
through official documents, in which they were repre- 
sented as “measures” taken by the authorities “in the 
interest of the peace and safety of the Stated Such 
reports did not convey to him the pain and suffering 
of the victims, but only the “heroism” of the soldiers 
“faithful in the fulfillment of their duty to the Czar 
and the Fatherland.” 1 From his youth he had been 
trained to believe that his welfare and the welfare of 
Russia were one and the same thing, so that the “dis- 
loyal” workmen, peasants and students who were shot 
down, executed or exiled seemed to him mere monsters 
and outcasts of humanity who must be destroyed for 
the sake of the country and the “faithful subjects” 
themselves.; 

Such explanations of the conduct of Nicholas II had 
not seemed convincing. But now, when one sees that 
neither close ties with the people, nor education, nor 
lofty socialist ideals, nor fine records of political and 
social work can prevent men from demonstrating their 
instincts of domination and unbridled ambition at the 
expense of the blood and tears of men, women and 
children, one can easily believe that Nicholas II in 
comparison with these blood-stained “revolutionists,” 
was a man not altogether devoid of human feeling, 
whose nature was perverted by his surroundings and 
traditions. 

When I left him after my first interview I was very 
much worked up. What I had seen of the former 
Empress made her character quite clear to me and cor- 
responded with what every one who knew her had said 
about her. But Nicholas, with his beautiful blue eyes 
and his whole manner and appearance, was a puzzle to 
me. Was he deliberately using his art of charming, 

[266] 



THE EX-CZAR AND HIS FAMILY 


inherited from his ancestors? Was he an experienced 
actor, an artful hypocrite? Or was he a harmless 
innocent and entirely under the thumb of his wife? It 
seemed incredible that that slow-moving, diffident 
simpleton, who looked as if he were dressed in some 
one else’s clothes, had been Emperor of All Russia, 
Czar of Poland, Grand Duke of Finland, etc., etc., 
and had ruled over an immense empire for twenty-five 
years! I do not know what impression Nicholas II 
would have made upon me had I seen him when he 
was still the monarch on the throne, but, when I first 
met him after the Revolution, I was struck chiefly by 
the fact that nothing about him suggested that only a 
month before so much had depended on his word. I 
left him with the firm determination of solving the 
riddle of this strange, terrible and ingratiating per- 
sonality. 

After my first visit I determined to send a new com- 
mandant to the Alexandrovsky Palace, a man of my 
own who would set my mind at rest about the imperial 
family. I could not leave them alone with the few 
faithful attendants who still clung to the old cere- 
monial * and the soldiers of the Guard who kept close 
watch over them. Later, there were rumors of a 
“counter-revolutionary” plot in the palace simply be- 
cause the “court” used to send a bottle of wine to the 
officer on guard, for his dinner. It was necessary to 
have a faithful, intelligent and tactful intermediary in 
the palace. I chose Colonel Korovichenko, a military 
jurist and a veteran of the Japanese and European 
Wars, whom I knew to be a courageous and upright 
man. I was justified in putting my trust in him, for 


♦Count Benkendorff; Naryshkina, lady-in-waiting; Prince Dol- 
goruky, Dr. Botkin, Count Buchevden, Schneider, etc. 

[267] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


he kept his prisoners strictly isolated and managed to 
inspire them with respect for the new authorities. 

In the course of my occasional short interviews with 
Nicholas II at Tsarskoye Selo, I tried to fathom his 
character and, I think, on the whole I succeeded. He 
was an extremely reserved man, who distrusted and 
utterly despised mankind. He was not well educated, 
but he had some knowledge of human nature. He 
did not care for anything or any one except his son, 
arid perhaps his daughters. This terrible indifference 
to aU external things made him seem like some un- 
natural automaton. As I studied his face, I seemed 
to see behind his smile and his charming eyes a stiff, 
frozen mask of utter loneliness and desolation. I think 
he may have been a mystic, seeking communion with 
Heaven patiently and passionately, and weary of all 
earthly things. Perhaps everything on earth had be- 
come insignificant and distasteful to him because all 
his desires had been so easily gratified. When I began 
to know this living mask I understood why it had been 
so easy to overthrow his power. He did not wish to 
fight for it and it simply fell from his hands. Author- 
ity, like everything else, he held too cheap. He was 
altogether weary of it. He threw off authority as 
formerly he might have thrown off a dress uniform 
and put on a simpler one. It was a new experience 
for him to find himself a plain citizen without the 
duties or robes of state. To retire into private life 
was not a tragedy for him. Old Madame Naryshkina, 
the lady-in-waiting, told me that he had said to her: 
“How glad I am that I need no longer attend to these 
tiresome interviews and sign those everlasting docu- 
ments ! I shall read, walk and spend my time with the 
children.” And, she added, this was no pose on his 
part. Indeed, all those who watched him in his cap- 

[268] 



THE EX-CZAR AND HIS FAMILY 

tivity were unanimous in saying that Nicholas II 
seellmed generally to he very good-tempered and ap- 
peared to enjoy his new manner of life. He chopped 
wood and piled up the logs in stacks in the park. He 
did a little gardening and rowed and played with the 
children. It seemed as if a heavy burden had fallen 
from his shoulders and that he was greatly relieved. 

■ His wife, however, was a proud and strong woman 
with altogether earthly ambitions, who felt keenly the 
loss of her authority and could not resign herself to 
the new state of affairs.' She suffered from hysteria 
and was at times partly paralyzed. She depressed 
every one around her by her languor, her misery and 
her irreconcilable animosity. People like the former 
Empress never forget or forgive. While the judicial in- 
quiry into the conduct of her immediate circle (Vyrou- 
bova, Yoyeikova, Rasputin, etc.) was going on, I had 
to take certain measures to prevent her from acting in 
collusion with the Czar, in case they had to give testi- 
mony. It would be more true to say I had to prevent 
her from bringing undue influence to bear on her hus- 
band. So, while the investigation was in progress, I 
separated the couple, allowing them to meet only at 
meal times, when they were forbidden to allude to 
the past. I gave the Czar my reasons for this act of 
severity and asked him to help in carrying it out, so 
that no one should have anything to do with the matter 
beyond those who knew of it already — Korovichenko, 
Naryshkina and, I think, Count Benkendorff. They 
did all I asked and carried out my injunction strictly as 
long as it was necessary. Every one concerned told me 
what a remarkably good effect the separation had upon 
the Czar and how it made him livelier and altogether 
more cheerful ! 

When I told him that there was to be an investiga- 
[ 269 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


tion and that Alexandra Feodorovna might have to be 
tried, he did not turn a hair and merely remarked: 
“Well, I don’t think Alice had anything to do -with it. 
Have you any proof?” To which I replied: “I do 
not know yet.” 

In all our conversations we avoided using names or 
titles and simply addressed each other as “you.” 
“Well, so now Albert Thomas is with you : last year 
he dined with me. An interesting man. Remember me 
to him, please.” (I delivered this message.) 

The way he compared “last year” with “now” 
showed that Nicholas II may have at times brooded 
over the past, but we never really discussed' the change 
in his position. We only touched upon such things 
casually and superficially. He seemed to find it difficult 
to mention these things and especially to speak of the 
men who had deserted and betrayed him so quickly. 
With all his contempt for mankind, he had not expected 
quite so much faithlessness. I gathered from the hints 
that slipped out in his conversation that he still hated 
Gutchkoff, that he considered Rodzianko shallow- 
minded, that he could not imagine what Miliukoff was 
like, that he respected Alexeyeff greatly and also Prince 
Lvoff to a certain extent. 

Only during one incident did I see Nicholas II get 
excited like any other human being. 

Either the Soviet of Soldiers and Workmen or the 
garrison Soviet (I forget which) had decided to follow 
the Petrograd example and organize an official funeral 
for the victims of the Revolution. It was to be held on 
Good Friday, in one of the main avenues of the park 
at Tsarskoye Selo, at some distance from the palace, 
but exactly opposite the windows of the rooms occupied 
by the imperial family. The Czar was to witness the 
ceremony from the windows of his gilded prison, to 

[ 270 ] 



THE EX-CZAR AND HIS FAMILY 

see his guard with red banners paying the last honors 
to the fallen fighters for freedom. It was an extraordi- 
narily poignant and dramatic episode. The garrison 
was still well in hand at that time and we were not 
afraid of any rioting. We even felt convinced that 
the troops wished to show their self-control and sense 
of responsibility, as indeed they did. But as the day 
of the ceremony approached, Nicholas II became more 
and more perturbed and begged me to have the funeral 
demonstration held somewhere else or, at least, to have 
it postponed for another day. For some reason or 
other he was especially anxious not to have it held on 
Good Friday, when he was fasting. Was he afraid of 
the crowd or was he thinking of other Good Fridays 
in the past? 

However, when later on I told him that he must 
prepare for a long journey, he remained perfectly calm. 
It was at the beginning of August. Since early in the 
summer the question of the imperial family had been 
attracting too much attention, giving us a great deal of 
anxiety. .People began to recall forgotten episodes of 
the Czar’s reign, as the reactionaries appeared to grow 
hopeful and their opponents became filled with hatred 
and a thirst for revenge.' The discipline of the Tsar- 
skoye Selo garrison was weakening and I feared that, 
if there were new disturbances in Petrograd, the Alex- 
androvsky Palace would not be safe. In addition, 
agents-provocateurs had begun to circulate rumors 
about counter-revolutionary conspiracies and attempts 
to kidnap the Czar, which spread rapidly within the 
garrison. One night a motor car had broken through 
the fence of the palace park and it was said that the 
car had tried to reach the palace grounds. Of course, 
it was a case of nothing but hooliganism. But still 
we were obliged to place an extra guard where the 

[271] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


fence had been broken. The disturbing rumors con- 
tinued to spread, however, and finally I decided to 
transfer the Czar and his family temporarily to some 
remote place, some quiet corner, where they would 
attract less attention. Although the government’s in- 
quiry into the doings of the Rasputin clique had cleared 
the Empress, the royal family could not be sent abroad 
because Great Britain had refused to give hospitality, 
during the War, to relatives of its royal house. They 
could not with safety be sent to the Crimea, so I chose 
Tobolsk, a really remote place, without railway com- 
munications, and which was almost isolated from the 
world in winter. The governor’s house at Tobolsk was 
fairly comfortable and tolerable accommodations could 
be arranged for the family. 

We made the preparations for their departure with 
the utmost secrecy, for publicity might have led to all 
kinds of obstacles and complications. Not even all the 
members of the Provisional Government were in- 
formed of the imperial family’s destination. In fact, 
only five or six persons in all Petrograd knew it. The 
ease and success with which we arranged the departure 
showed how much the authority of the Provisional 
Government had been strengthened by August. In 
March or April it would not have been possible to 
move the Czar without endless consultations with the 
Soviets, etc. But, on August fourteenth, the Czar and 
his family left for Tobolsk at my personal orders and 
with the consent of the Provisional Government. 
Neither the Soviet nor any one else knew of it until 
afterwards. 

When the date for the departure had been settled, I 
explained the situation to the Czar and told him to 
prepare for a journey. I did not say where he was 
going, but only advised him to take as much warm 

[ 272] 



THE EX-CZAR AND HIS FAMILY 

clothing as possible. The Czar listened attentively, 
and, when I told him not to be anxious, that the ar- 
rangement was being made for the benefit of his family, 
and generally tried to reassure him, he looked me 
straight in the face and said: 

“I am not worrying. We believe you. If you say 
this is necessary I am sure it is.” 

And he repeated: “We believe you.” 

As he said this I thought of another scene, one that 
had taken place in days gone by — the trial of that 
remarkable man, Carl Trauberg, head of the Northern 
Terrorist Organization, before the Petrograd military 
district court. This organization had already had 
many successes, and was preparing for still more seri- 
ous attacks, among them on the Grand Duke Nich- 
olas Nikolayevitch, Scheglovitoff and others. Trau- 
berg was about to be condemned to death. General 
Nikiforoff presided. He was a brutal and cynical man, 
who held nothing sacred. All through the trial Trau- 
berg had distinguished himself by his manly behavior, 
like a true revolutionist. Calmly, courageously and 
without hesitation, he was giving evidence against 
himself, to shield his friends. When the public prose- 
cutor tried to trip him up and catch him contradicting 
himself, the judge, cynic that he was, turned upon the 
prosecutor and said sternly: “The court believes Trau- 
berg; the court knows that he speaks the truth.” I 
remember how the face of the accused flushed with 
joyful pride, and how there was a general movement in 
court — a tribute to the moral victory of the revolution- 
ary spirit. Two days later Carl Trauberg was hanged 
“by order of His Majesty.” 

All this came back to me in a flash as I looked at 
the Czar. I think he read triumph in my eyes, for 
when he said “We believe you,” I felt that all those 

[273 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


who had perished for the victory of the Great Revolu- 
tion were avenged at last. He believed me! He, the 
autocrat who had not really trusted any one, confided 
himself and his children to the Revolution. It was not 
I but the Revolution itself, which had conquered the 
arch-reactionary. A mob drunk with blood cannot 
understand such a revenge, such a triumph. The as- 
sassins now in power in Russia and all the so-called 
“practical politicians” will smile at such naivete, but I 
am convinced that this is the only kind of revenge 
worthy of a great revolution, which should always 
represent the triumph of human kindness and mercy. 

The departure of the Czar and his family for To- 
bolsk took place on the night of August fourteenth. 
All the arrangements were completed to my satisfac- 
tion and, at about eleven o’clock in the evening, after 
a meeting of the Provisional Government, I went to 
Tsarskoye Selo to supervise the departure. I first 
made the round of the barracks and inspected the 
guards, chosen by the regiments themselves, to accom- 
pany the train and guard the Czar on his arrival at his 
destination. They were all ready and seemed cheer- 
ful and contented. There had been vague rumors in 
the town concerning the departure, and from early 
evening curious onlookers had begun to collect around 
the palace park. In the* palace the final preparations 
were under way. Luggage was being brought out and 
stored in motor cars, etc. We were all rather on edge. 
Before their separation I permitted the Czar to see 
his brother, Michael Alexandrovitch. Naturally, I 
had to be present at this interview, much as I disliked 
the intrusion. The brothers met in the Emperor’s 
study at about midnight. Both seemed much agitated. 
All their experiences of the last months came back to 
them. For a long time they were silent, and then 

C 274] 



THE EX-CZAR AND HIS FAMILY 

they began the casual, fragmentary conversation char- 
acteristic of such hurried interviews: “How is Alice?” 
“And how is mother?” asked the Grand Duke, etc. 
They stood facing each other, fidgeting all the while, 
and sometimes one would take hold of the other’s hand 
or the buttons of his uniform. 

“May I see the children?” Michael Alexandrovitch 
asked me. 

“No,” I answered. “I cannot prolong the inter- 
view. 

“Very well,” the Grand Duke said to his brother. 
“Kiss them for me.” 

They began to take leave of each other. Who 
could have thought that this was the last time they 
would ever meet! 

This unusual and exciting night seemed to fill the 
Czar’s young son with mischief. As I sat in the room 
near the Emperor’s study, giving the final orders and' 
awaiting news of the arrival of the train, I could hear 
the youngster running about noisily, trying to get 
across the corridor to where I was, to see what was 
going on there. 

The time was passing and still the train from the 
Nikolayevsky Railway did not arrive. The employees 
had hesitated about making up the train and delayed 
carrying out orders until confirmed by some reliable 
authority. It was daylight by the time the train ar- 
rived. We motored over to where' it was waiting, 
just outside the Alexandrovsky station. We had pre- 
viously arranged the order of seating in the cars, but 
everything was muddled at the last moment. 

For the first time I saw the former Empress simply 
as a mother, anxious and weeping. The son and daugh- 
ters did not seem to mind the departure so much, 
though they too were excited and nervous at the last 

[ 275 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


moment- Finally, after the last farewells had been 
said, the motor cars moved, with Cossacks in front 
and behind. The sun was already shining brightly 
when the convoy left the park, but fortunately the town 
was still asleep. When we reached the train we 
checked the list of those who were going. Another 
farewell and the train was off. They were leaving 
forever, but no one foresaw the terrible end that was 
awaiting them. 

I must go back to an interview I had with Alexandra 
Feodorovna. Old Madame Naryshkina (who, by the 
way, considered the former Empress the cause of all 
the calamities of Russia and “Niki”) was waiting in 
an adjoining room. We carried on the conversation 
in Russian, which Alexandra Feodorovna spoke hesitat- 
ingly and with a strong accent. Suddenly her face 
flushed and she flared up : 

“I don’t understand why people speak ill of me. 
I have always liked Russia from the time I first came 
here. I have always sympathized with Russia. Why 
do people think I am siding with Germany and our 
enemies? There is nothing German about me. I 
am English by education and English is my language.” 

*> She became so excited that it was impossible to con- 
tinue the conversation. She may have thought at the 
time that she liked Russia, but to tell the truth she did 
not give me the impression of being sincere. I knew 
perfectly well that she had never liked Russia. I be- 
lieve that, in spite of my careful approach to the sub- 
ject, she realized that I was trying to learn from her 
what I could about the part her circle had taken in the 
scheming for a separate peace.* 

As I have said, I never really succeeded in under- 
standing Alexandra Feodorovna or in discovering 
what her real aims had been, but of the members of 

[276] 



THE EX-CZAR AND HIS FAMILY 


her circle whom I met (Voyeikova, Vyroubova, Pro- 
topopoff) she was undoubtedly the cleverest and the 
strongest, and no one could have made a fool of her. 
As I never saw Rasputin, I am unable to judge what 
influence or, rather, what hypnotic force he possessed. 
But, clever as he was, this scoundrel was, after all, an 
illiterate mouzhik and although his cunning may have 
made him an excellent interpreter of the plans and in- 
trigues of others, he could not have had a political 
program of his own. However, I know definitely that 
from the beginning he was instinctively and violently 
opposed to the War. On the very eve of the declara- 
tion of war the Emperor sent a wire to Rasputin ask- 
ing him what he should do. Rasputin had a short time 
before been stabbed by one of the women he had 
seduced and was lying ill in Pokrovskoye, his village 
on the Irtish River, near Tobolsk. A copy of his 
reply to the Czar fell into the hands of my friend, 
Sukhanoff, member of the Duma from Tobolsk. I do 
not remember the exact words of the reply, but the 
substance of it was: “Do not declare war. The peo- 
ple will again begin to cry, ‘Down with this!’ and 
‘Down with that !’ You and your heir will get no good 
out of it.” 

It is well known that the Grand Duke Nicholas 
Nikolayevitch had to get the 1 mobilization order from 
Nicholas II almost by force./ I have no doubt that 
Rasputin’s telegram accounted, to a considerable ex- 
tent, for the Czar’s reluctance.,! I concluded, there- 
fore, that Rasputin, opposed to the' War because he 
instinctively fejt its inevitable fatal consequences for 
the Romanoffs j was the cunning tool of those who were 
interested in promoting the policy of a separate peace.- 
It is clear that some one cleverer and better versed in 
politics than all those Vyroubovas and Protopopoffs 

[ 277 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


was using them to further his or her own policy. I do 
not know who that person was. At any rate, it is cer- 
tain that Alexandra Feodorovna was directing the af- 
fairs of state during the last months of the autocracy, 
that she was the real ruler of the country. One had 
only to examine the visitors’ book at the Alexandrovsky 
Palace, and see who were the people who called on the 
Empress, to understand the part she played in public 
affairs. It is also certain that she saw clearly that the 
condition of the country made it impossible to continue 
the War and retain the old methods of government at 
home. Whether she herself decided to make peace 
with Germany and chose the government of Pro- 
topopoff, Beliayeff, Scheglovitoff, Stuermer, and others, 
for this purpose, or whether some one behind her in- 
spired her course of action is more or less immaterial. 
The outstanding fact is that she was the de facto head 
of the government that was leading the country straight 
into a separate peace. Whether any member of the 
Rasputin-Vyroubova circle was actually a German 
agent is not certain, but undoubtedly a whole German 
organization was sheltered behind them and they were, 
at any rate, quite ready to receive money and gifts of 
all kindsf 



CHAPTER XIII 

THE MOSCOW CONFERENCE 


T HE crisis of the Revolution, of which fsere- 
telli spoke on the day of the formation of the 
second coalition cabinet of the Provisional 
Government, was in truth the crisis of the statei It 
was, as already indicated, the victory of the state. 
Russian democracy emerged from its Soviet shell. Its 
voice began to resound everywhere — in city councils, 
zemstvos, cooperatives, trade unions, etc. Once again, 
also, was heard the voice of the hitherto silenced or- 
ganizations of propertied, middle-class Russia. The 
government, supporting itself on the country, felt the 
need of an organ of public opinion, expressing itself 
in some organized manner. For technical reasons and 
because of the recent cabinet crisis the convocation of 
the Constituent Assembly, set for October thirteenth, 
had to be postponed until December sixteenth. 

This was too long an interval. A new Congress of 
Soviets would have been inadequate, for its opinion 
would have been regarded less than ever as the opinion 
of the whole of Russia. At the very beginning of the 
cabinet crisis, immediately after the departure of 
Prince Lvoff, the Provisional Government had decided 
to convoke an All-Russian State Conference in Mos- 
cow, with the purpose of finding therein a new support 
for the strengthening of the government. Now we 
were no longer confronted with this need. The gov- 
ernment had gained new confidence and felt its 

C 279 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


strength. Nevertheless, it was conscious of the need 
of making an inventory, so to speak, of the nation’s 
political forces, to determine more clearly the balance 
of their respective weight in the nation, and to give to 
the political parties themselves, to the Soviets and other 
organizations an opportunity to sense the growth of 
the social forces and social organization in the country. 
For this reason the new coalition cabinet, immediately 
upon its formation, affirmed the plan for convocation 
of the Moscow State Conference. The date of the 
meeting was set for August twenty-sixth. 

On the day of the opening of the conference, the 
Bolshoy Theater in Moscow was filled with thousands 
of people, representing the very best elements of 
political, social, cultured and military Russia. Only 
a pitiful handful of monarchists and Bolsheviki, who 
had virtually been driven underground, did not send 
their representatives to this conference, truly expres- 
sive of the whole of Russia. 

The Bolsheviki even tried to organize a general 
strike in Moscow, in protest against the “reaction- 
ary assembly” which was to demonstrate the loyalty of 
“Russia’s subjects” to the “dictator Kerensky.” In 
extreme Right circles it was likewise whispered : “Ker- 
ensky is going to Moscow to be crowned.” And, in- 
deed, under the thunder of oratorical speeches in the 
main hall of the Bolshoy Theater, in the lobbies and 
behind the scenes, was being born, as we shall soon see, 
the mad idea of a dictatorship. The man who was to 
be the bearer of the dictatorial robe was General 
Korniloff, a man brave in war but quite unversed in 
politics. 

Outwardly, the" conference presented a most inter- 
esting picture. Running from the stage to the main 
entrance was the middle aisle, dividing the conference 

[ 280 ] 



THE MOSCOW CONFERENCE 

into two equal sides: on the left was democratic, 
peasant, Soviet, socialist Russia and on the right was 
liberal, bourgeois., propertied, capitalist Russia. The 
army was represented on the left by army committees 
and on the right by members of the commanding corps. 
Exactly opposite the main entrance, on the stage, sat 
the Provisional Government. My seat was precisely 
in the middle. \ On my left were the Democratic-Social- 
ist ministers. On my right were the ministers from 
the bourgeoisie. The Provisional Government was 
the only center uniting both Russias into one. In this 
center I was the mathematical point of unity.* 

Those who attended the meetings of the Conference 
at the Bolshoy Theater in Moscow can never forget 
those days. All the complexity of political opinions, 
the entire gamut of social sentiments, the entire tension 
of the inner struggle, the entire force of patriotic con- 
cern, the entire fury of social hatred, all the pain of 
accumulated insults and injuries — all this flowed in a 
tempestuous, roaring stream towards the stage, to the 
table of the Provisional Government. Demands, ac- 
cusations, complaints were heaped in a mass on the 
government table. Both sides wanted to help the 
government, from which some miraculous message 
was expected. Each of the two Russias wanted the 
government to be only with that particular side. 

But the government was only on the side of the 
state, for we of the Provisional Government saw in- 
dependently and as a whole what each of the struggling 
sides observed only from the point of view of the part 
that interested it alone. We saw that both sides were 
equally necessary to Russia, j The significance of the 
Moscow Conference was, of course, not in the pro- 
grams embodied in the various declarations, resolutions 

[281 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


and speeches but in the determination of the measure 
of power represented by the various social organiza- 
tions participating. iThe government sought to feel the 
pulse of the country, to sense its will. The repre- 
sentatives of the respective parties and organizations 
sought to weigh the authority of the government in 
the state : some aimed at strengthening it, while others 
searched for its Achilles’ heel. The most acute, the 
most tense moment of the conference was the appear- 
ance of General Lavre Komiloff, Commander-in-Chief. 
For the Left side of the conference he was the symbol 
of future “counter-revolution.” For the Right side 
he was almost a “national hero,” destined to over- 
throw the “weak-willed Provisional Government, the 
prisoner of the Soviets,” and to establish a strong au- 
thority. 

Which of the two sides represented the majority of 
the people at that time, .August twenty-sixth to twenty- 
eighth? The answer to this question was quite clear 
to all who were not blinded by party passion and social 
hatred. To learn the answer it was only necessary to 
examine the list of organizations which signed the 
declaration read by Tcheidze, President of the All- 
Russian Executive Committee of the Congress of 
Soviets. 

The list included the Committee itself, the Executive 
Committee of the Congress of Peasants, the commit- 
tees representing the front and the army, the coopera- 
tive organizations, the All-Russian Union of Zemstvos 
and Municipalities, the All-Russian Railway Union, 
the majority of city councils elected on the basis of 
universal suffrage, etc. etc. In a word, on the Left 
was represented the Russia of the people, all the demo- 
cratic, revolutionary elements of the country, into 
whose hands had fallen the entire apparatus of na- 

[ 282 ] 



THE MOSCOW CONFERENCE 

tional and local administration. After six months of 
experience of the Revolution, this Russia recognized 
the supreme authority of the Provisional Government 
and, instead of the previous abstract declarations, it 
brought to the Moscow Conference a practical pro- 
gram for the political and economic restoration of the 
country, a program which, while not entirely suitable 
as the basis of immediate government policy, was none 
the less a realistic, concrete program. The social 
organizations and parties comprising the Left sector 
of the Moscow Conference represented collectively an 
unquestionable buttress of the state. They constituted 
the dam behind which the elemental class antagonisms 
of the lower strata of the population were still raging, 
fanned by Bolshevist demagogy and German agents. 

. But who was on the Right? The entire financial 
and industrial aristocracy of the countrjff The elite 
of the urban liberal intelligentsia. These two forces 
were necessary to the new Russia. But at the Moscow 
Conference they were already represented by a ma- 
jority of “has-beens,” speaking for groups which as 
such had disappeared into history on March 12, 1917. 

Here were representatives of the Duma, the State 
Council, the Union of the Landed Nobility appearing 
under its new name of the “Union of Landowners,” 
former city and zemstvo officials, professors, journal- 
ists and, finally, representatives of the high command, 
the All-Russian Union of Officers, the Council of Cos- 
sacks, the Union of the Knights of St. George and 
other military organizations. As a matter of fact, 
the officers’ organizations, headed by the command- 
ing corps, represented the only physical force at the 
disposal of the entire Right sector of the conference. 
Shortly before the opening of the conference the prop- 

[ 283 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


ertied elements of Russia had set up in Moscow a 
permanent political center under the name of the “Con- 
ference of Public Leaders.” This conference became 
a real Soviet, the nucleus of what was then “white” 
Russia, and which, under certain circumstances, be- 
haved exactly as did the Soviet in the first weeks of 
the Revolution. 

On the last day of the conference occurred the 
celebrated scene when Tseretelli, chief spokesman of 
the Left wing of the conference, and Bublikoff, lead- 
ing representative of industrial and financial Russia, 
shook hands on the stage of the Bolshoy Theater, 
symbolizing thus the union of all the people around 
the nonpartisan, national Provisional Government, the 
armistice between capital and labor in the name of the 
struggle for Russia. But at that very moment, behind 
the scenes of the conference, certain leaders of the 
Right sector, together with former and active com- 
manders at the front, were signing the death warrant 
of the new coalition, of the union of the labor and 
bourgeois forces of the country, by giving their sanc- 
tion to the mad effort of a pitiful group of officers and 
political adventurers to destroy the Provisional Gov- 
ernment, i.e., to destroy completely the sole levee which 
alone could save Russia from a new outburst of 
anarchy. 

On my return from the Moscow Conference I felt 
more than ever that Russia could be saved only by 
following unswervingly the path along which the 
Provisional Government had led it from the very first 
day of the Revolution. To be sure, at the beginning 
of August there were only three members of the 
original Provisional Government in the cabinet — 
Terestchenko, Nekrassoff and 1. But the changes in 
the composition of the ministry did not in any way 

[284] 



THE MOSCOW CONFERENCE 

change the line of policy laid down by the government 
created by the Revolution. All three of us, who for 
more than six months had followed the course of events 
in Russia from day to day from the very central point 
of vantage, perceived how slowly but surely the new 
Russia was growing in strength and stability, overcom- 
ing one after another all political, economic and 
psychological obstacles. The end of the 1917 fight- 
ing season was drawing closer. The general inter- 
allied problem at the front was solved. Lenin was in 
hiding. The Soviets were relegated to the background 
of national life. The power of the state was con- 
solidated. Within three months the Constituent As- 
sembly was to meet, three months during which much 
hard work was yet to be done, but within the frame- 
work of a stronger, firmer state organization. 

All this was quite clear to any one possessing any 
common sense, objective vision. It seemed that it was 
not too much to expect such objectivity from the polit- 
ical and cultured upper elements of Russia, who had 
hut a few months before witnessed the dissolution of 
the monarchy and who had with their own hands felt 
all the ulcers of the old regime. They, the old, ex- 
perienced political leaders should have understood bet- 
ter than others the tremendous, superhuman patience 
required in the governing of Russia in the first months 
following the catastrophe, the equal of which had not 
perhaps been witnessed since the period of the fall of 
the Roman Empire. 

However, there was not enough patience ! 

The still shaky levee, protecting Russia from ruin 
and disintegration, was blown up by the hands of men 
who could have been accused of anything but lack of 
patriotism. But there is apparently a blind love of 

[ 285 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


country which is worse than open hatred. The Mos- 
cow Conference became the prologue to a terrible 
drama which developed between Mohileff, the head- 
quarters of the commander-in-chief, and Petrograd, 
seat of the Provisional Government. 



CHAPTER XIV 

THE CONSPIRATORS ON THE RIGHT 

T HE mad mutiny of the commander-in-chief, 
which opened the doors to the Kremlin for 
the Bolsheviki and to Brest-Litovsk for 
Ludendorff, was the final link in the conspiracies of the 
Right against the Provisional Government.? Public 
opinion abroad has been inclined to regard the Komiloff 
movement as an almost unexpected outburst of in- 
censed patriotism on the part of Komiloff and his 
supporters. In accordance with the picture portray- 
ing Russian history between March and November, 
1917, as a process of gradual and increasing disintegra- 
tion, Sovietization and Bolshevization of the state, the 
revolt of General Komiloff is presented as the heroic 
act of a self-sacrificing patriot, striving in vain to free 
Russia from a “weak-willed” government and to save 
his perishing country on the very brink of the precipice. 
I hope that what I have presented thus far has con- 
veyed to the reader’s mind a somewhat different pic- 
ture, a picture of reality as against pure legend. 

There was nothing sudden in the action of the peo- 
ple who prepared the conspiracy of the commander- 
in-chief against the government which had entrusted 
the army into his hands in the most critical months of 
the War. On the contrary, the conspiracy developed 
slowly, systematically, with cool calculation of all the 
factors involved affecting its possible success or failure. 
Nor was the motive of the conspiracy, so far as some 

[287] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


of its backers were concerned, one of unselfish patriot- 
ism. On the contrary, the motive was extremely 
selfish — to be sure, not one of personal but of class 
selfishness. To avoid misunderstanding I want to ap- 
pend right here one qualification: in describing the 
motives of the criminal activity of the initiators and 
original .leaders of the conspiracy I do not attribute 
these selfish class motives to General Korniloff and his 
close military supporters, all of whom were brave 
Russian patriots, who were drawn into the conspiracy 
after the preparatory work had been completed. 

The idea of the overthrow of the Provisional Gov- 
ernment by means of a conspiracy against it appeared 
in Petrograd for the first time early in May, 1917, 
and perhaps even earlier, in a limited circle of bankers 
and financiers. The date alone shows that what was 
being contemplated was not a struggle against the 
“excesses” of the Revolution and “Kerensky’s weak- 
willed government,” but against the Revolution itself, 
against the new order in Russia. The details of the 
conspiratory work of this original group of reaction- 
aries are little known. I know only that steps were 
taken for the creation of a fund, for which purpose 
the conspirators entered into contact with certain 
political figures. At the same time they undertook to 
make some soundings in military circles. The man 
placed in charge of the preliminary work and of finding 
ways and means for the execution of the conspiracy 
was a certain Zavoiko. I do not know whether he 
acted as a full-fledged member of the conspiracy or 
merely as an agent. 

The disintegration of the army, having reached its 
most critical point with Gutchkoff’s departure from the 
cabinet, created for the civilian prophets of military 
dictatorship a favorable condition in the attitude of 

[ 288 ] 



THE CONSPIRATORS ON THE RIGHT 

the officers. On May twentieth, in Mohileff, at the 
headquarters of the Commander-in-Chief, General 
Alexeyeff, was convened the first conference of officers, 
which led to the formation of the Union of Officers, an 
organization which gained much influence in circles 
close to the General Staff. 

The connecting link at General Headquarters be- 
tween the civilian and military organizers of the con- 
spiracy was Colonel L. Novosiltzeff, a reserve officer 
called into service during the War, and President of the 
Union of Officers. He was an experienced zemstvo 
and political worker, a member of the Central Com- 
mittee of the Constitutional-Democratic party, who 
had been elected to a seat in the fourth Duma but had 
resigned from it shortly afterwards. Novosiltzeff be- 
longed to the Right wing of the Constitutional-Demo- 
cratic party and by his origin and social interests was 
connected with the landed aristocracy. Colonel Novo- 
siltzeff made regular trips between General Head- 
quarters and Moscow. Because of his political and 
social position he was extremely valuable to the con- 
spiracy. At the beginning of June (i.e., previous_ to 
our military offensive and while Prince Lvoff was still 
the premier) the conspiracy stood as follows: 

At the front individual emissaries of the Central 
Committee of the Union of Officers were carefully en- 
listing supporters in the active army. Incidentally, 
the heads of the conspiracy at General Headquarters 
were very much incensed by the removal of General 
Alexeyeff and the appointment of General Brusiloff in 
his place, as commander-in-chief, for General Alexeyeff, 
from the very beginning, was cognizant of the work of 
Novosiltzeff and his close associates, and was helping 
them by his advice and connections in the two capitals. 
General Alexeyeff, the first one to be mentioned as 

[ 289 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


candidate for dictator, declined from the very begin- 
ning to play any such active role. After the break be- 
tween Admiral Kolchak and the Black Sea Fleet, the 
admiral was brought forward as the candidate. But 
nothing came of this either, and when Admiral Kolchak 
went to the United States on a special mission for the 
Provisional Government, the search for a general on 
a white horse continued. 

Up until the July uprising of the Bolsheviki the 
government’s attention was concentrated on the Left, 
from which alone, it seemed, there was danger of new 
perturbations. I think that the conspirators themselves 
had scant hope of success. I repeat, moreover, that 
they had not yet found the “hefro,” that very same gen- 
eral on a white horse who is so essential for a classic 
pronundamento. Finally, the conspirators themselves 
were not as yet sufficiently united and organized. And, 
what was most important, there was not as yet 
that general social-psychological atmosphere neces- 
sary to their enterprise. The financiers, staff officers 
and those politicians of Petrograd and Moscow who 
were swept aside by the fall of the monarchy were 
merely “gathering forces slowly” for “eventualities,” 
to be used “in case of need,” while Zavoiko, their mes- 
senger at the front, who had built himself a nest close 
to Korniloff, was not as yet giving tangible evidence of 
his work. 

THE PSYCHOLOGICAL PREPARATION FOR THE COUP 

The psychologic prerequisites for serious develop- 
ment of the military conspiracy appeared only after the 
July uprising of the Bolsheviki and the beginning, on 
July nineteenth, of the retreat of our armies from 
Galicia. The beginning of the new retreat of the Rus- 

[ 290 ] 



THE CONSPIRATORS ON THE RIGHT 

sian armies, accompanied by the usual horrors of such 
an operation, by panic and demoralization, aggravated 
acutely the general feeling of injured patriotism in all 
army circles, affecting equally the high command, the 
government commissars and the army committees. 

I have already emphasized that the fundamental 
strategic significance of the campaign of 1917 on the 
Russian Front was in the restoration of military opera- 
tions and the return of German divisions to our front. 
The decisive strategic consequences of the restoration 
of active operations by the Russian army could not in 
any way be minimized by our retreat, however painful 
was its effect psychologically on the nation’s patriotism. 
This simple military truism should, of course, have 
been clear to such men as General Alexeyeff or General 
Denikin. Moreover, as we of the Provisional Gov- 
ernment knew, they knew well that the situation in the 
Austro-German trenches was by no means in order. 
They knew that the plan of a crushing offensive in the 
direction of Kieff and Odessa, conceived by Ludendorff, 
had completely failed, because of the disorganization 
of the Austrian army. But these cold considerations 
were not comprehensible to the mind of the broad 
masses of the people and. the troops; they experienced 
most painfully only the outer pictures of our new 
military failure, to which the revelations of Lenin’s 
cooperation with Ludendorff lent a particular acute 
touch. 

At midnight on July twentieth, I received the 
first telegram telling of the enemy’s break through the 
Russian lines in the direction of Tamopol. On July 
twenty-first to twenty-second, this break developed into 
a determined offensive, in the course of which our 
troops, failing to show proper resistance in the mass 
and, in places, failing to obey orders, were retreating 

C 291 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


with increasing speed. On the Western Front of Gen- 
eral Denikin, the operation begun at Krevo ended with- 
out result on July twenty-third, due to our inability to 
develop our initial success because of the unreliability 
and moral weakness of some of our units. 

In the autumn of 19x4 the armies of Samsonoff and 
Rennenkampf in East Prussia had been not only 
smashed but virtually destroyed as fighting units. In 
1915 the Russian troops had been swept from the 
Carpathian heights and Przemysl in Western Galicia 
and rolled back almost to the Russian frontier. With 
equally astounding rapidity the Russian army in the 
same year had lost Warsaw and the entire Polish line 
of fortresses. But then those terrific defeats were 
being reported only through curt, dry communiques 
from the General Headquarters of the Grand Duke 
Nicholas Nikolayevitch, while the commanding corps, 
indignant and resentful, either kept a severe silence or 
was compelled to feign an official optimism. The na- 
tion, held within the grasp of military censorship, had 
been fed on only vague rumors and, suffering in stifled 
misery, had been unable to do anything for the army. 

: Now exactly the opposite was the case.; With the 
very first German blow the entire country emitted a 
cry of pain. And first to speak of its travail was the 
army itself, at times too loudly and in tones of ex- 
aggerated apprehension. On July twenty-second, the 
third day of the Tarnopol break, when General 
Brusiloff was still commander-in-chief, the Provisional 
Government, the All-Russian Committee of Soviets 
and the Executive Committee of the Peasant Congress 
received simultaneously a telegram signed by the Army 
Committee of the Southwestern Front and the com- 
mittee and commissar of the eleventh army, against 

[ 292] 



THE CONSPIRATORS ON THE RIGHT 


which the enemy attack was directed. I will quote the 
telegram, because it illustrates well what I am trying 
to describe: 

^ The offensive begun by the Germans on July 
nineteenth is developing into an immeasurable 
disaster. The morale of the units moved recently 
into action by the heroic efforts of a conscious 
minority has undergone a fatal change. The fight- 
ing spirit has been quickly exhausted. Most 
units are in a state of increasing disintegration. 
Persuasion and argument have lost their power. 
They provoke only threats and even shooting. 
Some units desert their positions without waiting 
even for the approach of the enemy. There have 
been cases when orders for immediate advance to 
the assistance of hard-pressed units were dis- 
cussed for hours at meetings. Positions are not 
infrequently being deserted at the very first shot 
of the enemy. Long columns of deserters, with 
and without rifles, are moving along a line hun- 
dreds of versts long, without any consciousness of 
possible punishment. At times whole units desert 
in this manner. In the unanimous opinion of the 
commissars the situation demands the most ex- 
treme measures and effort, for we must stop at 
nothing to save the Revolution from perishing. 
To-day the commander-in-chief of the South- 
western front [General Korniloff, just appointed 
by me to this post — A. K.] and the commander 
of the eleventh army, with the approval of the 
commissars and committees, issued orders to open 
fir^ on those who flee from positions. Let the en- 
tire country know the whole truth of the situa- 
tion here. Let it rouse itself and find the 
strength and determination to crush mercilessly all 
those who by their weakness are destroying and; 
betraying the Revolution. 

[ 293 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


The army committees who signed this significant 
telegram were all composed of members of Socialist 
parties and some of those men had but recently re- 
turned from hard labor in Siberia, following the 
amnesty proclaimed by the Provisional Government . 1 

Similar telegrams were received by us in Petrograd 
from all sections of the front. The country’s imme- 
diate reply to this call of woe was a mighty determina- 
tion to overcome the disintegration. The Soviets, city 
councils and similar organizations began to speak in a 
new language, summoning the nation to new and un- 
yielding effort to save the Revolution and the state. 

\ Active operations are absolutely essential as a cura- 
tive measure for the restoration of the fighting capacity 
of a weary, shattered army, but such curative measures 
have a violent and, therefore, dangerous reaction. As 
an example we may recall the French experience three 
months before our own July offensive. I refer to the 
unsuccessful offensive under General Nivelle, which 
ended in disastrous failure and immediate mutiny in 
the army. This, it will be remembered, occurred in a 
country unshattered by any revolutionary upheavals 
and with a firm political organism.* After the War, 
Painleve himself, minister of war at the time of the 
Nivelle disaster, told of the critical night when he 
learned that one division was preparing to march on 
Paris. It was only three months after the Austro- 
German break at Tamopol when not only the Austrian 
armies themselves were in a state of complete dis- 
integration but Germany herself began giving indica- 

*In genera], it may be said that the entire development of the 
summer campaign of 1917 would have taken a different course if 
there had been cooperation among the Allies (England, France, and 
Russia). For example, the Nivelle offensive would have in all 
probability been successful if it had been timed with ours, and if the 
British command had supported us. — -A. K. 

[ 294] 




THE CONSPIRATORS ON THE RIGHT 


tions of collapse, with the first serious disorders in the 
Kaiser’s fleet. 

In Russia, in the fourth year of the war, the mani- 
festations of weariness in the army took place under 
circumstances of the very greatest difficulty and in the 
wake of the most profound political, social, economic 
and psychologic disturbances. 

Concluding my references to the situation at the 
front, following the German counter-offensive, I will 
say here that the rapid retreat begun by the Russian 
armies on July nineteenth was not of long duration. 
The new psychology of the nation, the revived wave 
of patriotism and the unforgetable self-sacrifice of 
the commanding corps performed a miracle. On July 
thirtieth I received a telegram from the commissar 
of the Northern Front stating that after the loss of 
the suburban fortifications at Iskul “the morale of the 
rank and file was undergoing a sharp change for the 
better, with the approach of the troops to the home 
frontier.” And on August ninth followed a report 
from General Beliayeff, commander of the Galician 
(Southwestern) Front, to the effect that the retreat 
had definitely been halted and the position of the army 
consolidated. General Komiloff himself, the new com- 
mander-in-chief, in making his first report to the 
Provisional Government, on August fifteenth, pre- 
sented an encouraging picture of the general situation 
at the front, expressing his intention of resuming of- 
fensive operations in Galicia in the near future. 

I have devoted so much space to a description of the 
acutely patriotic and extremely tense reactions ex- 
perienced by Russia in July- August, 1917, in order to 
make dear to the reader the whole work of the sup- 
porters of the contemplated military revolt in the 

[ 295 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 

psychological preparation of their attack on the gov- 
ernment. 

This preparation consisted: i, in deliberate exag- 
geration of the difficulties at the front and of the very 
great sufferings experienced by the army; 2, in de- 
manding from the government demagogic measures, 
obviously unenforcible, for the restoration of discipline ; 
3, in vilifying all democratic organizations in the army; 
and 4, in waging an open press campaign in behalf of 
General Korniloff as the “only possible savior of Rus- 
sia.” This demagogic campaign of arousing in certain 
circles a feeling of patriotic indignation did not abate 
but, on the contrary, increased with the improvement 
at the front. And, indeed, under the prevailing pa- 
triotic sentiment animating the entire country, this play 
on the painful emotions of injured patriotism gained 
excellent results for the conspirators. By the middle 
of August both capitals were sufficiently filled with 
various conspiratory organizations, military and civil- 
ian, while the practical preparations for a coup d’etat 
in the name of the military dictatorship of General 
Korniloff proceeded apace. 



CHAPTER XV 

LAVRE KORNILOFF 

T HE reminscences of my childhood in Simbirsk 
connect me with the Lenin (Ulianoff) family. 
In my youth fate brought me together with 
Komiloff. 

Following our removal from Simbirsk, my father 
was chief inspector of schools in Turkestan. My high 
school years were spent in Tashkent. 

The capital of Russian Turkestan was, above all, a 
military center. Many of the leading figures of the 
Great War, particularly officers of the General Staff, 
served at one time or another of their career in Tash- 
kent. Among them was the young Captain Korniloff, 
who came to Tashkent immediately upon his gradua- 
tion from the Military Academy. Slight of build, thin 
and wiry, with slanting, slightly Kalmyk eyes, Korn- 
iloff was of simple origin. (“I am General Korniloff, 
peasant, son of a Cossack , 5 5 wrote the future rebel- 
lious general in one of his proclamations to the peo- 
ple.) General Komiloff spent little time in fashionable 
drawing-rooms, although their doors were always open 
to any officer of the General Staff, and had no liking 
for the ladies of the social set. He was regarded as 
rather shy and even somewhat of a “savage.” 

Very soon Captain Korniloff became the talk of the 
capital. Having mastered one of the local dialects, 
Captain Korniloff carried out a very brave enterprise. 
Alone, disguised as a native merchant, he made his way 

C 297 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 

into the buffer state between Russian Turkestan and 
British India, at that time heart of Afghanistan, for- 
bidden ground to all foreigners, particularly military 
men. On his return to Tashkent, the' young captain 
became the hero of the hour. However, he did not 
permit himself to be carried away by the prospect of 
social success. Very soon he again astonished the 
“high society” of the provincial capital by marrying 
the daughter of a minor official in my father’s depart- 
ment. This was too much : the doors of society were 
closed to him! 

Many years later, almost on the eve of his revolt 
against the Provisional Government, General Komiloff, 
Commander-in-Chief, breakfasted with me at the 
Winter Palace. After a rather tense conversation in 
my office, we engaged in light chatter at breakfast. 

“You probably do not remember me,” said General 
Korniloff to me jocularly. “I used to visit your peo- 
ple and even danced in your house in Tashkent.” 

“Of course, how can one fail to remember that,” 
I said, recalling the impression produced on all by his 
bold expedition to Afghanistan. 

Korniloff remained all his life a man of simple 
tastes, a man of the people. There was nothing of 
the hereditary bureaucrat or of the aristocratic landed 
noble in him. Incidentally, all the three leading figures 
of the “white” movement — Korniloff, Alexeyeff, Den- 
ikin — were of lowly origin and had made their way to 
the top of the military hierarchy by their own efforts. 
Being poor, they experienced fully the burdens of an 
officer’s career under the old regime. All three were 
distinctly hostile to the privileged elements in the army, 
represented by the Guards. All three made’ brilliant 
records at the Military Academy. And all three made 
rapid advances with the War, which ruined so many 

[ 298 ] 



LAVRE KORNILOFF 


brilliant careers, of the kind promoted in court circles 
and ministerial anterooms. 

Already in 1915, Alexeyeff made his way to General 
Headquarters as chief-of-staff to the Commander-in- 
Chief, Nicholas II. The outbreak of the Revolution 
found Denikin and Korniloff at the front. Both did 
remarkable work in all operations on the Galician 
Front. In one unfortunate operation, in which he 
showed all his personal daring and bravery, Korniloff 
was taken prisoner by the Austrians. His bold escape 
and spectacular return to the Russian lines became the 
source of a kind of Korniloff legend, although it did 
not reach the broad masses of the people and of the 
army rank and file. 

Of all the three future leaders of the White 
armies Korniloff was least fit for political work. On 
the other hand, General Alexeyeff had considerable 
political acumen but was too much of a politician. In 
military science Korniloff was not a strategist hut only 
a tactician, which corresponded entirely with his im- 
pulsive, unthinking nature, given to no consideration 
in moments of danger and acting in such moments with 
lightninglike boldness, oblivious to the possible con- 
sequences. 

Apparently, it was this very characteristic of all too 
great and unthinking determination and zeal, not al- 
ways desirable in responsible military leaders, that 
impeded Korniloff’s advancement. Up until the Rev- 
olution he remained in the shade. After the Revolu- 
tion, his career developed contrary to the will of his 
immediate military superiors. His very appointment 
in the first days of the Revolution as commander of 
the Petrograd military district failed to win the ap- 
proval of General Alexeyeff. However, in this post 
General Korniloff proved himself entirely “weak,” and, 

[ 299 3 



THE CATASTROPHE 


being unable to handle the Petrograd garrison, he re- 
turned to the front in May. 

Immediately preceding his resignation as war min- 
ister, Gutchkoff wanted to appoint Korniloff com- 
mander of the Northern Front, but met with the strong 
disapproval of General Alexeyeff, who under threat 
of his own resignation compelled Gutchkoff to abandon 
his intention. Korniloff thereupon became commander 
of the thirteenth army in Galicia, where Zavoiko 
found him. 

When at the time of the Tarnopol break and the 
beginning of the German counter-offensive in Galicia, 
I suggested to General Brusiloff, Commander-in-Chief, 
the removal of the obviously incompetent General 
Koutor and the substitution for him as commander on 
the Galician Front of General Korniloff, I met with 
almost the same opposition from Brusiloff as was ex- 
perienced by Gutchkoff from Alexeyeff. Nevertheless 
Korniloff was appointed to the post. Contrary to 
similar opposition by military authorities, General 
Korniloff was at my suggestion named, on August first, 
commander-in-chief of the Russian armies, in place of 
Brusiloff, who had lost his will to command. 

I have set down this account of General Korniloff’s 
career in order that the reader may understand the 
events that followed and may realize why I did not 
and could not to the very last moment see General 
Korniloff among the conspirators, despite all the in- 
dications of the military conspiracy in preparation 
against the Provisional Government and the great 
amount of evidence gathered on it by myself. In push- 
ing him forward to the highest post in the army, in 
the face of the opposition of his superiors and of his 
unpopularity among the political Left; in ignoring his 
own extremely undisciplined utterances with regard to 

[300] 



LAVRE KORNILOFF 


the Provsional Government and in exercising on oc- 
casion all too much patience in this respect, I believed 
firmly that the incomparably brave soldier would not 
engage in political hide-and-seek games and would not 
shoot from ambush. 

To Russia’s great misfortune this did happen. 



CHAPTER XVI 

THE CONSPIRATORS TAKE THE OFFENSIVE 

I DO not know to this day when and where the final 
decision was taken to make General Korniloff 
dictator. I believe the decision was made al- 
ready previous to the appointment of Korniloff as 
commander of the Galician Front, i.e., between July 
fifteenth and twentieth. I am strengthened in this be- 
lief by the tone of the very first telegram addressed 
by Korniloff to the government in reply to his appoint- 
ment as commander of the front. It is possible, how- 
ever, that Zavoiko, the emissary of the conspirators, 
having received some liberty of direct initiative from 
his friends in Petrograd, determined to force develop- 
ments. In its content the telegram showed only partial 
opposition to my demands as war minister, but in its 
form it was clearly threatening and insistent, bearing 
distinctly the character of an ultimatum. After pre- 
senting a very sharp description of the situation at the 
front, General Korniloff wired: 

I, General Korniloff, whose entire life, from 
the very first day of my conscious existence, has 
been devoted only to serving my country, declare 
that the Motherland is perishing and, therefore, 
although not asked to express my opinion, I de- 
mand the immediate cessation of the offensive on 
all fronts. It is necessary to introduce imme- 
diately capital punishment in the territory of mili- 
tary operations. ... I declare that if the Gov- 

[302] 



THE CONSPIRATORS TAKE THE OFFENSIVE 

ernment fails to give its approval to the measures 
I propose, depriving me thereby of the sole means 
of saving the army and using it as the instrument 
for which it was intended — the defense of the 
Motherland and of liberty — I, General Korniloff, 
will divest myself of my office as commander-in- 
chief. 

As was shown later, this document, so astounding for 
a general, was written by none other than Zavoiko. 

I had already made the proper suggestion to Gen- 
eral Brusiloff with regard to halting the offensive. 
The application of armed force in the struggle with 
deserters, looters and similar traitors had already been 
made obligatory on all commanders by my repeated 
orders. The demand for the restoration of capital 
punishment at the front had been previously presented 
by army committees. 

Thus, the significance of General Komiloff’s tel- 
egram was not in the content but in its gesture — the 
gesture of a “strong man.” The same gesture was re- 
peated soon at General Headquarters at Mohileff by 
the Central Committed of the Union of Officers. In a 
telegram to the Provisional Government signed by 
Colonel Novosiltzeff, it was declared already without 
any compunction that all members of the government 
would be “responsible with their heads for failure to 
approve the measures proposed by General Korniloff.” 

The future impartial historian will not fail to note 
that in comparison with the inadmissible and shocking 
excesses of speech resorted to by the Soviets and demo- 
cratic organizations in the first weeks of the Revolu- 
tion, no one had yet dared to use such words with 
respect to the government. General Korniloff’s and 
Novosiltzeff’s telegrams went unpunished. Why? 
Simply because the Provisional Government regarded 

[ 303 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


as excusable and, perhaps, natural the exaggerated ex- 
citement of military men who were experiencing 
directly the new blows at the front, and at a time when 
many people even in the rear had lost almost all mental 
and moral equilibrium. 

In fact, I personally even liked General KornilofFs 
impulsive gesture. In the fourth month of the Revolu- 
tion we of the Provisional Government could no longer 
be surprised by excesses of speech. Still less could our 
equilibrium be shattered by such utterances, for we 
had already had plently of experience with the revolu- 
tionary “wild men” on the Left, who were properly 
tamed as soon as they were led into the harness of gov- 
ernment and responsibility. I believe that General 
Komiloff and his close military friends would likewise 
be tamed and disciplined by the consciousness of re- 
sponsibility. 

On July twenty-ninth, at an extraordinary military 
council summoned by me at General Headquarters, 
General Denikin, then commander of our Western 
Front, in the presence of General Alexeyeff, Brusiloff 
and other high commanders, delivered himself of a 
veritable indictment against the Provisional Govern- 
ment, expressing his own opinion as well as that of his 
colleagues. iHe was more bitterly incisive than Gen- 
eral Korniloff (Zavoiko), accusing the Provisional 
Government of “besmirching our banners with mud.” 
He demanded that the Provisional Government “recog- 
nize its mistakes and guilt before the officer corps,” 
and even ventured to doubt “whether the members of 
the Provisional Government had any conscience.” 

Terestchenko, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, and 
I, the Prime Minister and Minister of War and 
Marine, listened quite calmly to this cry of the 

[ 304 ] 



THE CONSPIRATORS TAKE THE OFFENSIVE 

scorched soul of an officer. At the conclusion of the 
grave philippic, amidst the confused and alarmed 
silence of all those present, I rose, shook hands with 
General Denikin and said : “I thank you, General, for 
your courageous and sincere words.” 

General Denikin’s declaration constituted in reality 
a formulation of the military program upon which 
the propaganda of the supporters of the military con- 
spiracy was based, which I then dubbed “the music of 
the future military reaction.” This program “was 
reiterated in even sharper form before the Moscow 
Conference by General Kaledin, of the Don Cossacks. 
This program was more than justified. Its substance 
was the demand for the restoration of normal military 
discipline and unity of command and the abolition of 
the system of commissars and army committees. 

This had been all along the aim of everybody and, 
in particular, of the Provisional Government. The 
dispute was not in the aim but in the best way of at- 
taining it. It was quite impossible to restore army 
discipline immediately and at one stroke. For this 
reason General Korniloff himself, in his remarks be- 
fore the military council, did not demand immediate 
abolition of commissars and army committees but, on 
the contrary, continued to the very last day before his 
revolt to emphasize the positive role of the army com- 
missars and army committees and the need of their 
preservation. General Korniloff wanted only to cir- 
cumscribe more definitely their rights and activities, 
which the Provisional Government itself had been as- 
siduously and unswervingly engaged in from the very 
first day of Gutchkoff’s departure from the War Min- 
istry. 

Being unable to attend the military council at 
[ 305 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


General Headquarters on July twenty-ninth because 
of active operations on his front at that time, General 
Korniloff forwarded his demands by telegraph. To a 
large extent these demands corresponded with those 
of Denikin but emphasized, however, the need of ex- 
tending the activity of the commissars in the army and 
reorganization of the commanding corps. 

On my return to Petrograd from the military council 
I suggested to the Provisional Government the removal 
of Brusiloff as commander-in-chief and the appoint- 
ment of Korniloff in his place, recommending also the 
appointment of Savinkoff, former terrorist, member 
of the Socialist-Revolutionary party and the commissar 
attached to Korniloff’s army, as my immediate as- 
sistant. 

In reply to the new appointment, General Korniloff 
sent to the government a veritable ultimatum, striking 
in its defiant tone and political ignorance. 

Asserting that “as a soldier” obliged to be an ex- 
ample of military discipline, he was ready to obey the 
order making him commander-in-chief of the army, 
General Korniloff, speaking already as such, imme- 
diately made himself the instrument of violation of 
all discipline. In an open, uncoded telegram to the 
Provisional Government, made public immediately by 
the newspapers, he informed the Provisional Govern- 
ment that he accepted supreme command but on the 
following conditions: i, that his responsibility be only 
to his own conscience and to the people direct; 2, that 
there be no interference with his orders and appoint- 
ments; 3, the application to the rear, where army re- 
serves were located, of recent measures at the front, 
i.e. restoration of capital punishment ; and 4, acceptance 
of his proposals as wired to the military council at 
General Headquarters on July twenty-ninth. 

[ 306 ] 



THE CONSPIRATORS TAKE THE OFFENSIVE 

Reporting Korniloff’s ultimatum to the Provisional 
Government I suggested his immediate dismissal and 
prosecution. 

I no longer remember clearly the motives which 
prompted both the Right and Left wings of the 
Provisional Government to show leniency to General 
Korniloff. Savinkoff tried to convince me that Gen- 
eral Komiloff simply did not understand the meaning 
of the telegram concocted by Zavoiko. In consequence, 
I withdrew my proposal and Korniloff remained com- 
mander-in-chief. This leniency on the part of the 
government was interpreted as “weakness” by the con- 
spirators, whose audacity now reached its highest point. 

By this time the political center of the conspiracy, 
or, rather, the entourage of the future dictator was 
fully organized. 3 At General Headquarters the mili- 
tary-technical preparations for a sudden blow at the 
Provisional Government were in full swing. From the 
very first day of Komiloff’s appearance at General 
Headquarters duplicity became the moving force of 
its existence: the machinery as a whole continued to 
function as the governing center of the army but in- 
dividual parts of the appartus devoted themselves 
feverishly to conspiratory work. In General Kom- 
iloff’s office matters military were considered together 
with matters conspiratory, the latter receiving much 
more attention. 

There can be no doubt now that from the very be- 
ginning of his arrival at Mohileff General Komiloff 
played a game of duplicity against the Provisional Gov- 
ernment. His entire attention was devoted to the 
development of the military side of the conspiracy, to 
measures intended to assure its success. All the mo- 
tions gone through at General Headquarters, its many 

C307] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


and varied reports and memorandums submitted to 
the Provisional Government as manifestations of 
heated military activity, its flirtation •with my closest 
assistant, Savinoff — all this was nothing else than 
a smoke screen, to use a military expression, concealing 
the activities of the center of the conspiracy from the 
unappreciative eyes of Petrograd. 

General Korniloff’s state of mind at General Head- 
quarters was well described by General Denikin, one 
of the participants in the revolt, who prided himself on 
never playing the game of hide and seek. Denikin 
arrived at Mohileff during the first two weeks in 
August, following his appointment as commander of 
the Southwestern Front. After a business meeting, 
Denikin tells us, “General Komilofli invited me to re- 
main and when all had gone, he said quietly, almost 
in a whisper : 

“ ‘We must fight, or else the country will perish. N. 
has come to me at the front. He is still full of the 
idea of a coup d’etat and wants to see the Grand Duke 
Dmitri Pavlovitch put on the throne. He is organiz- 
ing something and suggests joint action. I told him 
that I will engage in no adventures with the Romanoffs. 
The government itself understands that it is helpless. 
They have asked me to enter the government. But 
no, these gentlemen are bound too closely to the Soviet 
and cannot make up their minds to do anything. I have 
told them : give me supreme power and I will lead the 
struggle. We must bring the country to the Con- 
stituent Assembly and then let it do as it likes. I 
will then step aside and will not interfere. So this 
is the situation. May I count on your support? In 
full measure?’ We embraced each other.” 

| The words of General Korniloff cited by Denikin 
snow the political confusion and phantasy which 

[308 ] 



THE CONSPIRATORS TAKE THE OFFENSIVE 

dominated the mind of the politically inexperienced 
general, led astray by the politicians surrounding him. 
Incidentally, not a single word of General Korniloff 
with regard 4 to the Provisional Government had any 
basis in fact . ! 

\ Shortly before the Moscow Conference Kornilofi 
came to Petrograd. In a tete-a-tete in my office I sought 
to convince the general that there were no differences 
between the Provisional Government, on one side, and 
himself and his entourage on the other as far as ques- 
tions bearing on the army were concerned. f I tried to 
make Kornilofi realize that any attempt at hasty and 
violent action would produce adverse effect on the 
army. I repeated to him what in May I said at the 
front, namely, that if any one should try to establish 
a personal dictatorship in Russia he would find himself 
the next day helplessly dangling in space, without rail- 
roads, without telegraphs and without an army. ' I 
pointed out to him the terrible fate awaiting the officers 
in event of failure of the coup d’etat. 

“Well, what of it?” said Korniloff as if thinking 
aloud. “Many will perish but the rest will finally take 
the army into their hands.” 

This phrase rings now almost like a confession, but 
at that time it was uttered in a speculative, theoretical 
mood. Throughout that period General Korniloff 
failed to realize the full meaning and significance of 
his own plans. Even his phrase “well, what of it, it 
may be necessary to try even a dictatorship” was ut- 
tered in such completely hypothetical manner that even 
this did not make me suspicious of Korniloff personally. 

At the time of this conversation Korniloff’s emis- 
saries were already canvassing the front, transmitting 
verbally Korniloff’s orders. 

[309 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


One such emissary came to General Denikin. 
Denikin himself describes it in his memoirs as follows: 

He handed me a letter written in Korniloff’s 
own hand, in which I was requested to receive 
personally the report of the officer. He reported : 
According to reliable information, a Bolshevist 
uprising is to take place in Petrograd at the end 
of August.* At about that time the third Cavalry 
Corps will be moved to the capital, with General 
KrimoflF in command, who will crush the Bolshe- 
vist uprising and at the same time “finish” the 
Soviets. . . . 

The commander-in-chief requests you to com- 
mandeer to General Headquarters several score 
reliable officers — officially for the study of bomb 
and mine throwing. In reality they will be sent 
to Petrograd into the officer detachment.f 

At one point of their preparations the conspirators 
in Petrograd were inclined to resort to terrorism, i.e., 
to have me assassinated. This would have been a very 
easy thing to do, as the precautions taken for my per- 
sonal safety were very meager. Moreover, no pre- 
cautions would have been sufficient to prevent my 
assassination, for the terrorists themselves had un- 
restricted access to me, some of them being meimbers 
of my guard and immediate entourage. Among these 
was a colonel of the General Staff whose duty it was 
to report to me every morning on the situation at the 
front. Usually, we were quite alone, discussing the 
military situation, with a map of the front before us. 
On being informed that he had been ordered by the 

♦This was a deliberate invention of the conspirators, for the Bol- 
sheviki, having been driven underground, could not and did not at 
that time plan any uprising. — A. K. 
f Denikin, Memoirs, page 210. 

[310] 



THE CONSPIRATORS TAKE THE OFFENSIVE 

conspirators to kill me, I kept close watch on him at 
our morning conferences, without, however, changing 
in the least the mode of procedure. The colonel, usually 
restrained, well poised and calm, did begin to show 
indications of peculiar nervousness. After several 
days of this game, I finally bid the colonel good-by and 
asked him not to come to me any more. He did not 
ask for the reason of his dismissal and disappeared 
with a bow. 

The hero of a second unsuccessful plan to assas- 
sinate me was a young officer of marines. His task 
was to shoot me at the Winter Palace, where the 
guard on the eve or at the very beginning of the 
Komilolf rebellion consisted of marines. The young 
man could have performed his “patriotic task” with- 
out the slightest difficulty or risk. But at the last 
moment he was not in the Winter Palace but at the 
home of some relatives. In great excitement and 
weeping he revealed to them the whole story of the 
plot for my assassination and the fact that he had been 
chosen to be the instrument of my death. The marine 
officer’s relatives, acquaintances of a high official of 
the city militia, immediately reported the matter to 
that official. 

Without giving the incident any publicity, I ordered 
the removal of the marines from the Winter Palace 
and the substitution of another guard. The marine 
officer was permitted to return undisturbed to his unit. 

J I must say that the idea of beginning the revolt with 
my assassination was in itself strategically a proper 
one, for only by dislocating at one blow the government 
apparatus could the conspirators hope for any measure 
of success. 1 Of course, the conspirators had intended 
to do away with me but had finally decided to do so 

[3ii] 



THE CATASTROPHE 

under circumstances of least danger and risk to them- 
selves. In general, the officers involved in the con- 
spiracy, brave on the field of battle, preferred to follow 
in their plot against the Provisional Government a 
policy of cunning duplicity rather than of frank, 
straightforward action. In this respect these officers, 
in addition to showing a lack of civic courage, were 
less courageous than the Bolsheviki, who never pre- 
tended to be loyal to the Provisional Government. The 
conspirators were compelled to adopt this policy of 
duplicity because of the sentiments of the people and 
of the rank and file of the army. In their revolt 
against Nicholas I, on December 14, 1825, the Petro- 
grad guard officers were able to address themselves 
directly to the barracks and to march at the head of 
their troops. But now the conspirators were without 
any following in the barracks, maintaining their author- 
ity only in so far as it had been delegated to them by 
the Provisional Government. At the time of the 
Komiloff advance on Petrograd, the officers did not 
dare to reveal the purpose of the expedition even to 
the Cossack regiments or to the celebrated “Wild Di- 
vision,” which led the advance, the conspirators being 
compelled to keep secret from their own troops their 
aim of overthrowing the Provisional Government. On 
the contrary, the Cossacks and the men of the “Wild 
Division” were told that a Bolshevist uprising was in 
progress in Petrograd and that it was necessary to 
rush to the defense of the capital and of the Provisional 
Government. 

Simultaneously with the preparation for the treach- 
erous blow against the Provisional Government, Gen- 
eral Korniloff’s immediate associates conducted nego- 
tiations with certain military and political Allied circles. 
The political aspect of the conspiracy was not in the 

[312] 



THE CONSPIRATORS TAKE THE OFFENSIVE 

hands of General Headquarters, where General 
Krimoff was in charge of the military preparations, 
but was being taken care of in certain quiet and com- 
fortable studies in Petrograd and Moscow. On their 
visit to Moscow during the Conference, officers of 
the General Staff conferred secretly with the political 
leaders of the conspiracy. To this very day, however, 
the conservative and liberal politicians who took part 
in the conspiracy, who know in detail its plan and 
purposes, continue to speak of the “misunderstanding” 
between the Provisional Government and Korniloff, 
placing upon me the responsibility for the result and 
catastrophe. 

I will not cite here all the data at my disposal. The 
readers interested in a detailed account of the Korniloff 
affair will find it in my book The Prelude to Bol- 
shevism, wherein I present the complete documentary 
evidence. 

The conspiratory machinery at General Headquar- 
ters and in Petrograd was already in operation by 
the time of the convocation of the Moscow Conference. 
The conspirators sought to utilize the conference for 
a trial of strength, planning to proclaim General 
Korniloff dictator, should circumstances prove favor- 
able during the course of the conference. With this 
end in view, they carried out a mobilization of their 
political and social forces several days preceding the 
conference. Quite “accidentally” the central commit- 
tees of the respective military organizations involved 
in the conspiracy passed resolutions which while differ* 
ing in text were quite similar in content. The Cossack 
Council, the Union of the Knights of St. George, the 
Central Committee of the Union of Officers, the Con- 
ference of the Military League, etc., proclaimed Gen- 
eral Korniloff as the permanent and irremovable com- 

[313 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


mander-in-chief. The Cossack Council even went so 
far as to threaten the Provisional Government with 
mutiny in the event of KomilofPs removal. With the 
resolution embodying this threat representatives of the 
Cossack Council appeared before me. Needless to say, 
they received a proper answer. 

On August twenty-first, with the convocation of the 
reactionary “Conference of Public Workers,” Rod- 
zianko sent a telegram to Korniloff, expressing in the 
name of the conference his agreement with the resolu- 
tions of the military organizations. 

The result was outwardly an imposing picture : Gen- 
eral Korniloff was being proclaimed commander-in- 
chief, permanent and irremovable, not only by the 
military organizations representing the more authorita- 
tive officer circles, but also by all the “sound” and 
“politically mature” elements of Russia, headed by the 
president and members of the Duma, the former Im- 
perial Council, the nobility, the industrial and financial 
aristocracy, the spokesmen of the academic and jour- 
nalistic world and, finally, by the two former 
commanders-in-chief, General Alexeyeff and General 
Brusiloff. 

It is not difficult to visualize the effect of this on the 
mind of the naive general, given to impulsive action 
but little able to think politically. He interpreted every 
word of his worshipers as befits a soldier: words must 
be followed by deeds and promises by performance. 
The fact, however, was that all the high sounding reso- 
lutions of the military and civilian grandees and of 
celebrated political orators were just words. Words, 
words, words! These men were pushing the naive 
general over a precipice, while they themselves re- 
mained on the brink, having not the slightest intention 
of risking their necks in following him. 

[ 314 ] 



THE CONSPIRATORS TAKE THE OFFENSIVE 

General Komiloff came to the Moscow Conference 
in great pomp. At the station he was met by the entire 
elite of the old capital. Wealthy ladies in white 
dresses and flowers in hand fell on their knees before 
him; politicians wept with joy. Officers carried the 
“popular hero” on their shoulders. In an automobile 
surrounded by cavalry composed of exotic tribesmen, 
Korniloff, following the old Czarist custom, went from 
the station to the Kremlin to pray at the shrine of the 
Iversk Madonna. On returning to his railway car- 
riage, General Korniloff began receiving delegations 
and deputations of various kinds. Regular reports were 
submitted to him on the financial, economic and general 
internal situation in Russia. 

On the streets of Moscow pamphlets were being dis- 
tributed, entitled “Komiloff, the National Hero.” 
These pamphlets were printed at the expense of the 
British Military Mission and had been brought to 
Moscow from the British Embassy in Petrograd in the 
railway carriage of General Knox, British military 
attache. At about this time, Aladin, a former labor 
member of the Duma, arrived from England, whither 
he had fled in 1906, after the dissolution of the first 
Duma. In London this once famous politician lost his 
entire political baggage and became an extremely sus- 
picious adventurer. ',This discredited man brought to 
General Korniloff a letter from Lord Milner, British 
War Minister, expressing his approval of a military 
dictatorship in Russia and giving his blessing to the en- 
terprise. This letter naturally served to encourage the 
conspirators greatly. Aladin himself, envoy of the 
British War Minister, was given first place next to 
Za voiko in the entourage of General Korniloff. 

As we have already seen, the Moscow Conference 
proved a complete failure for the conspirators. Their 

[ 315 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


plan for the “peaceful” proclamation of a military dic- 
tatorship was shattered. It was then, on the road from 
Moscow back to General Headquarters, in the carriage 
of the commander-in-chief, that they decided to over- 
throw the Provisional Government by force of arms. 



CHAPTER XVII 

THE DRIVE AGAIN ST THE PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT 

O N August twenty-ninth the government re- 
turned to Petrograd, while Korniloff went back 
to General Headquarters. On September first 
the Germans launched a new attack on the Dvina, 
breaking through our lines and threatening Petrograd. 

On September third the Provisional Government 
made the following decisions : 

i. To begin preparations for the govern- 
ment’s removal to Moscow. 

2. To transfer the troops of the Petrograd 
military district to the direct jurisdiction of the 
commander-in-chief. 

3. To create a separate military area, consist- 
ing of Petrograd and its environs, under the juris- 
diction of the Provisional Government. 

4. To bring from the front a detachment of 
reliable troops, to be placed at the government’s 
disposal. 

* This decision was made necessary by military and 
political considerations. Because of the unreliability 
and demoralization of the Petrograd garrison, it was 
necessary for the government to take proper measures 
guaranteeing its safe removal to Moscow, which was 
to take place at the end of November. 5 In addition, 
the evidence at our disposal made it necessary for the 
government to be ready to repell any attack from the 

[ 317] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


Right. It -was only from that quarter that we faced any 
real danger at that time. 

Immediately after the cabinet meeting at which the 
aforementioned decision was taken I dispatched As- 
sistant War Minister Savinkoff and General Baranoff- 
sky to General Headquarters, to cooperate in carrying 
out the government’s decision. Before their departure 
I ordered Savinkoff to inform General -Korniloff that, 
while he was at liberty to pick the troops to be sent 
to Petrograd, he was under no circumstances to dele- 
gate General Krimoff as commander of these troops. 
I also ordered Savinkoff to inform General Korniloff 
that the “Wild Division” was not to be included among 
these troops. My demands were motivated by the 
reliable information that General Krimoff and a num- 
ber of the officers of the “Wild Division” had taken a 
direct part in the conspiracy. On September sixth 
General Korniloff categorically promised Savinkoff that 
my demands would be obeyed. This was reported to 
me by Savinkoff on September seventh. But on the 
same day General Korniloff, in a secret order, placed 
General Krimoff in command of the “Wild Division,” 
which moved immediately in the direction of Petro- 
grad. 

In the order to his troops Krimoff declared that a 
Bolshevist revolution had broken out in Petrograd and 
that the government was unable to cope with it. On 
September ninth, when according to the calculations of 
General Headquarters Krimoff’s troops were to have 
arrived near Petrograd, there appeared before me in 
the Winter Palace a former member of the Provisional 
Government, Vladimir Lvoff, who placed before me a 
verbal ultimatum from General Korniloff. The ulti- 
matum did not surprise me, but I still entertained doubt 
as to whether General Korniloff had actually lent his 

[ 318 ] 



DRIVE AGAINST PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT 

name to it. The entire tragic significance of what was 
being contemplated appeared clearly before me. Only 
by quick action was it possible to save the situation. I 
immediately took myself in hand and pretended that 
I did not believe in the authenticity of the ultimatum. 
Lvoff became greatly excited, assuring me on his word 
of honor that all he said was true. I then demanded 
that he put the ultimatum in writing. I told him this 
was necessary as otherwise the Provisional Govern- 
ment to whom I, as premier and war minister, was to 
carry Korniloff’s ultimatum demanding the govern- 
ment’s resignation would consider me mad. Lvoff 
wrote down the ultimatum point by point : 

1. Proclamation of martial law in Petrograd. 

2. Immediate resignation of. the government. 

3. My departure the same night, together 
with Savinkoff, for General Headquarters, where 
we were to put ourselves at Korniloff’s disposal. 

I put the written ultimatum into my side pocket and 
agreed with Lvoff to meet him at seven o’clock in the 
evening at the long distance telephone at the War 
Ministry, when we were to converse with General 
Korniloff at General Headquarters. En route to the 
War Ministry I still entertained some hope that the 
ultimatum and my whole conversation with Lvoff were 
a horrible dream. Lvoff was late for the appointment. 
There was no time to lose. I called Korniloff at Gen- 
eral Headquarters and in my name and Lvoff’s, who 
had not yet arrived, I began to question Korniloff on 
all the points of the ultimatum, with the ostensible pur- 
pose of verifying the general’s demands. I wanted to 
make absolutely sure that the ultimatum was in Ms 
name. I asked leading questions, which could be an- 

[ 319 1 



THE CATASTROPHE 


swered only by a person thoroughly familiar with the 
contents of the ultimatum. General Korniloff’s replies 
showed he was well versed in the matter and had given 
it his full approval. Especially convincing was his final 
reply. 

Without mentioning Savinkoff, whose name ap- 
peared in the ultimatum, I asked : 

“Am I to come to General Headquarters ?” 

General Korniloff replied: 

“Yes, and with Savinkoff.” 

There could no longer be any doubt. It was neces- 
sary to act with utmost rapidity. On my leaving the 
telephone I was met by Lvoff. We returned together 
to the Winter Palace. There, in my office, I repeated 
to him my conversation with General Korniloff. Lvoff 
again confirmed and explained everything. In a dark, 
far corner of the large office, unnoticed by Lvoff, sat 
an official of the Ministry of the Interior. He heard 
our conversation and noted Lvoff’s statement. On 
completing my conversation with Lvoff I walked out 
into the corridor, summoned the officer on guard and 
ordered him to arrest Vladimir Lvoff, former member 
of the Provisional Government. 

In an hour I submitted a report to the Provisional 
Government together with the incriminating ultimatum 
and received from the cabinet extraordinary powers for 
the liquidation of the Korniloff mutiny, which was 
about to begin with the arrival, expected at any mo- 
ment, of Krimoff’s troops in PetrogradA 

I will not go into further details. . As I foretold, the 
rebellious general found himself suddenly without 
troops and railways, and cut off at General Head- 
quarters from the entire country. Without firing a 
single shot we were victorious, for the rank and file 
of even the “Wild Division” refused to follow their 

C 320] 



DRIVE AGAINST PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT 

officers when emissaries dispatched by me to head off 
and arrest Krimoff informed the troops of the use to 
which they were being put. Krimoff himself was 
brought a prisoner to my office. While under arrest 
in my office, General Krimoff committed suicide by 
shooting himself with his revolver. 

On September twelfth the adventure was finished. 
On September thirteenth I issued an order to the army 
and navy presenting a picture of the anarchy and de- 
moralization provoked anew by the Korniloff adven- 
ture. 

Following the arrest of Korniloff and his immediate 
associates, the supporters of the Korniloff movement 
launched a widespread campaign through the press 
against the Provisional Government. Amply supplied 
with funds they successfully spread the falsehood that 
there had been no conspiracy, that Korniloff was the 
victim of a “misunderstanding” between himself and 
the Provisional Government. It was even asserted 
that I had been in “agreement” with Korniloff through 
Savinkoff and “betrayed” him under pressure from the 
Soviet. /This slanderous invention was immediately 
taken up by the Bolsheviki, who used it as dynamite 
with which, within a few days, they succeeded in de- 
stroying the confidence of the raqk and file of the army 
in the Provisional Government. 

The Korniloff uprising destroyed the entire work of 
the restoration of discipline in the army, achieved after 
almost superhuman efforts. 

Lenin, still in hiding, immediately grasped the 
significance of the service performed for him by the 
organizers of the Korniloff rebellion. 

“General Korniloff,” wrote Lenin to the Central Ex- 
ecutive Committee of the Bolshevist party from Fin- 
land, whither he had fled after the issuance of my July 

[321 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 

order for his arrest, “has opened for us quite unex- 
pected perspectives. We must act at once.” J 

The movements of the Bolsheviki were facilitated 
by the crisis provoked by the Korniloff rebellion in the 
parties comprising the government coalition. The sym- 
pathy which had been extended to Korniloff by many 
prominent liberals roused among the socialist parties 
a strong movement against continuance of cooperation 
with the bourgeois parties. The Provisional Govern- 
ment could no longer be maintained in the composition 
upon which it was based on the day of the Korniloff 
mutiny. A directorate was set up, in whose name I 
had to conduct prolonged negotiations with the respec- 
tive parties for restoration of the government coalition. 
All these conversations proved endless because virtually 
no one believed in the possibility of restoring mutual 
confidence among the parties. 

In the meantime the new wave of anarchy and dis- 
integration rose high under the stimulus of Bolshevist 
propaganda and demagogy. The Korniloff rebellion 
was crushed on September twelfth. On September 
eighteenth, for the first time since the Revolution, the 
presidium of the Petrograd Soviet was captured by 
the Bolsheviki. Having formed from among the sol- 
diers’ section of the Soviet a military-revolutionary 
committee, Trotsky began to prepare the garrison for 
another uprising against the Provisional Government. 

As in the beginning of March, heaps of telegrams 
came to my desk, telling of lpcal uprisings and mutinies, 
agrarian disturbances, attacks by soldiers against 
officers, etc. But then, in the spring, all hopes were 
before us. Now, in the autumn, all the fires of hope 
were dying. The revived anarchy inside the country 
combined soon with a new wave of mass desertioiis 
from the front. 


[322] 



DRIVE AGAINST PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT 


This tragedy came to pass exactly at the time when 
all our sacrifices were about to find their justification. 
The Austro-Hungarian government, having realized 
that the situation of Austria-Hungary was untenable, 
addressed to the Provisional Government a request for 
a separate peace. The move was made without knowl- 
edge of Berlin. It was particularly significant because 
Foreign Minister Terestchenko had long been prepar- 
ing, with the cooperation of the diplomatic representa- 
tives of the United States in Bulgaria and Turkey, a 
plan for negotiations which would have meant the exit 
of Bulgaria and Turkey from the War. There could 
be no doubt, with Austria’s example before them, that 
similar peace proposals would have followed soon from 
Sofia and Constantinople. The exit to the Mediter- 
ranean would have been opened for Russia. The 
blockade of Russia would have been broken and Ger- 
many would have stood completely isolated in Europe. 
Russia was on the verge of her greatest victory. 

Instead of victory we received Brest-Litovsk. The 
news of Austria’s separate peace proposal reached 
Petrograd on November fifth. J On November seventh, 
suddenly and unexpectedly — Unexpectedly for us, but 
not for Berlin — came the Bolshevist counter-revolution. 
The Bolshevist General Staff had originally planned 
the uprising for the day of the contemplated transfer 
of the Provisional Government to Moscow, which was 
not to have taken place before the middle of 
November, 



CHAPTER XVIII 

GATCHINA 

T HE last act in the struggle of the Provisional 
Government against the Bolsheviki on the 
Right and on the Left was played between 
November sixth and fourteenth, 1917. 

After the abortive attempt of the conspirators be- 
hind General Korniloff — so fatal in its consequences 
for the entire country — to overthrow the Provisional 
Government, the social groups supporting the “dicta- 
tor” decided to give no aid to the government in the 
event of its collision with the Bolsheviki. Their 
strategic plan was not to hinder in any way the success 
of an armed Bolshevist uprising and, then, after the 
fall of the Provisional Government they so hated, 
quickly to suppress the Bolshevist “mutiny.” In this 
way were to be realized finally the aims set for the 
Korniloff rebellion. 

The military and civil strategists who were the 
authors of this plan were thoroughly convinced that 
the Bolshevist triumph would entail no serious danger 
and that within three or four weeks the “sound ele- 
ments” of the Russian people would make short shrift 
of the mutinous mass and establish a “strong govern- 
ment” in Russia. Alas, having successfully carried out 
the first, so-called passive part of this plan, having 
“overthrown” the Provisional Government with the 
hands of the Bolsheviki, the “patriots’* found them- 
selves absolutely unable to execute the second, activist 

[ 324 ] 



GATCHINA 


part of their program. They failed to defeat the 
Bolsheviki not only in three weeks but in ten years ! 

On November sixth it had become quite evident that 
the uprising was inevitable, that it had already begun. 
At about eleven o’clock in the morning I appeared be- 
fore the Council of the Republic and requested from 
N. D. Avksentieff, the President, permission to make 
an urgent statement. On taking the floor I informed 
the council that I had in my possession unmistakable 
evidence of the organization by Lenin and his lieuten- 
ants of an uprising against the Provisional Govern- 
ment. I declared that all possible measures were being 
taken by the Provisional Government for the suppres- 
sion of the uprising and that the government would 
fight to the end against the betrayers of the mother- 
land and of the Revolution. I declared that the gov- 
ernment would resort without qualms to the use of 
force, but that to insure the government’s success the 
immediate cooperation of all parties and groups, and 
of the entire people, was necessary. I demanded from 
the Council of the Republic full confidence and co- 
operation. The atmosphere of the meeting and the 
sentiments of those assembled were indicated by the 
ovations which greeted my declaration, the members 
punctuating their approval and expressing their 
solidarity with the Provisional Government in its fight 
against the enemies of the people by rising from their 
seats. In those moments of general national indigna- 
tion only a handful of leaders, representing the two 
extreme political flanks, could not subdue in themselves 
their fierce hatred against the government of the 
March Revolution. They kept their seats when the 
rest of the assembly rose as one man. 

Convinced that the representatives of the nation 
were fully conscious of the seriousness of the situation 

[ 325 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


and of their own responsibility, I returned, without 
awaiting the actual vote, to Staff Headquarters to re- 
sume important unfinished business, confident that 
within an hour or two I would be informed of the de- 
cisions and active preparations of the Council of the 
Republic in support of the government. 

Nothing of the sort happened. The council, tom 
by inner discords and irreconcilable differences of 
opinion, could not come to a decision until late into 
the night. Instead of organizing all their forces for 
the difficult struggle against the traitors, the leaders of 
all the anti-Bolshevist and democratic parties wasted 
the entire day and evening in useless quarrels and dis- 
putes. t 

And meanwhile, the Bolsheviki, being already en- 
trenched at Smolny Institute, preparing for the final 
blow, were proclaiming loudly that all assertions con- 
cerning “some kind of a Bolshevist uprising” were pure 
inventions of “counter-revolutionists” and of “that 
enemy of the people — Kerensky.” By this maneuver, 
knowing well the psychology of their opponents, the 
Bolsheviki were successfully attaining their aims. 

I shall never forget the following truly historical 
scene. 

My office, midnight, November sixth. The Pro- 
visional Government has just met and adjourned for a 
short recess. A stormy conversation between myself 
and a delegation from the Socialist groups in the Coun- 
cil of the Republic concerning the final adoption by the 
Left majority of the council of the resolution I had 
demanded in the morning. This resolution, as adopted, 
was now of no more use to anybody, being endlessly 
long and involved, of little meaning to simple mortals. 
If, in its substance, it did not directly express lack of 
confidence in the government, it drew an obvious line 

[326 ] 



GATCHINA 


of distinction between the Left majority of the council 
and the government and its struggle. 

Enraged, I informed the delegation that after such 
a resolution the government would resign to-morrow 
and that the authors of the resolution and all those 
who had voted for it must take upon themselves all 
responsibility for events, although apparently they 
seemed to have little conception of the situation. 

The reply to my outburst was delivered calmly and 
analytically by Dan, at that time not only leader of the 
Mensheviki but also president of the All-Russian Ex- 
ecutive Committee of Soviets. I cannot, of course, 
repeat Dan’s historic reply textually but I vouch for the 
substance. First of all, Dan told me that the delega- 
tion was more correctly informed than I was and that 
I was exaggerating developments, due to the misin- 
formation of my “reactionary staff.” He then added 
that the resolution of the Council of the Republic, how- 
ever unpalatable to the “government’s sense of self- 
respect,” was extremely useful and desirable for its 
psychologic effect on the masses, that this “effect” was 
already noticeable, and that the influence of Bolshevist 
propaganda was now bound “to decline rapidly.” On 
the other hand, Dan continued, the Bolsheviki them- 
selves, in their negotiations with the leaders of the 
Soviet majority, expressed readiness to “subordinate 
themselves to the will of the Soviet majority” and 
were willing, beginning to-morrow, to undertake all 
measures to stop the uprising, “which had begun 
against their wish and without their sanction.” In 
conclusion Dan, asserting that the Bolsheviki would 
“to-morrow” (always to-morrow I) disband their mili- 
tary staff, declared that all measures taken by me for 
suppression of the uprising tended only to “disturb the 
masses” and that, in general, my “intervention” served 

[ 327 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


only to “interfere with the success of the negotiations 
of the majority of the Soviets with the Bolsheviki for 
liquidation of the uprising.” At the very moment when 
Dan was communicating to me this remarkable in- 
formation, armed detachments of the “Red Guard” 
were already occupying one government building after 
another. Almost immediately upon the departure of 
Dan and his comrades from the Winter Palace, Kar- 
tasheff, Minister of Cults, was arrested in Millionnaya 
street, on his way home from the meeting of the 
Provisional Government, and taken to Smolny, whither 
Dan had departed for negotiation with the Bolshe- 
viki. 

One must admit that the Bosheviki were acting with 
great energy and no less great skill. 

While the uprising was in full swing and “Red” 
troops were in action all over the city, some Bolshevist 
leaders especially assigned to the task tried, not with- 
out success, to make the representatives of the “Soviet 
democracy” blind to what was actually taking place. 
The entire night was spent by these acrobats in endless 
disputes on various formulae supposed to serve as con- 
ditions of peace and liquidation of the uprising. By 
this method of “negotiation” the Bolsheviki gained 
a great deal of valuable time. The fighting forces of 
the Socialists-Revolutionists and Mensheviki were not 
mobilized in time. 

I had hardly concluded my conversation with Dan 
and his comrades, when into the room came a delega- 
tion from the Cossack regiments then stationed in 
Petrograd, consisting, if I recall aright, of two or 
three officers and as many Cossacks. The delegation 
informed me, first, that they wanted to know what 
forces I had at my disposal for suppression of the 
mutiny. They then declared that the Cossack regi- 

[ 328 ] 



GATCHINA 


ments would defend the government, but only on con- 
dition of my assurance that this time the blood of the 
Cossacks would not be spilled in vain, as it was in 
July, when I was supposed to have failed to take suffi- 
ciently energetic measures against the mutineers. 
Finally, the delegates insisted that they would fight 
only on my personal orders. 

In reply, I first of all pointed out to the Cossacks 
that declarations such as they were making were quite 
inadmissible from men of military duty, particularly 
when the nation faced great peril, and that it was in- 
cumbent upon every one of us to fulfill his obligation 
to the end! I then added: “You know full well that 
at the time of the Bolshevist uprising of July sixteenth 
to nineteenth, I was at the front where the offensive 
was then beginning. You know that, after leaving the 
front, I arrived in Petrograd on July nineteenth and 
immediately ordered the arrest of all the Bolshevist 
chieftains. You know, also, that I immediately dis- 
missed General Polovtzoff as commander of the troops 
because of his indecision during the uprising.” 

As a result of this conversation, the Cossacks de- 
clared categorically that all their regiments in Petro- 
grad would do their duty. I thereupon signed a special 
order to the Cossacks, commanding them to place them- 
selves at the disposal of the district military staff and 
to carry out all its instructions. At that moment, at 
i A.M. on the night of November sixth, I had not the 
slightest doubt that these three regiments of Don Cos- 
sacks would not violate their oath and I immediately 
sent an adjutant to Staff Headquarters with the in- 
formation that the Cossacks could be relied upon fully. 

As in the morning, at the meeting of the Council of 
the Republic, I made a grave mistake. I did not know 
that while I was conversing with the regimental del- 

[329 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 

egates, the Council of Cossack Troops, meeting all 
night, had proclaimed the neutrality of the Cossacks 
in the struggle of the Provisional Government against 
the Bolshevist uprising. 

Following my conversations with Dan and with the 
Cossacks I returned to the meeting of the Provisional 
Government. One can imagine the tension that marked 
the meeting, particularly after the arrival of informa- 
tion concerning the seizure by the “Red Guard” of the 
central telephone station, the main post office and other 
government buildings. None of us, however, thought 
for a moment of the possibility of any negotiations or 
agreements with the traitors at Smolny. As I remem- 
ber, the government concluded its meeting at 2 A.M. 
and the ministers went home. I remained alone with 
Konovaloff, Vice-Premier and Minister of Commerce 
and Industry. We worked together all night, after 
M. Terestchenko, who had tarried a while longer at 
the Winter Palace after the departure of the other 
ministers, had gone. 

Meanwhile, the uprising in the city was developing 
with tremendous speed. Armed detachments of Bol- 
sheviki were closing in upon the Winter Palace and 
the Military District Staff Headquarters. Some sol- 
diers of the Pavlovsk Guards Regiment set up a real 
ambush in their barracks at the end of Millionnaya 
street, near the Field of Mars, arresting all “sus- 
picious” persons coming from the direction of the 
palace. The palace was guarded only by military 
cadets and a small squadron of armored motor cars. 

Immediately upon adjournment of the cabinet meet- 
ing, the commander of the garrison and his chief-of- 
staff appeared before me. They offered to organize 
an expedition of all the forces loyal to the govern- 
ment, including the Cossacks, for the capture of Smolny 

[ 330 ] 



GATCHINA 


Institute, the Staff Headquarters of the Bolsheviki. 
During this conversation I followed with more and 
more interest the ambiguous behavior of Colonel 
Polkovnikoff, being increasingly impressed by the cry- 
ing contradiction between his all too optimistic and re- 
assuring reports and the sad reality of the situation as 
I already knew it. It became more than evident that 
all his reports of the past ten to twelve days concern- 
ing the attitude of the troops and the preparedness of 
his own staff for a decisive struggle with the Bolsheviki 
had no basis in fact. 

The government’s commissar attached to the mu- 
nicipal administration, Rogovsky, appeared during my 
conference with the commander of the troops. He 
brought alarming news, contradicting in every way the 
reports just presented by Colonel Polkovnikoff. We 
learned from Rogovsky, among other things, that a 
considerable number of warships from the Baltic Fleet 
had entered the Neva in battle formation, that some 
of these ships had moved as far as the Nicholayevsky 
Bridge, and that this bridge had been, in turn, oc- 
cupied' by detachments of mutineers, who werel already 
advancing farther toward the palace bridge. Rogovsky 
drew our attention especially to the fact that the Bol- 
sheviki were carrying out their plan without any trou- 
ble, meeting no resistance on the part of the govern- 
ment troops. To me personally Rogovsky reported his 
observation that the staff of the Petrograd military 
district was watching the developments with utter in- 
difference, showing no inclination for activity on its 
P?rt. 

i The contradiction between the report presented by 
Rogovsky and that of Colonel Polkovnikoff was shock- 
ingly obvious. There was not a minute more to lose. 
It was necessary to hurry to Staff Headquarters 1 

[331 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 

Together with A. T. Konovaloff and accompanied 
by an adjutant, I left for the staff building, passing 
through the endless, almost dark corridors and lower 
chambers of the palace, where the military cadets who 
were off duty were preparing for bed. The staff build- 
ing was filled with officers of all ranks and ages and 
delegates of various military units. Amidst this 
military throng moved about some strange civilians. 

Rushing up to the third story, directly into the office 
of the commander of the troops, I requested Colonel 
Polkovnikoff to present a report on the situation im- 
mediately. The report convinced us — Konovaloff and 
me — that it was no longer possible to rely on Colonel 
Polkovnikoff and the majority of the officers of his 
staff. It became urgent in this eleventh hour to take 
command into one’s own hands, not only for an offen- 
sive against the mutineers but for the defense of the 
government itself, pending the arrival of fresh troops 
from the front and reorganization of the government’s 
forces in the capital. 

Within the district staff there were a number of high 
ranking officers upon whom I could rely with absolute 
confidence. But there were too few of them. I sum- 
moned by telephone those of them whose presence ap- 
peared most necessary and asked them to come to 
Staff Headquarters without delay. Then I decided to 
bring into action the volunteer military organizations 
of the parties, particularly the considerably numerous 
organization of the Party of Socialists-Revolutionists. 

The hours of the night dragged on painfully. 
From everywhere we expected reenforcements, but none 
appeared. There were endless telephone negotiations 
with the Cossack regiments. Under various excuses 
the Cossacks stubbornly stuck to their barracks, 
asserting all the time that “everything would be cleared 

[ 332 ] 



GATCHINA 


up” within fifteen or twenty minutes and that they 
would then “begin to saddle their horses.” 

On the other hand, the volunteer military forces at 
tfie disposal of the party organizations likewise evinced 
no activity. This rather puzzling circumstance was to 
be explained by the fact that the party centers, en- 
grossed in endless negotiations with Smolny, and rely- 
ing more on the force of “resolutions” than on the 
power of bayonets, had failed to issue the necessary 
orders in time. ■ 

Meanwhile the night hours passed. And the closer 
morning approached, the tenser grew the atmosphere 
at the Staff Headquarters. One honest and devoted 
officer, summoned to duty, came to me and after ob- 
serving what was going on in the staff building and 
following closely the actions of Colonel Polkovnikoff, 
declared that he could not term the things he had seen 
otherwise than betrayal. The many officers assembled 
in the staff building conducted themselves in their at- 
titude towards the government, and particularly to- 
wards me personally, in an increasingly defiant manner. 
As I learned afterwards they were engaged, on the 
initiative of Colonel Polkovnikoff, in an agitation for 
my arrest. At first they did this quietly, in whispers, 
but towards morning they began to talk quite loudly, 
almost without embarrassment and without regard to 
the presence of “strangers.” A mad idea had struck 
the minds of many of them in those moments; without 
Kerensky it would be easier to “finish” the Bolsheviki 
and establish finally that so-called “strong govern- 
ment.” { And there is no doubt that throughout that 
night Colonel Polkovnikoff and certain other officers of 
the district staff were in constant contact with con- 
servative anti-government organizations, such as the 
Council of Cossack Troops, the Union of the Knights 

[333 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 

of St. George, the Petrograd branch of the Union of 
Officers and other similar military and civil organiza- 
tions. 

Naturally, this suffocating atmosphere could not re- 
main without effect on the spirits of those defenders of 
the government who were in touch with the staff. Al- 
ready on the previous evening the military cadets, who 
had been in a confident state of mind, had begun to 
lose courage. Later, the crews of the armored cars 
began to grow panicky. Every moment of futile wait- 
ing for reenforcements lowered the fighting spirit of 
both. 

At seven o’clock in the morning, after conversation 
by direct wire with the Staff Headquarters of the com- 
mander of the Northern front, in an effort to prevail 
upon him to rush loyal reenforcements to Petrograd, 
for the Cossacks were still “saddling their horses,” 
Konovaloff and I, weary and exhausted by the impres- 
sions of the night, returned to the Winter Palace for 
a bit of rest. I remember how on the way we were 
surrounded several times by groups of excited military 
cadets. I remember how I had to reassure them and 
to explain all the probable consequences to the nation 
of a success for the Bolsheviki. 

I had intended, on arriving in my rooms, to get to- 
gether all my correspondence and all documents in my 
keeping and have them sent somewhere else for safe 
keeping, but I abandoned this intention, realizing the 
discouraging effect this would produce on all those in 
the palace. As a result, some of my papers, among 
them documents of not inconsiderable interest, fell into 
the hands of the Bolsheviki, while others disappeared. 

After parting with Konovaloff and issuing some 
urgent instructions to cover possible eventualities, I 
remained alone in my study. Without undressing I lay 

[ 334 ] 



GATCHINA 


down on the couch in my room. To sleep was im- 
possible. I lay with my eyes closed, dozing, in a kind of 
semi-consciousness. Hardly an hour had passed when 
I was roused by a noncommissioned officer, who came 
in with urgent information: the Bolsheviki had cap- 
tured the central telephone station and all our palace 
wire communications with the city had been cut. The 
palace bridge (beneath my windows) was occupied 
by Bolshevist sailor-pickets. The palace square was 
dead and empty. Not a word from the Cossacks, as 
was to have been expected. 

In another ten minutes, both of us — Konovaloff and 
I — with all my adjutants were racing back to Staff 
Headquarters. Nothing had changed there in the two 
hours of our absence. No, something had changed; 
some of the units operating the armored cars had “dis- 
appeared.” The armored cars were now about as use- 
ful as water wagons. The approaches to the palace 
and to Staff Headquarters, separated from one another 
by the palace square, were absolutely undefended. 
There was no news of any reenforcements from the 
Northern Front, although they should have been by 
this time in Gatchina. There was the beginning of 
panic. The staff building, filled to capacity all the 
previous evening and all night, was being gradually 
deserted. 

I had hardly entered the Staff Headquarters when 
a delegation of the military cadets guarding the palace 
appeared. It developed that the Bolsheviki had sent 
them a formal ultimatum demanding surrender of the 
palace on pain of merciless repressions. The delegates 
wanted instructions, saying that the majority of their 
comrades were ready to do their duty to the end, if 
there was any hope of at least some reenforcements. 
It was evident, under the circumstances, that only the 

[335 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 

quick arrival of reenforcements from the front could 
save the situation. 

But how to obtain those reenforcements? There 
was hut one thing to do : to lose no more time and go 
to meet the echelons, delayed somewhere near Gatch- 
ina, and hurry them forward to Petrograd, regardless 
of all obstacles. After conferring with Konovaloff and 
Kishkin (who had arrived in the meanwhile) and con- 
sulting with several loyal officers of the staff, I decided 
to break through the Bolshevist lines and personally 
meet the advancing troops approaching, as we believed, 
in the direction of Petrograd.-), 

To do this it was necessary, first, to cross the 
entire city in full view of everybody, without arousing 
the attention of the Bolshevist troops and Red Guard 
patrols scattered throughout the capital. This was 
most difficult of all. After some consideration it was 
decided to stake all on one play. To remove all sus- 
picion we determined to act openly. 

I called for my open touring car. My soldier- 
chauffeur, with whom I had covered the entire front, 
was a brave and devoted man. One of my adjutants 
made clear to him the task we were embarking upon. 
Without a moment’s hesitation he accepted it. As 
luck would have it, the supply of gasoline was not suffi- 
cient for the long journey, nor were there reserve tires. 
We preferred to take the risk of running out of gas- 
oline and of the absence of the reserve tire to the pos- 
sibility of attracting attention by prolonging the 
preparations. I took along with me Captain Kuzmin, 
assistant commander of the garrison, and a staff 
officer. 

I do not know how it happened but the news of my 
proposed departure reached the Allied embassies. 
Just as we were about to leave, representatives of the 

[ 336 ] 



GATCHINA 


British and, as far as I can remember, of the Ameri- 
can embassies arrived saying that the Allied envoys 
desired that I be accompanied by an automobile flying 
the American flag. Although it was more than evi- 
dent that the American flag could not save me and my 
companions in the event of our failure and that, on 
the contrary, it would only attract unnecessary atten- 
tion on our passing through the city, I accepted the 
suggestion as evidence of the interest of the Allies in 
the Russian Provisional Government and their solidar- 
ity with it. 

Shaking hands for the last time with Kishkin, who 
took upon himself the direction of the defense of the 
capital in my absence, I went out into the yard of the 
staff building, together with my companions. We en- 
tered my car. Close at hand was the American ma- 
chine. One of my officers, unable to find room in my 
car, decided to travel alone, but on the condition that 
in passing through the city he was to keep his machine, 
flying the American flag, at a “respectful distance” 
from ours. Finally, we moved. We followed closely 
all the details of my daily travel through the city. I 
occupied my usual seat — on the right, in the rear. I 
wore my customary semi-military uniform, which had 
become so familiar to the population and to the troops. 
The automobile moved at the usual city speed. At the 
very beginning of the Morskaya, near the telephone 
station, we passed the first Bolshevist guard. Some 
distance beyond, at the Astoria Hotel and at the 
Maryinsky Palace, were additional patrols and de- 
tachments of Bolsheviki. I need hardly say that the 
entire street — pedestrians and soldiers — recognized me 
immediately. The soldiers straightened up, as they 
would ordinarily have done. I saluted, as usual. In 
all probability, the moment after I passed not one of 

[ 337 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


them could account to himself how it was possible for 
him not only to have permitted this “counter-revolu- 
tionist,” this “enemy of the people” to pass, but also 
to have saluted him. 

Having passed safely through the center of the city, 
on entering the workmen’s section and approaching the 
Moscow Toll Gate we increased our pace and, finally, 
moved with breakneck speed. I remember how at the 
very exit from the city Red Guardsmen, patroling the 
road, came rushing towards our machine from all sides 
of the chaussee, but we had already passed them, while 
they had not only failed to make an effort to stop us, 
but had not even had time to take a good look at us. 

At Gatchina we drove up straight to the palace 
gate leading to the commandant’s quarters. We were 
chilled through and through by the mad drive. On 
learning, to our great surprise, that there were no 
echelons from the front at Gatchina and that no one 
here knew anything about them, we decided to pro- 
ceed farther, to Luga,. and if necessary to Pskoff. But 
to undertake such a long journey on a wet, autumn 
road without reserve tires and sufficient gasoline was 
unthinkable. We resolved to spend a half hour at the 
commandant’s office, to have some tea and warm up, 
while our machines were to be taken to the garage of 
the local military automobile command to take on the 
necessary materials. However, the moment I stepped 
into the commandant’s office his conduct appeared very 
strange to me. He tried to speak as loudly as possible 
and kept close to an open door leading into an ad- 
jacent room, from where we were being closely eyed 
by some soldiers. As if responding to the warning of 
some inner voice I suddenly ordered my machine 
detained and proposed to my companions that we 
resume the journey at once, without waiting for tea. 

[ 338 ] 



GATCHINA 


Only the car with the American flag and one officer 
went to the garage for the necessaries. 

We had left in time. Five minutes after our de- 
parture a machine all decorated with red flags raced 
into the palace yard; members of the local military- 
revolutionary committee had come to arrest me. It 
developed that some traitors in the staff building in 
Petrograd had informed Smolny of my departure for 
Gatchina. From Smolny had come an order to have 
me arrested here. Our automobile managed, however, 
to escape from the! city. But our other machine fell 
into serious difficulty. For more than an hour it 
wandered about the streets of Gatchina. After break- 
ing through two ambushes, under a hail of shots, it 
found escape from the third ambush not quite so easy. 
One bullet pierced a tire and another struck the chauf- 
feur in the hand. My officer, deserting the machine, 
was compelled to seek refuge in a near-by wood. We 
learned of this only next day, on our return to Gatch- 
ina from the front. 

But on leaving Gatchina we counted only the 
minutes, jumping with every jerk of the machine, trem- 
bling for the fate of our tires. There is no use to 
describe in detail our mad hunt for the elusive echelons 
from the front, which we did not find until our arrival 
at Pskoff. 

When we entered that city at nine o’clock in the eve- 
ning we knew nothing of what had possibly taken place 
here. Nor had we any knowledge of the extent to 
which the people were familiar with events in Petro- 
grad, or of how these events had been received here. 
For this reason we decided to move with great care 
and instead of going directly to the Staff Headquarters 
of the Commander of the Northern Front, General 
Tcheremisoff, we went to the home of his quarter- 

[ 339 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 

master-general, Baranoffsky, formerly chief of my 
military cabinet. Here I learned that the news from 
Petrograd was very discouraging, that a Bolshevist 
military-revolutionary committee was already function- 
ing in Pskoff itself, and that it had telegraphed an order 
for my arrest, signed by Lieutenant Krilenko and the 
sailor, Dybenko. In addition, I learned what was even 
worse, namely, that Tcheremisoff himself was making 
all sorts of advances to the revolutionary committee 
and that he would not take any measures for the dis- 
patch of troops to Petrograd, believing anv such ex- 
pedition to be useless and detrimental. 

Soon, upon -my order, the commander himself ap- 
peared. A very unpleasant conversation followed. 
The general did not conceal his intention of not bind- 
ing his fate in any way with that of the “doomed” 
government. He also tried to show that he had no 
troops he could spare from the front, and declared 
that he could not guarantee my personal safety in 
Pskoff. Tcheremisoff informed me also that he had 
countermanded the order, given in response to my de- 
mand from Petrograd, for the dispatch of troops, the 
Third Cavalry Corps included. 

“Have you seen General Krassnoff ? Does he share 
your opinion?” I asked. 

“I expect General Krassnoff any minute from 
Ostroff.” 

“In that case, general, direct him to me at once.” 

“I obey.” 

The general left, saying he was going straight to a 
meeting of the Military-Revolutionary Committee to 
get a clear idea of the attitude of the troops and that 
he would come back to me to report. My conversation 
with this clever, able, extremely vain man, who had 
so completely forgotten the call of duty, made a dis- 

[ 340 ] 



GATCHINA 


gusting impression upon me. Considerably later I 
learned that upon leaving me the general did not go to 
a meeting of the Military-Revolutionary Committee. 
He even tried, by long distance wire, to prevail upon 
General Baliayeff, commander of the Western Front, 
not to give any aid to the government. 

Tcheremisoff’s absence seemed endless. Meanwhile 
every minute was costly, for every delay meant ir- 
reparable damage in Petrograd. It was 1 1 p.m. How 
could we in Pskoff know that at that very moment the 
Winter Palace, where the Provisional Government was 
sitting, was withstanding the final bombardment and 
the last attacks of the Bolsheviki? Finally, at one 
o’clock in the morning, General Tcheremisoff returned 
to declare that he could not give any aid to the govern- 
ment. And if, he continued, I still held to my convic- 
tion that resistance was necessary, I should go imme- 
diately to Mohileff, as my arrest here, in Pskoff, was 
inevitable. In mentioning Mohileff, General Tcher- 
emisoff did not, however, tell me that General Duk- 
honin, chief-of-staff at General Headquarters, had tried 
twice to speak to me by long distance wire and that 
twice Tcheremisoff had refused to permit him to do so, 
without asking me. 

“And Krassnoff?” I asked. 

“He has already been here and gone back to 
Ostroff.” 

“But, look here, General, didn’t I ask you to send 
Krassnoff to me?” 

As far as I can recall there was no answer to this 
exclamation. His criminal shirking of his duty was 
obvious and I was in a hurry to get rid of him. For 
there was no hesitation in my mind. 1 felt I must re- 
turn to Petrograd, even if only with one regiment. 
After considering the situation with General Baran- 

[34i] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


offsky and my young companions, I decided to proceed 
immediately to Ostroff, Staff Headquarters of the 
Third Cossack Cavalry Corps and, in the event of 
failure there, to continue to Mohileff. While waiting 
for my automobile I lay down to rest. In the silence 
of the night I could almost hear the onward light- 
ning-like rush of the seconds, and the realization that 
every passing moment was bringing everything closer 
to the abyss was unbearable. 

Suddenly, a ring at the main door I It was Krassnoff 
with his chief-of-staff. He wanted to see me at once. 
At one jump I was in the room where the two officers 
awaited me. It appeared that having received from 
General Tcheremisoff an order, signed ostensibly by 
me, countermanding the move on Petrograd, which had 
already been begun, General Krassnoff somehow 
doubted the authenticity of the order, and instead of 
leaving for Ostroff he had begun to look for me here 
in the night. 

“And I, general, was just making ready to go to you, 
to Ostroff, relying on your corps, and hoping, regard- 
less of obstacles, to march on Petrograd.” 

It was decided that we would immediately go to- 
gether to Ostroff, with the idea of moving on the 
capital the same morning, with whatever forces we 
could muster. At this point it is necessary to stop for 
a moment in order that all the fatal events that fol- 
lowed may be made clearer. It is necessary to stop 
and recall the past • history of the Third Corps, with 
which it pleased fate to bind my last effort to save the 
country from Bolshevist destruction. ' The 1 Third Cav- 
alry Corps was the very same celebrated corps which 
together with the “Wild Division,” under command 
of General Krimoff, had been hurled against the Provi- 
sional Government by General Komiloff on September 

[ 342 ] 



GATCHINA 


seventh. After the collapse of the rebellion the “de- 
moralized” parts of this corps had been scattered all 
over the Northern Front. That was why instead of a 
corps I found only several regiments in Ostroff. On 
the other hand, the participation of the corps in the 
Korniloff adventure had seriously lowered its spirits, 
shattered its military discipline and sowed mistrust of 
the officers on the part of the Cossack rank and file. 
The officers, on their part, could not reconcile them- 
selves to the collapse of the Korniloff enterprise and 
hated all its opponents, particularly me. 

General Krassnoff himself conducted himself, in his 
relations with me, with great but proper restraint. In 
general, he was all the time holding back much that he 
would have liked to say. However, I did get the 
impression immediately that he was ready to do all he 
could to crush the Bolshevist mutiny. Moreover, not 
in vain did it please fate to make it possible for me to 
continue the struggle by pushing Krassnoff to my side. 

Late in the night we left for Ostroff, arriving there 
at dawn. The order stopping the move on Petrograd 
was in turn recalled. 

The advance on Petrograd was announced. 

We did not know then that the government, to 
whose aid we were rushing, was already in the hands 
of the Bolsheviki and that the ministers themselves 
were in the Fortress of SS. Peter and Paul. But we 
could see how quickly events in Petrograd reacted on 
the front, destroying everywhere all the discipline and 
order barely restored anew after the Korniloff affair. 

We had hardly entered Ostroff when we began to 
hear reports on all sides that the local garrison had 
decided to use force to prevent the Cossacks from 
leaving the town. In the morning, addressing a meet- 
ing of garrison and Cossack delegates, at the request 

[343 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


of General Krassnoff, I had opportunity to convince 
myself that every hour’s delay in the town made the 
departure of the Cossacks from Ostroff increasingly 
more problematical. Gradually, the soldier mass, dis- 
orderly and partly armed, gathered in increasing num- 
bers around the Staff Headquarters of the Third Corps. 

At last, at about ten o’clock in the morning, we re- 
ceived word from the railway station that the military 
trains were ready for the entrainment of the troops. 
Our automobiles moved to the station under a Cos- 
sack convoy, to the accompaniment of the threatening 
cries of the infuriated soldiery. At the station new 
difficulties developed. Under various excuses, with 
the object of paralyzing our enterprise, our trains were 
not permitted to pass. Only my personal presence 
among the troops finally removed all apparent and con- 
cealed obstacles. With much delay, the trains loaded 
with the echelons of the Third Cavalry Corps moved 
on their journey. 

The entire “fighting force” of the corps consisted of 
five or six hundred Cossacks and several cannon. How- 
ever, with these forces and at any cost we decided to 
fight our way to Petrograd, without awaiting any re- 
inforcements or stopping anywhere. 

Only towards evening of that day, in the train, near 
Luga, did I receive the first report of the capture of 
the Winter Palace. The report was brought to me by 
special courier from General Baranoffsky at PskofiF, 
who in turn had received it by direct telephone com' 
munication from the telegraph station at the Winter 
Palace through an officer of my military cabinet. Al- 
though based apparently on unimpeachable authority 
it appeared to us, as often happens in life, improbable, 
while the courier from Pskoff himself roused our sus- 
picion. For with us in the train was an officer who 

[ 344 ] 



GATCHINA 


had left Petrograd on the morning of November 
eighth. According to him the government was at that 
time still defending itself while resistance to the Bol- 
sheviki was increasing in the city. Comparing this 
testimony of the “eyewitness” with the report from 
Pskoff, we involuntarily questioned the authenticity of 
the latter, believing the tragic information to have 
been fabricated by a Bolshevist agent in order to pro- 
voke panic and demoralization in the ranks of the 
government forces. And however difficult, almost 
hopeless, may have been the position of Petrograd on 
the morning of November seventh, at the hour of our 
departure, it still seemed to us improbable that at two 
o’clock in the morning, on November eighth, the Bol- 
sheviki could already be masters of the palace and of 
Staff Headquarters. 

At dawn, on November ninth, our detachment was 
approaching Gatchina, which was by this time already 
in the hands of the Bolsheviki, under the authority of 
the local military-revolutionary committee and of the 
local Soviet. The town was filled with all kinds of 
Bolshevist troops — local infantry, artillery, Kronstadt 
sailors, armored cars from Petrograd, etc. Despite 
the overwhelming numerical superiority of the “enemy” 
we decided to capture the town at once. We unloaded 
our troops and the military operations began. These 
operations were concluded quickly and brilliantly. Al- 
most without firing a shot and, as I recall, without any 
losses, the government “forces” captured Gatchina. 
'The “revolutionary” troops fled in all directions or 
surrendered together with their rifles, guns, hand 
grenades, etc. In their hurried retreat they even left 
behind an armored car. At about four o’clock in the 
afternoon, accompanied by all my companions, I was 
again entering the office of the commandant, from 

[ 345 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


which less than two days before I had made my timely 
and fortunate departure. 

In preparing the military operations that followed, 
I did not, of course, assume the direction of the mil- 
itary-technical side of the task, appointing General 
Krassnoff commander of all the armed forces of the 
Petrograd district. I was prepared, however, to sup- 
port him at any point at which his personal authority 
might prove inadequate. 

The first prerequisite of continued success was the 
arrival of reenforcements from the front, especially of 
infantry. From Gatchina I sent out many telegrams 
demanding the dispatch of troops. From many sec- 
tions of the front I received replies that the troops 
were either already on the way or were about to leave. 
According to our calculations, based on official data, 
the first echelon of infantry was due to arrive in Gatch- 
ina towards evening of November ninth. We were 
particularly in need of infantry, as it was difficult to 
develop our operations with only the cavalry and artil- 
lery at our disposal. The Cossacks of the Third Corps, 
remembering the bitter experience of the Korniloff ex- 
pedition, were eagerly awaiting the arrival of other 
soldiers. Our appearance at Gatchina had brought 
into the town a considerable number of officers who 
aroused the suspicion of the Cossacks, all the more 
so because these officers gave expression to sentiments 
quite reactionary. 

Despite the insignificance of the forces at our dis- 
posal, we decided not to halt our advance on Petro- 
grad pending the arrival of reenforcements from the 
front, for we were convinced that the first echelons 
would surely reach Gatchina by evening of November 
tenth. Moreover, it was necessary to take full ad- 
vantage of the demoralizing effect produced on the 

[346 ] 



GATCHINA 


Bolshevik! by our speedy return from the front and 
the capture of Gatchina. It should be remembered 
that no one really knew the exact number of bayonets 
and guns at our disposal. 

In Petrograd the impression in both friendly and 
hostile circles was that our troops were numbered in 
thousands ! Our policy of “speed and pressure” was, 
moreover, made imperative by the general condition 
of the country and, particularly, of the front. jThe 
trump card of the Bolsheviki was peace, peace, imme- 
diate peace 1 >j Having seized the central telegraph sta- 
tion in Petrograd on the night of November eighth and 
the most powerful Russian wireless station at Tsar- 
skoye Selo, the Bolsheviki had begun immediately dis- 
seminating throughout the front their appeals for 
peace, arousing the weary troops, provoking their 
elemental demobilization and rush for home and stim- 
ulating fraternization with the enemy. It was neces- 
sary to destroy all communications between the Bol- 
sheviki in Petrograd and the front and to stop the 
stream of poisonous propaganda coming over the wires 
and the radio. We felt that in eight or ten days it 
would be too late and the entire country would be over- 
whelmed by the masses of soldiery streaming from the 
front. There was no other way out. It was necessary 
to act, however great and mad the risk. 

Incidentally, I may say that the legend that the 
Provisional Government disappeared from the face of 
the earth amidst general indifference is in no way borne 
out by the facts. Simultaneously with our advance on 
Petrograd, civil war broke out all over the country and 
at the front. The heroic uprising of the military 
cadets in Petrograd on November eleventh, the street 
battles in Moscow, Saratoff, Kharkoff and other cities, 
the battles at the front between troops loyal to the 

[ 347 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


Revolution and Bolshevist units— all these show con- 
clusively that we were not alone in our final stand. ■ 

And so, making Gatchina our base and taking stock 
of our forces and all possible reenforcements, we de- 
cided to move on Tsarskoye at dawn of November 
tenth, intending to capture it by noon of the same day. 

General Krassnoff himself was full of courage and 
confidence, believing that he would not require reen- 
forcements until after the capture of Tsarskoye Selo, 
when the direct operations against Petrograd would 
begin. The attitude of the Cossacks on that day, 
November ninth, was still quite satisfactory. At dawn, 
on November tenth, the Cossacks moved from Gatch- 
ina and soon their ranks were advancing along the 
Tsarskoselsky chaussee. On the same morning we re- 
ceived our first reenforcement: a splendidly equipped 
armored train, abundantly supplied with guns and light 
quick-firing field pieces. 

But already on that morning we began to be wor- 
ried by the delay in the advance of the echelons from 
the front. This delay appeared quite strange and 
mysterious. Later, we learned the reasons for it. On 
the one hand, we were being sabotaged by various mil- 
itary authorities, like the aforementioned Tcheremisoff, 
and, on the other, railroad and telegraph workers were 
hindering the troop trains going in the direction of 
Gatchina. 

About three hours after the departure of our forces, 

I followed them in an automobile. I found the Cos- 
sacks at a place where I did not expect them to be. 
They were not advancing at the rate of speed expected 
of them, and it soon became clear that they would not 
reach Tsarskoye Selo by noon. 

.Observing strictly my rule not to interfere in actual 
military operations, I stopped halfway between Gatch- 

[348 ] 



GATCHINA 


ina and Tsarskoye Selo, at the Meteorological Ob- 
servatory at Pulkovo, from the dome of which the 
battlefield was clearly visible through field glasses. 
Here I learned that the Bolsheviki had apparently or- 
ganized some kind of resistance near Tsarskoye Selo 
and that General Krassnoff, following an artillery bom- 
bardment, was attacking the town. 

Indeed, very soon after our arrival at the observa- 
tory we heard a short cannonade. Then everything 
grew still. Time passed quickly. The silence was un- 
broken. There was no information from General 
Krassnoff. Finally, I grew tired of waiting and left 
for the point of concentration of the government 
troops. 

General Krassnoff reported that the delay was due 
to the organization of the defense of Tsarskoye Selo, 
which was more thorough than he had expected, and 
to the insignificant forces at our disposal. 

Continuing this conversation, General Krassnoff 
adopted a rather new attitude towards me. At the 
conclusion of the conversation he suddenly asked me 
rather hesitatingly not to remain on the battlefield, 
explaining in no particularly convincing manner that 
my presence was interfering with the military opera- 
tions and was disturbing the officers. All this mystified 
me greatly. I could not understand it, until ... I 
observed in his entourage a number of very familiar 
figures from the Council of Cossack Troops. It de- 
veloped that the council had sent a special delegation 
to General Krassnoff. I thereupon understood all too 
clearly General Krassnoff’s changed manner and atti- 
tude. I had not forgotten the conduct of the Cossack 
regiments in Petrograd on the night of November 
sixth, remembering their suspicious neutrality instigated 
by the propaganda of the very same Cossack Council. 

[ 349 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


The appearance of politicians and intriguers from the 
Cossack Council had already made itself felt in my 
detachment and boded no good. My suspicion was 
aggravated when on my return to the observatory, 
after my conversation with General Krassnoff, I was 
overtaken by Savinkoff. 

Savinkoff in my detachment as a delegate of the 
Cossack Council! This was and for a long time re- 
mained a riddle to me. It was difficult to realize how 
Savinkoff had suddenly gained the confidence of the 
Cossack Council, which had remained loyal to Korniloff 
to the last. On his own insistent plea, Savinkoff had 
been appointed by me commander of Petrograd, in the 
defense of the capital against Korniloff, and had openly 
denounced Korniloff as a traitor. And now he was 
the representative of the same Cossack Council that 
was so bitterly hostile to the Provisional Government 
and to me in particular. 

On the appearance in the small room of the ob- 
servatory of this most peculiar Cossack I realized 
in a flash the entire new situation in my detachment. 
I realized immediately that the appearance of this 
“delegation” would not pass without serious effect 
on my undertaking. 

Time passed. The sun was already in the west. I 
managed to make another trip to Gatchina to attend 
to some urgent business, but there was no news about 
a “determined advance” on Tsarskoye Selo. There- 
upon I again returned to our troops, planning this tipie 
to interfere directly in the military operations. )l I 
was no longer in doubt that the sudden paralysis that 
had befallen the troops was not of military-technical 
but of purely political origin.l 

I found General Krassnoff and his men already in 
the very suburbs of the town but observed not the 

[ 350 ] 



GATCHINA 


slightest indication of military action. On the con- 
trary, between the “besieging” and the “besiegers” 
some kind of endless conversations were in progress 
concerning “voluntary” capitulation, surrender of arms, 
etc. On learning the situation I sent General Krassnoff 
a written demand for immediate active operations 
against Tsarskoye Selo by opening artillery fire. 

The general replied that his forces were inadequate 
and that, in addition, the hesitation and extremely dis- 
turbed attitude of the Cossacks compelled him to re- 
frain from decisive measures. It was evident Krassnoff 
was not in a hurry. I still am absolutely convinced 
that with proper good will on the part of the command 
and with the absence of intrigue, we would have oc- 
cupied Tsarskoye Selo in the morning, twelve hours 
before it was actually occupied, i.e., before the crush- 
ing of the military cadets in Petrograd. 

As will be seen later, this deliberate delay at Tsar- 
skoye Selo was a fatal blow to our entire expedition. 

Late in the evening, General Krassnoff, continuing 
to delay the bombardment, reported to me his intention 
to withdraw his troops some distance, postponing the 
capture of Tsarskoye Selo until the morrow. This 
was too much. Under no circumstances could I give 
my assent to such a move. 

First, I saw no obstacles to the immediate occupa- 
tion of Tsarskoye Selo; second, I believed it highly 
dangerous to create an impression of our weakness and 
uncertainty in the military operations. At that very 
time there arrived from Petrograd the army com- 
missar at General Headquarters, Stankevitch, whose 
report strengthened my determination in my differ- 
ences with General Krassnoff. 

Stankevitch, reporting on the situation in the capital 
and the forces ready to support us there, insisted on 

[ 351 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


speeding up our advance on Petrograd. Finally, it 
was decided to occupy Tsarskoye Selo at once. As 
was to have been expected, our detachment entered the 
town about midnight, seizing the city without any 
difficulty. This could have been achieved with equal 
success twelve hours earlier. 

I returned to Gatchina for the night in a mood of 
utmost dejection and misgiving. pThe experiences of 
the day had shown that the men in command of our 
detachment were already in the web of intrigue, that 
many of them had lost consideration for the welfare 
of the country.\ I saw no escape from the situation ex- 
cept through surrounding and disarming the Cossack 
detachment as speedily as possible by other troops. 
These troops I confidently hoped to find in Gatchina 
and move them on Tsarskoye Selo. In Gatchina I 
found only telegrams. Meanwhile, in our absence, 
the situation at Gatchina had taken a sharp turn for 
the worse, due, particularly, to the effects of the pres- 
sure of Bolshevist forces on the right flank (in the di- 
rection of Oranienbaum and Krassnoye Selo), the Bol- 
shevist forces consisting principally of naval detach- 
ments. 

The uncertainty of the situation, the absence of 
exact information, the mass of rumors created extreme 
nervousness and tension in the town, particularly to- 
wards night. Panic threatened to ensue at any mo- 
ment. 

On the very same night of November eleventh and 
on the morning of the following day a tragic and 
bloody misunderstanding developed in Petrograd. At 
that time there were still sufficient forces in the Petro- 
grad garrison, both in the regular regiments and in 
special units, ready at the first opportune moment to 
move against the Bolsheviki. Adding to these the 

[ 352 ] 



GATCHINA 


cadets of the military schools, nearly all of which were 
preparing for action, there were still very considerable 
forces in Petrograd able to deal a decisive blow in the 
rear of the Bolshevist troops facing our detachment 
at Pulkowo. In addition, all the military units of the 
respective parties, especially that of the Socialist-Rev- 
olutionists, had finally been mobilized by this time. 
But due to misunderstanding of the confused situa- 
tion and the misleading activity of a gents-provocateurs 
and traitors, all the anti-Bolshevist forces in Petrograd 
had gone into action too soon, before we could be of 
any assistance to them or, at any rate, before we could 
take advantage of the fighting in Petrograd to attack 
the Bolshevist forces at Pulkowo. 

Of course, had we been properly informed of the de- 
velopments in the capital, I would have demanded im- 
mediate supporting action on our part. The whole 
horror of the situation lay in the fact that not only was 
the action of our forces in Petrograd, provoked by 
a gents-provocateurs, premature, but that we knew 
nothing about it all that day. Only late in the after- 
noon, at about four o’clock, when all was over, was I 
summoned to the telephone by the Mikhailowsky Castle 
and informed of the defeat of our forces in Petrograd. 
Accompanying the information was a plea for help. 

But what could I do now? How could Petrograd 
venture to rise without contact with the army? This 
question threw me into despair and anger. 

Late at night some political friends arrived in 
Gatchina from Petrograd and brought the answer to 
this terrible question. It developed that, according to 
the plan of our supporters, our forces in Petrograd 
were to go into action at the proper moment, in full 
cooperation with the military operations of our de- 
tachment advancing on the capital. At a meeting of 

[ 353 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


our leaders in Petrograd, on the evening of November 
tenth, no resolution concerning immediate action had 
been adopted. Active operations were decided upon 
later, after adjournment of the meeting, when the ma- 
jority of the participants had already departed. At 
that moment a group of military men, highly excited, 
appeared at the place of the meeting with the hardly 
reliable information that the Bolsheviki, having learned 
of the contemplated action, had decided to begin the 
disarmament of the military schools next morning and 
for this reason it was necessary to take risks and begin 
operations immediately. And, indeed, the morning 
of November eleventh opened with a cannonade, the 
meaning and purpose of which were at first a mystery 
to the majority of the civilian and military leaders of 
the anti-Bolshevist movement in Petrograd. The 
provocateurs had been completely successful in their 
aim. Our own detachment could no longer hope for 
any assistance from Petrograd, while the Bolshevist 
forces facing us were greatly encouraged. 

5 At this point I must emphasize the conduct of the 
Cossack regiments in Petrograd throughout the tragic 
uprising of our forces on November eleventh. Al- 
though the Cossacks had given me their solemn prom- 
ise to do their duty they continued throughout the 
fighting, as they did on the night of November eighth, 
“saddling their horses.” \ These Cossack regiments 
remained true to themselves. Despite their promise, 
ignoring the horrors in the streets of Petrograd, when 
the military cadets and their civilian supporters were 
being shot and drowned in the Neva by the hundreds, 
the Cossacks renjained- “neutral.-” Old Tchaikovsky, 
accompanied, I think, by Avksentieff, made the round of 
the barracks, pleading for help from the Cossacks. 
According to the testimony of participants in the fight- 

[ 354 ] 



GATCHINA 


ing, Colonel Polkovnikoff and his associates remained 
faithful to their policy of permitting the Bolsheviki to 
smash the Provisional Government and the democracy 
they so hated, in order to establish afterwards a strong 
“national” dictatorship. 

But let us return to Tsarskoye Selo. The entire day 
of November eleventh was devoted to preparations 
for battle, which was to begin at dawn on Monday, 
November twelfth. The Bolshevist lines ran along 
the heights of Pulkowo. On their right flank was 
Krassnoye Selo, from which they were in a position 
to undertake a flanking movement against Gatchina. 

^ The reports of our scouts showed that we were 
faced by 12,000 to 15,000 troops of various branches. 
The heights of Pulkowo were occupied by Kronstadt 
sailors, splendidly grained, as we learned later, by 
German instructors. | We had several hundred (600- 
700) Cossacks, a limited quantity of artillery of ex- 
cellent quality, an armored train and a regiment of 
infantry, which had meanwhile arrived from Luga. 
Not much! To be sure, we had also heaps of tel- 
egrams informing us of the approach of additional 
echelons. About fifty military trains from many sec- 
tions of the front were fighting their way towards 
Gatchina against all obstacles. But it was impossible 
to delay any further. The Bolshevist command was 
feverishly assembling its forces, preparing to take the 
offensive at any moment. 

Early in the morning, November twelfth, the fight 
at Pulkowo began. In general it was developing satis- 
factorily. The great portion of the Bolshevist forces, 
consisting of troops of the Petrograd garrison, de- 
sefrted their positions as soon as our artillery opened 
fire and under the slightest pressure of our men. But 
the right flank of the Bolsheviki held fast. Here the 

[355 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


Kronstadt sailors and their German instructors were 1 in 
action. The report presented to me in the evening of 
that day by General Krassnoff stated that the sailors 
were fighting in accordance with all the rules of Ger- 
man tactics and that among the prisoners taken by 
us were men who spoke only German, or Russian with 
a foreign accent. The fight at Pulkowo was concluded 
in the evening successfully for us, but we could not 
follow up this “success” by pursuit or consolidate it 
because of the insignificant numbers at our disposal. 
Towards evening, General Krassnoff retreated to 
Gatchina. At about eight o’clock in the evening, Gen- 
eral Krassnoff and his staff, accompanied by his weary 
troops, entered the gates of the Gatchina Palace. 

\ From the military point of view, this maneuver was 
quite proper and reasonable. But in the tense, political 
atmosphere of the situation this retreat provoked com- 
plete demoralization in the ranks of the government 
forces. It meant the beginning of the end!| 

Before I describe these last thirty-six hours of our 
agony let us return to the picture presented by our 
detachment before the battle at Tsarskoye Selo. This 
will explain more clearly the psychology of the final 
events at Gatchina. Unfortunately, all the negative 
aspects of the situation at Gatchina had attained full 
bloom at Tsarskoye. On the one hand, our handful of 
Cossacks was virtually lost in the mass of the local 
garrison. Everywhere — in the park avenues, in the 
streets, at the barrack gates — meetings were in 
progress, with agitators doing their best to confuse and 
discourage our men. The main argument of the propa- 
ganda consisted in comparing my expedition with 
Korniloff’s : “Once more, comrades, as under the Czar 
and under Korniloff, you are being compelled to shoot 
down peasants and workmen in order tjiat the land* 

[ 356 ] 



GATCHINA 


lords, the bourgeoisie and the generals may be re- 
turned to power.” The rank and file of the Cossacks 
did not long remain indifferent to this demagogic agita- 
tion and began looking askance at the commanders. 
And at the same time, the commanders, without ex- 
ception, from the highest staff officers to the very last 
noncommissioned officer, having forgotten their duty, 
were devoting themselves to playing politics. The! 
local irreconcilable Komilovites, supporting those who 
had come from Petrograd, began “working” openly 
among the officers, fanning confusion, stimulating 
hatred towards the! Provisional Government and de- 
manding my head. Indications of treason were clearly 
discernible in the atmosphere of intrigue. 

My presence in our detachment was regarded by 
members of the staff as detrimental to our “success,” 
etc. I did not wish to interfere with our success, but I 
could not abandon the fight against the Bolsheviki. 
To sit idle! at Gatchina was likewise not particularly 
pleasant and, what is more, it was useless. This was 
how I viewed the situation at Tsarskoye Selo on the 
night of November twelfth. I decided to go immedi- 
ately to meet the echelons supposed to be approaching 
from the front. I had hoped also by my personal 
presence to accelerate their advance, as I did in the 
case of the Cossacks at Ostroff, and to deliver the 
infantry reenforcements in time to Krassnoff. As far 
as I remember, I sent a note to Krassnoff, in the morn- 
ing of November twelfth, informing him of my depar- 
ture from Tsarskoye Selo. 

Great was my surprise when a short time later a 
delegation of the Cossack Council, headed by Sa- 
vinkoff, appeared before me I They informed me, in 
the name of the entire detachment, that my departure 
was most undesirable, that it was likely to produce a 

[ 357 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


bad effect on the rank and file of the Cossacks and, 
therefore, on the progress of the battle, and, finally, 
as the Cossacks had come here with me I must share 
their fate with them- In reply, I explained to the dele- 
gates the purpose of my journey, emphasizing that I 
considered the journey possible only because yester- 
day’s conduct on the part of Krassnoff and his staff 
had convinced me that I had become superfluous here. 
And if this was not so, I said, if my departure was 
likely to interfere with the success of the fight, I was, 
of course, ready to remain, on condition that the Cos- 
sacks remain loyal to the Provisional Government. 

The interview was concluded. I remained in Gatch- 
ina, to which, as I have already pointed out, the entire 
detachment returned in the evening. 

In Gatchina itself the report of “the retreat of Ke- 
rensky’s troops” spread with lightning-like speed long 
before the return of the Cossacks, producing panic 
among some and doubling the energy and audacity of 
others. In the evening, shortly before the return of 
Krassnoff, a delegation of the All-Russian Executive 
Committee of the Union Railwaymen came to me from 
Petrograd with a brazen ultimatum, demanding on the 
threat of a railway strike that I enter into peace nego- 
tiations with the Bolsheviki. I was called upon to 
reply within a few hours. A stormy scene followed. 
The treason of the Railway Union rendered our situ- 
ation nothing short of tragic, for a railway strike, with- 
out affecting in any way the movement of Bolshevist 
armed forces (already concentrated in Petrograd, with 
their reserves deployed along the Baltic coast) would 
have cut us off from all fronts and from all advancing 
reenforcements. 

It was imperative to organize as speedily as possible 
the defense of Gatchina against possible blows from 

[358 ] 



GATCHINA 


the direction of Krassnoye Selo and Oranienbaum. To 
do this had become, however, well-nigh impossible, 
despite the concentration of an enormous number of 
officers in the town.. All of them preferred to while 
away their time at the palace, at Staff Headquarters, 
discussing the situation, quarreling and criticizing ev- 
erything and everybody. On General Krassnoff’s arri- 
val I informed him of the Railway Union’s ultimatum. 
Krassnoff expressed the opinion that under the circum- 
stances it would perhaps be wise to begin armistice 
negotiations, in order to gain time. This, he said, 
would tend to pacify, to some extent, the Cossacks, 
who had begun to look with increasing suspicion on the 
commanders, and would give us a breathing space, 
pending the arrival of reenforcements. 

■ The Cossacks had begun to lose all hope of the 
arrival of these infantry reenforcements. In vain were 
our efforts in showing them heaps of telegrams con- 
cerning the movements of the echelons ; in vain did we 
seek to prove to them that the reenforcements were 
actually coming and that we had not very long to wait. 
In vain! The Cossacks were paying ever increasing 
attention to the speeches of agitators, being inclined 
to regard our assurances with ever decreasing credu- 
lity and showing a growing impatience and distrust 
with respect to the officers. 

On the same evening of November twelfth, taking 
advantage of the arrival of a group of friends from 
Petrograd, I gave them a letter addressed to N. D. 
Avksentieff, President of the Council of the Republic, 
transferring to him, in the event of “possible necessity,” 
the rights and duties of premier of the Provisional 
Government, suggesting also the immediate filling of 
vacancies. 

I had hardly completed this task when I was 

[ 359 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


informed that a meeting of the officers in Gatchina 
desired emphatically that I appoint Savinkoff com- 
mander of the defense of the town, that they trusted 
him and that they would immediately begin organizing 
the defense. I appointed Savinkoff to the post, which 
was utilized the same night by the Bolsheviki as new 
evidence of my “counter-revolutionism.” 

Only late at night did I find myself alone, with my 
two young adjutants, Lieutenant Kovanko and Lieu- 
tenant Vinner, who remained faithful to me to the last. 
It was now possible for me to think of my own fate, 
which did not appear particularly uncertain. One of 
my adjutants had just become a father. After much 
difficulty I prevailed upon him to leave me at the first 
opportunity, which presented itself very soon. The 
other, nineteen-year-old Vinner, who had stuck to me 
throughout the Revolution, declined flatly to yield to 
all importunities. We decided to meet all eventuali- 
ties together. At that moment we already felt that we 
were moving quickly towards the inevitable. 

In the morning, November thirteenth, I summoned 
a military council. Present were General Krassnoff; 
Colonel Popoff, his chief-of-staff ; Captain Kuzmin, 
assistant commander of the troops of the Petrograd 
military district; Savinkoff, Stankevitch and another 
member of the staff. Opening the meeting, I presented 
a brief summary of the political situation as it appeared 
on the basis of the information at my disposal and, 
then, requested the chief-of-staff to explain the mili- 
tary situation and to report on the movement of the 
troops. After that I put the question of the accept- 
ance or rejection of an armistice before the council. 
The opinions were given in the order of seniority, the 
youngest present speaking first. Only two opinions — 
Savinkoff’s and mine — were in favor of unconditional 

[360] 



GATCHINA 


refusal of any negotiations. All the military men pres- 
ent were unanimous in the view that it was necessary 
to start negotiations immediately, as otherwise it was 
impossible to guarantee the behavior of the Cossacks. 

Thus, the opinion of the majority was clearly evi- 
dent: however difficult and unpleasant the task was, 
there was no other way out ; it was necessary to gain 
time by negotiations. In addition, I felt it was impos- 
sible to permit Krassnoff and his staff to say to the 
Cossacks: “We were for peace but Kerensky ordered 
us to fight.” I confirmed the opinion of the majority 
and the military council began working out the tech- 
nical conditions of the negotiations. 

It was decided that Stankevitch go to Petrograd by 
detour, to inform the Committee for the Salvation of 
the Motherland and the Revolution of my armistice 
conditions. I regret that I cannot recall the full text 
of this document, of which I did not retain a copy. 
At any rate, these conditions were unacceptable to the 
Bolsheviki, who following our departure from Tsar- 
skoye Selo had had little doubt of their ultimate suc- 
cess. But I remember clearly two of my conditions: 
first, the immediate laying down of arms by the Bol- 
sheviki and their promise to obey the Provisional Gov- 
ernment, which was to be reorganized ; and, second, the 
reorganization of the government and its program, to 
be determined by agreement of the existing Provisional 
Government with the representatives of all the polit- 
ical parties and the Committee for the Salvation of 
the Motherland and the Revolution. 

At about four o’clock in the afternoon Stankevitch 
left for Petrograd. By this time General Krassnoff 
had organized a delegation to go to Krassnoye Selo, 
Bolshevist headquarters, to conclude an immediate 
armistice, pending the result of Stankevitch’s mission. 

[36i] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


The delegation left for Bolshevist headquarters only- 
in the evening. It consisted only of Cossacks, as Cap- 
tain Kuzmin categorically declined to accompany the 
delegation, despite the importunities of Krassnoff. 

Before that, early in the afternon, following the 
adjournment of the military council, Savinkoff had 
come to me with a paper in his hand. I thought his 
visit had something to do with some urgent question 
concerning the defense of Gatchina. I was mistaken. 
The paper stated that the bearer, Boris Savinkoff, 
was commissiond by Kerensky, Premier and Com- 
mander-in-Chief, to go to General Headquarters to 
facilitate the dispatch of reenforcements to Gatchina. 

“Please sign this paper, Alexander Feodorovitch; 
I want to go.” 

“Go ahead,” I replied, returning the signed com- 
mission, although Savinkoff’ s journey to General Head- 
quarters was quite unreasonable, and although he was 
abandoning the very responsible task he had under- 
taken in Gatchina and towards the execution of which 
he had not yet done a single thing. 

Both of us understood the purpose of his departure 
and it would have been useless to discuss it. Savinkoff’s 
wise foresight served only to emphasize the atmos- 
phere that surrounded mel Only by a miracle, only 
by the utmost self-sacrifice of the few defenders of 
Gatchina could the situation now be saved. But not 
even the impending grave peril served to unite us, to 
rouse energy and initiative; on the contrary it only 
stimulated and added poison to the disintegration. 
For the majority, sdlf-preservation became the first 
consideration. The Cossacks looked with increasing 
anger upon their officers as the cause of their impend- 
ing destruction, while the officers, under the hostile 
pressure of the Bolshevist soldiery and of their own 

[362] 



GATCHINA 


Cossacks, began to think more frequently at what pricS 
they could buy their own lives from the Bolsheviki in 
the event of the fall of Gatchina. Because of the con- 
tinued delay in the arrival of reenforcements the Cos- 
sacks honestly believed themselves betrayed. The offi- 
cers considered it no longer necessary to conceal their 
hatred for me, feeling that I was no longer able to 
protect them from the fury of the mob. 

Thus began the night of November thirteenth. No 
reports from the parliamentarians “at the front.” No 
information from Petrograd. The half-dark, gloomy, 
endless corridors of the old palace, built by Emperor 
Paul I, are filled with masses of aroused, infuriated 
people. The air, poisoned by fear, is filled with most 
improbable, monstrous rumors. Everywhere there is 
whispering : “If the Cossacks will voluntarily surrender 
Kerensky they will be permitted to return to their 
homes, on the quiet Don.” The temptation is too great; 
the thought of betrayal captures the minds of many. 
It seems as if the long autumn night will never end. 
The minutes appear like hours. The rats are desert- 
ing the sinking ship. There is not a soul in my rooms, 
only yesterday filled to capacity. There is only grave- 
like silence and calm. We are alone. There are very 
few of us. We have stuck together all these months, 
united by a common fate. Nothing hinders us now 
from thinking quietly and undisturbedly of what is 
impending. Daylight had already broken when, after 
destroying all the papers and letters which could not 
very well be permitted to fall into “strange hands,” 
I lay down on the bed and dozed off with but one 
thought : “Will the echelons arrive in the morning?” 

At about ten o’clock I was awakened suddenly. A 
most unexpected report: the Cossack-parliamentarians 
headed by Dybenko ! The basic demand of the sailors 

[363] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


was the unconditional surrender of Kerensky to the 
Bolsheviki. The Cossacks were prepared to accept 
the condition. 

The report was quite surprising! To the very last 
moment, despite all the suspicious indications and dark 
forebodings, we had refused to admit the possibility 
of such contemptible treason. But the fact was unde- 
niable ! 

There remained but one thing to do: to have a 
showdown with General Krassnoff and his staff, to 
clear up the question of whether or not they them- 
selves were involved in the betrayal. I sent immedi- 
ately for the general. He appeared, most correct and 
all too calm in his bearing. 

I asked him if he knew what was happening at that 
moment below. I asked him to explain how he had 
dared to permit the presence of the sailors in the palace 
itself; why he had failed even to inform me of this 
beforehand. 

He began to explain at excessive length that this 
conversation with the sailors was of no particular sig- 
nificance; that he was keeping careful watch, through 
some trusted men, on everything that was taking place ; 
that he even considered these negotiations an event 
of extreme benefit for us. “Let them talk,” he argued. 
“The day will pass in conversation and argument, and 
towards evening the situation will clear up ; the infantry 
will arrive and we will change our tone.” 

So far as the surrender of myself was concerned, 
he assured me he would never accept anything of the 
kind, saying I could remain perfectly undisturbed on 
this point. He thought, however, that it might be use- 
ful if I personally, accompanied, of course, by a good 
escort — he offered to supply it — would go to Petro- 

C 364 ] 



GATCHINA 


grad and try to reach an agreement with the various 
parties and even with Smolny Institute itself! To be 
sure, he added, the enterprise was rather risky, but was 
it not worth trying for the sake of the salvation of 
the country? 

Thus spoke General Krassnoff to me. It was my 
last meeting with the general. The general’s nervous- 
ness following upon the outward calm with which he 
had entered my room, the unsteady eyes, the strange 
smile — all this left no doubt of the actual situation. 
The bargaining for my head in progress downstairs 
was by no means as innocent as it was painted to me ! 

The general left. 

I revealed the whole truth to those who were still 
with me. What was to be done? All my relations 
with the Cossack detachment were now broken by the 
Cossacks themselves. It would have been quite proper 
for me to consider myself no longer bound to those 
who had already betrayed me. But there was no way 
of escape. I had prepared no measures for my per- 
sonal safety. Nor were any preparations made for 
departure from Gatchina. We were too few for any 
armed resistance — less than ten. Escape from the 
palace was likewise impossible. Built by Paul I in the 
form of a closed rectangle, the palace grounds had but 
one exit, already occupied by a mixed guard of Cos- 
sacks and sailors. 

While we were discussing how to escape from the 
impasse, how to get out from the trap, one of the keep- 
ers of the palace appeared offering assistance. He 
explained that he knew of a secret underground exit, 
leading outside of the palace, but that it was impossible 
to make use of this exit before dark. If nothing hap- 
pened before then, it was possible to escape from the 

[365 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


trap by means of this secret exit. I requested my com- 
panions to lose no time and save themselves one by 
one as best they could. 

I, personally, and Lieutenant Vinner determined not 
to give ourselves up to the traitors alive. That was 
all. Our plan was that, while the band of sailors and 
Cossacks would search for us in the front rooms, we 
would settle accounts with life by means of our re- 
volvers in thd rear charhbers. At that time, on the 
morning of November 14, 1917, this resolve seemed 
quite simple, logical and inevitable. 

Time passed. We waited. Downstairs they were 
bargaining. Suddenly, at three o’clock in the after- 
noon, the same soldier who had brought us, in the 
morning, the news of Dybenko’s arrival, came running 
in. His face was pale as death. The bargain had 
been concluded, he explained. The Cossacks had 
bought their freedom and the right to return to their 
homes with their arms for the price of only one human 
head! To carry out the bargain, i.e., my arrest and 
surrender to the Bolsheviki, the enemies of yesterday, 
in quite friendly manner, had chosen a mixed commis- 
sion. The sailors and Cossacks were ready to rush 
into my rooms at any moment. 

What was Krassnoff’s role in this deal? In the 
archives at General Headquarters there is a short and 
eloquent reply to this question. On Novembeir four- 
teenth General Dukhonin received a telegram from 
Krassnoff: “I ordered the arrest of the Commander- 
in-Chief ; he managed to escape.” 

Those who saw General Dukhonin at that time say 
that on receiving the telegram he was convinced that 
die order for my arrest had been issued because of my 
intention to compromise with the Bolsheviki. 

The agreement between the Cossacks and the sail- 

[ 366 ] 



GATCHINA 


ors seemed to settle the situation, finally, leaving me no 
avenue of escape. But a miracle happened ! 

Two men whom I had never met or known before 
come into the room — a soldier and a sailor. 

“There is no time to lose. Put this on.” 

“This” consists of a sailor’s cloak, a sailor’s hat and 
automobile goggles. The cloak is too short for me. 
The hat is too small and persists in falling back on my 
neifck. The masquerade attire appears ludicrous and 
dangerous. But there is nothing to be done. I have 
only a few minutes. 

“At the gate, before the palace, an automobile 
awaits you.” 

We say good-by. 

Together — the sailor and I — we walk out of my 
rooms through the back door. Two sailors come pass- 
ing the door. 

They walk slowly across the empty corridor, en- 
gaged in quiet, nonchalant conversation. The rec- 
tangular corridor seems endless. 

Finally, we are at the stairway. We go below to 
the only exit, already occupied by a mixed guard of 
Cossacks and sailors. The least mistake, an uncertain 
step, we will be discovered and all will be lost. 

But we do not seem to think of that possibility at 
all. Our bodies move quite automatically, with per- 
fectly balanced precision, like good machines. We 
pass the guard at the entrance door. Nothing 1 

We move under the arch. We look around. I cer- 
tainly do look ludicrous. Again nothing. 

We pass to the elevation before the palace. All 
is empty. There is no one to be seen! No automo- 
bile. We cannot understand at first what has hap- 
pened. 


[ 367 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


We walk on. 

Where? We don’t know. To move faster is 
impossible. 

“There has been a mix-up,” says my new comrade. 

“Let us go back,” I reply. 

We turn back. 

We are again under the arch. We look around. 
We are now being observed. 

We reenter the palace, through the door opposite 
to the one through which we left. This door leads 
straight to the guardroom. 

We hear a diminishing distant roar. Dybenko’s 
sailors and Krassnoff’s Cossacks are running upstairs 
to arrest me. 

At this moment we are met by the same friend who 
told us that an automobile would be waiting for us at 
the exit. 

Imperceptibly, with an air of complete indifference, 
he passes us, saying: 

“There has been a misunderstanding; the automo- 
bile is waiting for you at the exit from the town, at the 
Egyptian gates.” 

We turn and appear for the third time under the 
arch. 

This is already too much. A guard takes a step 
forward in our direction. But here, under the arch, 
stands a trusted friend, an officer placed there for 
possible “necessity.” He is covered with bandages; 
his face and body bear the scars of war. He “sud- 
denly” grows faint and falls straight into the arms of 
him, a sailor or Cossack — I do not remember — who 
was about to approach us. 

All eyes turn upon the officer who has fainted. We 
slip through. 

We march through the city. The road is long. 

[368 ] 



GATCHINA 

Gradually we put on speed. We meet a cab. We 
jump in. 

“Go!” 

From the distance we see the machine at the Egyp- 
tian gates. It seems as if we will never reach it. We 
almost stifle with impatience. Finally we are at our 
destination. We push into the hand of the cabman a 
ridiculously large bill. His eyes look with surprise at 
the machine, flying at breakneck speed. 

The machine is an excellent one. So is the chauf- 
feur, an aviator. We speed along the chaussee towards 
Luga at a fantastic rate. The chauffeur is master of 
the wheel. Inside the car are hand grenades. In 
the event of necessity we will hurl them at our pur- 
suers. 

A few minutes after our escape the pursuit begins. 

Where and how I escaped is a puzzle to everybody 
in the palace. 

Some friends at the palace take a most active part 
in the preparations. Our soldier, a chauffeur, a man 
absolutely devoted to me, appears “infuriated” at the 
escape. He volunteers to lead tht pursuit. In my 
own machine, one I had used at the front, he follows 
along the route of our escape. 

Others take the opposite direction. The automobile 
driven by my “pursuer” is filled with enemies. But 
this does not disturb him. While at full speed the 
excellent machine “suddenly” breaks down. We can 
no longer be overtaken. 

But we do not know this. We speed on. But where 
are we going? Surely, not to Luga ? We have not the 
slightest idea of what has taken place there in these 
last hours. 

Near by, in the woods, there is a little peasant home- 

[369] 



THE CATASTROPHE 

stead. The occupants are simple folk, with no inter- 
est in politics, but honest. 

They are acquaintances of the sailor friend with 
whom I escaped from the palace, although he has not 
been to see them for more than a year. We look 
around the chaus see. Not a soul is to be seen either 
in front or behind. We stop. Both of us jump out 
and disappear in the thick of the wood. The auto- 
mobile proceeds. 

From afar we hear the farewell of its horn. 

While we had been speeding along the chaussee 
towards Luga, the trains with our long awaited 
infantry were approaching Gatchina from the opposite 
direction. 

But it was too late. The first part of the strategic 
plan so cleverly conceived by the civilian and military 
“Kornilovites” was carried out brilliantly. 

With the hands of the Bolsheviki the Provisional 
Governmeint was overthrown. The hated man was no 
longer in power. 

There remained only the task of executing the sec- 
ond and more important part of the plan : to “finish” 
the Bolsheviki within three weeks and to establish in 
Russia a “national” and, above all, a “strong govern- 
ment.” 

These three weeks have dragged out too long. 



CHAPTER XIX 

CONCLUSION 

W ITH Gatchina ended the history of the Pro- 
visional Government’s struggle against Rus- 
sia’s foreign foes and her enemies within. 
The natural center of the people’s will and national 
consciousness, created by the Revolution itself, was 
finally destroyed by the combined efforts of the irre- 
sponsible extremists on the Right and on the Left. 

Under the social, political and international condi- 
tions of that period as described in this book, it was 
inevitable that of the two extremes seeking dictator- 
ship over Russia the victory should go to the dictators 
on the Left. 

But on capturing the machinery of government, 
the Bolsheviki had by no means become the govern- 
ment of the country. On the contrary, the day of the 
official victory of Leninite reaction became only the 
first day of a long, most cruel and extremely bloody 
armed struggle of the Bolsheviki for power over the 
Russian people and the Russian state, which continues 
to this day. 

The transfer of supreme power by the entire coun- 
try into the hands of the Provisional Government in 
March, 1917, amidst the sudden outburst of anarchy 
in the first days of the Revolution, signified the pre- 
vention of civil war. The forcible seizure of the 
machinery of government by the Bolsheviki in Novem- 
ber opened for Russia the period of civil war and ter- 

[ 371 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 

rorism, the period which has not yet found the condu- 
sion. 

“It is imperative to transform the exterior war of 
peoples into an interior war of classes,” wrote Lenin 
in 19 15. In November, 1917, this product of the mad- 
man’s delirium became a reality for Russia. 

I repeat: there is nothing more ridiculous than the 
opinion widely prevalent abroad that the Bolsheviki 
seized power in Russia without any serious resistance 
on the part of the “passive” nation. In reality, there 
was not a city of importance in Russia where street 
fighting was not in progress in the autumn of 1917. 
In the summer of 1918 the democratic forces of Rus- 
sia created in the Volga region a government and an 
army for the defense of a free, republican order. The 
constant and stubborn resistance of the peasantry more 
than once provoked open rebellions. 

The struggle of the organized forces of democracy 
ended in complete failure, under the pressure of the 
supporters of dictatorship on the Right and the Left. 
The centrifugal political forces of Russian democracy 
were temporarily wiped off the stage of history, while 
the representatives of two dictatorships' — Red and 
White (Kolchak, Denikin, Wrangel) — contended for 
supremacy on the battlefields of civil war. 

It is a common failure of people to fail to comprehend 
events occurring before them or to perceive the causa- 
tion and connection of these events. It is because of 
this that the Bolsheviki have been able to deceive public 
opinion abroad into the belief that the civil war and 
the reign of terror had been forced upon them by the 
White generals and the other “bourgeois counter-revo- 
lutionists.” 

I have always been an uncompromising opponent 
of the activities of the so-called White dictators. I was 

[ 372 ] 



CONCLUSION 


and I remain an opponent of the blockade of Russia 
and of foreign military intervention in her struggle 
against the Bolsheviki. Nevertheless, one must not 
forget that all the evil done to Russia by the heirs of 
General Korniloff and by foreign intervention was only 
the inevitable consequence of the unpardonable crime 
committed by Lenin: the violent coup d’etat carried 
out in the name of a minority dictatorship, on the eve of 
the convocation of the Constituent Assembly. 

Even after their reactionary coup d’etat of Novem- 
ber seventh, the Bolsheviki still had an opportunity 
to extinguish the growing flames of civil war and to 
halt the destruction and dissolution of Russia. This 
they could have done by submitting to the authority of 
the Constitutent Assembly. 

Under the Provisional Government the Bolsheviki 
passed as the most devoted supporters of democracy. 
“The speediest possible convocation of the Constituent 
Assembly” was one of their most insistent demands. 
One of the outstanding accusations which had been 
hurled daily against the Provisional Government by 
Lenin and his followers was that we had sought to 
postpone unduly the convocation of the Constituent As- 
sembly. But all this democratic enthusiasm on the part 
of Lenin and his lieutenants was mere demagogic play 
on the sentiments of the people, who had faith in the 
Constituent Assembly and wished for its convocation. 

In reality, as Lenin himself put it quite bluntly at 
the meeting of the Central Committee of the Bolshevist 
party, October 23, 1917, the Bolshevist knew quite 
well that the Constituent Assembly would be against 
them. It was precisely for this reason that two weeks 
before the opening of the campaign for the election to 
the Constituent Assembly, the Bolsheviki executed their 
reactionary coup d’etat, made necessary to prevent 

[373 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 


Russia’s success in her negotiations with Austria fol- 
lowing’s Vienna’s plea for a separate peace. A sepa- 
rate peace with Austria, followed soon thereafter by 
peace with Bulgaria and Turkey and by the isolation 
of Germany would have meant the end of the War, the 
triumph of the Provisional Government, the victory of 
democracy and the end of all efforts at the establish- 
ment of dictatorship. It was the last chance the Bol- 
sheviki had and Lenin was determined not to lose it. 

The coup of November seventh sealed the fate of 
the Constituent Assembly. But neither the people nor 
even the leaders of the democratic anti-Bolshevist 
parties understood this at the beginning. They could 
not conceive the possibility of a Bolshevist attack on 
the sovereign will of the people, expressed by the Con- 
stituent Assembly. 

However, the Bolsheviki themselves hoped at first 
that with the overthrow of the “bourgeois” Provisional 
Government and with the machinery of power in their 
hands the elections to the Constituent Assembly would 
bring a Bolshevist majority. This, of course, failed 
to develop. 

The peasant majority of the first Russian Constit- 
uent Assembly, headed by the Social-Revolutionary 
party, did not betray the principles of democracy and 
the fundamental traditions of the liberation movement. 
It refused to give its approval to the coup d’etat of 
November seventh. 

On the very first day of its convocation (January 
5, 1918), the Constituent Assembly was dispersed by 
the bayonets of drunken Bolshevist sailors. Over the 
telephone from Smolny Institute Lenin demanded the 
shooting of the chosen representatives of the people. 
The demand failed to reach in time the proper destina- 
tion. 


[ 374 ] 



CONCLUSION 

On the morning of the convocation of the Con- 
stituent Assembly a peaceful demonstration of unarmed 
thousands in favor of the Constituent Assembly was 
dispersed by the rifles of Lettish Sharpshooters, 
brought into Petrograd for the defense of the Bol- 
sheviki against the people. On the same day A. I. 
Shingarioff and F. F. Kokoshkin, former members of 
the Provisional Government and duly elected members 
of the Constituent Assembly were foully murdered in 
their beds in a hospital by their own Bolshevik guards. 

In defending their reactionary policy before the 
workers of the West, the Bolsheviki justify their dis- 
solution of the Constituent Assembly by asserting that 
the assembly was composed of the “class enemies of 
the workers and peasants.” This is, of course, a 
palpable falsehood. Even were we to accept for the 
sake of argument the demagogic and deeply erroneous 
viewpoint according to which every nonsocialist is a 
“class enemy” of the workers and peasants, the num- 
ber of such enemies in the Constituent Assembly did 
not exceed fifteen.* And even those were not admitted 
to the Constituent Assembly by the Bolsheviki. Thus, 
the Assembly dispersed by the Bolsheviki consisted 
solely of representatives of democratic and socialist 
parties. 

Ten years have passed since the fall of the Provi- 
sional Government and the forcible dissolution of the 
Constituent Assembly created by that government, but 
the aims of the Bolshevist dictatorship remain as ir- 
reconcilable as ever with the fundamental life interests 
of Russia. 


•Two-thirds of the Constituent Assembly consisted of Social- 
Revolutionaries. There were less than a score Mensheviki and less 
than fifteen Constitutional-Democrats. The Bolsheviki, therefore, 
controlled less than one-third of the membership. 

[375 ] 



THE CATASTROPHE 

Leninism represents the most complete political, 
social and economic reaction, unprecedented in the his- 
tory of Europe. And like all reaction, the dictator- 
ship of the Political Bureau of the Central Committee 
of the Bolshevist party is: utterly incapable of any 
gradual, evolutionary and peaceful readjustment of its 
substance. 

To be sure, Russia has during the ten years re- 
turned from the complete economic paralysis of the 
period of integral Leninism (1918-20), styled shame- 
facedly by the Bolsheviki as “military communism,” 
through the “Nep” to purely capitalist forms.* But 
this capitalism represents a most backward, primitive, 
avaricious and poorly productive order, based upon 
the most cruel exploitation of the workers and peasants. 

The experiment of the Bolshevist reaction has 
proved once more that no social or political progress 
is possible without recognition and affirmation of the 
rights of the individual to complete liberty of thought, 
of conscience and of expression. 

Social welfare, popular enlightenment, domestic or- 
der and international security will not be assured to the 
Russian people as long as the Bolsheviki continue to 
hold Russia in the grip of their party dictatorship. For 
no social order capable of guaranteeing to the people 
the blessings of work and freedom is possible in a 
country the people of which are deprived of funda- 
mental human rights and civil liberties, of economic 
initiative and of the protection of law based and ad- 
ministered on the principle of equality. Where “party 

•The <tf Nep” — new economic policy — was proclaimed by Lenin in 
the spring of 1921, after the celebrated revolt of the Kronstadt 
sailors, a series of peasant uprisings and the terrible famine of that 
year, a famine such as had not been experienced by Russia since *613. 
The “Nep” restored internal economic freedom to the villages and 
freedom of trade in the cities— A. K. 

[376] 




CONCLUSION 


expediency” gives way to social and national interest 
there can be no civilization and no real progress. 

To-day, after ten years of Bolshevist domination, 
Russia stands at the starting point of the circle of 
Leninism : terrorism and severe economic crisis. These 
are the results of acute, unnatural, artificial economic 
and political causes, collectively expressed in the nature 
and substance of dictatorship, which stifles the inde- 
pendent, creative life and activity of the people. 

In the struggle for liberation Russia must inevitably 
return to the road of popular, national, democratic con- 
struction, the road upon which the Russian people em- 
barked — hesitatingly and with uncertain step — in 
March, 1917! 

(1) 


THE END 







