Ttiroij^h  The . . . . . 

rv  U  k!>  O I  r\  INI .  .  »  « 

REVOLUTION 


Al.BBRT  RHYS    WILLIAMS 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2009 


http://www.archive.org/details/throughrussianreOOwill 


€r 


\  .m>. 


The  life  of  an  illiterate  is  terrible! 
He  lives    in   a   dark  forest.      Everything 
frightens  him.     An  owl  hoots  at  night, — 
the  illiterate  thinks  it  is  the  were-wolf  howl- 
ing;   he  believes  in   devils   and  witches.     If 
lightning  strikes  his  hut,  he  says  God  is  pun- 
ishing him  for  his  sins;  he  does  not  know  how 
to  catch  the  lightning  with  a  rod!     The  crop 
is  poor— he  will  pray  to  God:   but  if  he  knew  how  better  to 
eultivate  Mother  Earth,  his  harvest  would  be  rich.     He  is  cruel  to  animals— 


Soviet  Educational  Poster— Children  of  Darkness  and  Superst^ 


e  friends  of  man.     He  does  not  know  Jioiv 
tend  them  or  utilize  them.     But  ivhen  the 
literate    goes    thru    school — he,    a    blind    man, 
nmediately  has  his  eyes  opened.     He  begins  tc 
nderstand  everything;   all  things  become  clear  to  him. 
e  sees  what    he   did  not  see   before.      It   h   as   if  he  had 
quired  a   hundred   eyes;  life  for   him    begins   to   be   a  joy.      All 
alters  begin  to  take  a  good  turn.     And  if  he  is  in  trouble,  he  will  take 
Ivice  from  his  friend,  the   book — who  will    not   deceive   him — and  he  will 
am  how  to  get  out  of  his  trouble. 


ssiNG  INTO  A  School:  then  Emekging  into  Light  and  Knowxedge 


THROUGH  THE 
RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 


BY 

ALBERT  RHYS  WILLIAMS 


Author  of 

In  the  Claws  of  the  German  Eagle 
Lenin,  the  Man  and  His  Work 
y6  Questions  and  Ansiuers 


Illustrated  with  photographs 
and  Russian  posters  in  colors 


BONI  AND  LIVERIGHT 

Publishers  New  York 

1921 


THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 


Copyright,  1921,  By 

BONI   AND  LiVERIGHT,    InC. 


Printed  in  the  United  States  of  America. 


To 

THE     WORKERS     AND     PEASANTS     OF     RUSSIA 
WHO  FELL  IN  DEFENSE  OF  THE  REVOLUTION 


"Against  riches,  power  and  knowl- 
edge for  the  few  you  began  a 
war,  and  with  glory  you  died  in 
order  that  riches,  power  and  knowl- 
edge    should    become     universal." 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 

Introduction i 

PART  I 
THE  MAKERS  OF  THE  REVOLUTION 

WITH  THE  WORKERS,  PEASANTS  AND  FIGHTERS 

CHAPTER 

I.  The  Bolsheviks  AND  THE  City   .      .  ii 

II.  Petrograd  Demonstrates     ...  25 

III.  A  Peasant  Interlude      ....  41 

IV.  The  Man  on  Horseback  ....  65 
V.  Comrades  of  the  Sea      ....  75 

PART  II 
THE  REVOLUTION  AND  THE  DAYS  AFTER 

AMONG  THE  WHITES  AND  THE  REDS 


VI.     '"'All  Power  to  the  Soviets" 
VII.    November  7 — A  New  Date  in  His 

TORY 

VIII.    Looting  the  Winter  Palace     . 
IX.     Red   Guards,   White    Guards,   and 

Blackguards 

X.     Mercy  or  Death  to  the  Whites? 
XI.     The  War  of  the  Classes 
XII.     Building  the  New  Order    . 


89 

98 
105 

119 
134 

156 
176 


vi  CONTENTS 

PART  III 
THE  OUTREACH  OF  THE  REVOLUTION 

ACROSS  SIBERIA  ON  THE  EXPRESS 

CHAPTER  PAGE 

XIII,  The  Steppes  Rise  Up      ....     193 

XIV.  The  Red  Convicts  of  Cherm    .      .     207 
XV.    The   Vladivostok    Soviet     .     .      .     218 

XVI.    The  Local  Soviet  AT  Work  .     .     .     228 

PART  IV. 
THE  TRIUMPH  OF  THE  REVOLUTION 

the    SOVIETS    AGAINST    THE    CAPITALIST   WORLD 

XVII.  The  Allies  Crush  the  Soviet    .      .  243 

XVIII.  The  Red  Funeral 257 

XIX.  Exit 268 

XX.  Retrospect 275 


appendix 

I.    The  Death  of  a  Red  Regiment 
II.    The  Death  Train  of  Siberia    . 

III.  The  Burial  of  Yanishev 

IV.  A  Circular  for  British  Soldiers 

V.  Yesterday  and  Today,  By  Gorky 

VI.  Declaration  of  the  Rights  of  the 

Toiling  and  Exploited  Peoples 
VII.    Posters  and  Placards 


287 
288 
292 

293 
295 

297 
301 


PHOTOGRAPHS  AND  POSTERS 

Children  of  Darkness  and  Light  (color)  Frontispiece 

FACING    PAGE 

One  of  the  Ten  Thousand  Soviets  ....  14 

Lenin  Speaks 15 

The  Red  Horseman  (color) 18 

A  Cathedral  of  Communist  Faith  ....  24 

"The  River  of  Red" 25 

The  Sailors  Enter  Petrograd 30 

Lying  Down  to  Escape  Death 31 

Peasant  Paradoxes 50 

The  Woodchoppers — The  Harvesters  ...  51 

Forward  to  the  Light  (color) 64 

Obliterating  the  Past 76 

The  Bronze  Czar  Beheaded 77 

The  Illiterate  is  a  Bhnd  Man  (color)      .      .  84 

Cossack,  with  Whom  are  You?  (color)    .      .  97 

A  Crack  Fighting  Regiment 104 

Red  Guards  Before  the  Winter  Palace           .  105 

The  Trojan  Horse  of  the  Bolsheviks  .      .      .  134 

vii 


viii        PHOTOGRAPHS  AND  POSTERS 

FACING   PAGE 

The  Sentinel 135 

Antonov,  Head  of  the  Red  Guards  .      .      .  142 

Bolsheviks  at  Study 150 

Bolsheviks  under  Arms — At  Work    .      .      .  151 

The  Sickle  and  the  Book  (color)  ....  168 

Palace  Passes  to  the  Children 184 

At  Play — Bolshevik  Milk  Maids  ....  184 

Clay  Modelling— The  Children's  Theatre      .  185 

Trotzky  Salutes 185 

The  Czar's  Surprise  Party 202 

A  Siberian  Mother  Mourns  her  Dead       .      .  203 

Ivan  Finds  a  True  Friend  (color)      .      .      .  218 

The  Steel  Ring  of  Bayonets 234 

A  Defender  of  Land  and  Liberty  .      .     .      .  235 

Intervention  Begins 256 

The  Red  Funeral 257 

Comrades!     Fight  Typhus  (color)     .      .      .  283 

A  Communist  Pays  the  Price 288 

On  the  Death  Train 289 

The  Kremlin  in  Moscow  (color)    ....  300 


INTRODUCTION 

In  Moscow  I  saw  two  peasant  soldiers  gazing 
at  a  poster  being  stuck  up  on  a  kiosk. 

"We  can't  read  a  word  of  it,"  they  cried,  indignant 
tears  in  their  eyes.  "The  Czar  only  wanted  us  to 
plough  and  fight  and  pay  taxes.  He  didn't  want  us 
to  read.    He  put  out  our  eyes." 

"To  put  out  the  eyes"  of  the  masses,  to  put  out 
their  minds  and  consciences,  was  the  deliberate 
policy  of  the  Russian  autocracy.  For  centuries  the 
people  were  steeped  in  ignorance,  narcotized  by  the 
church,  terrorized  by  the  Black  Hundreds,  dragooned 
by  the  Cossacks.  The  protesters  were  thrown  into 
dungeons,  exiled  to  hard  labor  in  Siberian  mines, 
and  hung  up  on  gibbets. 

In  191 7  the  social  and  economic  fabric  of  the 
land  was  shot  to  pieces.  Ten  million  peasants 
dragged  from  their  ploughs  were  dying  in  the 
trenches.  Millions  more  were  perishing  of  cold  and 
hunger  in  the  cities  while  the  corrupt  ministers 
intrigued  with  the  Germans  and  the  court  held 
bacchanalian  revels  with  the  notorious  monk, 
Rasputin.  Even  the  Cadet,  Milyukov,  was  forced 
to  say:  "History  does  not  know  of  another  govern- 
ment so  stupid,  so  dishonest,  so  cowardly,  so 
treacherous." 

All  governments  rest  upon  the  patience  of  the 
poor.  It  seems  everlasting,  but  there  comes  an  end 
to  it.    It  came  in  Russia  in  March,  191 7. 

The  masses  felt  that  more  vicious  even  than  the 


2  INTRODUCTION 

Kaiser  in  Berlin  was  their  own  Czar  in  Petrograd. 
Their  cup  of  bitterness  was  full.  They  marched 
forth  against  the  palaces  to  end  it  all.  First,  out  of 
the  Viborg  district,  came  the  working  women  crying 
for  bread.  Then  long  lines  of  workingmen.  The 
police  turned  the  bridges  to  prevent  them  entering 
the  city,  but  they  crossed  on  the  ice.  Looking  at 
the  red-flagged  throngs  from  his  window,  Milyukov 
exclaimed:  "There  goes  the  Russian  Revolution — 
and  it  will  be  cmshed  in  fifteen  minutes!" 

But  the  workingmen  came  on  in  spite  of  Cossack 
patrols  on  the  Nevsky.  They  came  on  in  face  of 
wilting  fire  from  machine  gun  nests.  They  came 
on  until  the  streets  were  littered  with  their  bodies. 
Still  they  came  on,  singing  and  pleading  until  soldiers 
and  Cossacks  came  over  to  the  people's  side,  and  on 
March  12  the  Romanov  dynasty,  which  had  mis- 
ruled Russia  for  300  years,  went  crashing  to  its 
doom.  Russia  went  mad  with  joy  while  the  whole 
world  rose  up  to  applaud  the  downfall  of  the  Czar. 

It  was  mainly  the  workers  and  soldiers  who  made 
the  Revolution.  They  had  shed  their  blood  for  it. 
Now  it  was  assumed  that  they  would  retire  in  the 
orthodox  manner  leaving  affairs  in  the  hands  of 
their  superiors.  The  people  had  taken  the  power 
away  from  the  Czarists.  Now  appeared  on  the 
scene  the  bankers  and  lawyers,  the  professors  and 
politicians,  to  take  the  power  away  from  the  people. 
They  said: 

"People,  you  have  won  a  glorious  victory.    The 
next  duty  is  the  formation  of  a  new  state.    It  is  a 
most  difficult  task,  but  fortunately,  we,  the  educated, 
understand  this  business  of  governing.    We  shall  set  | 
up  a  Provisional  Government.     Our  responsibility; 
is  heavy,  but  as  true  patriots  we  will  shoulder  it.  [ 


INTRODUCTION  3 

Noble  soldiers,  go  back  to  the  trenches.  Brave 
workingmen,  go  back  to  the  machines.  And 
peasants,  you  go  back  to  the  land." 

Now  the  Russian  masses  were  tractable  and  rea- 
sonable. So  they  let  these  bourgeois  gentlemen 
form  their  "Provisional  Government."  But  the 
Russian  masses  were  intelligent,  even  if  they  were 
not  literate.  Most  of  them  could  not  read  or 
write.  But  they  could  think.  So,  before  they  went 
back  to  the  trenches,  the  shops  and  the  land,  they 
set  up  little  organizations  of  their  own.  In  each 
munition  factory  the  workers  selected  one  of  their 
number  whom  they  trusted.  In  the  shoe  and  cotton 
factories  the  men  did  likewise.  So  in  the  brick- 
yards, the  glass-works  and  other  industries.  These 
representatives  elected  directly  from  their  jobs  were 
called  a  Soviet  (Council)  of  Workmen  Deputies. 

In  like  manner  the  armies  formed  Soviets  of  Sol- 
diers' Deputies,  the  villages  Soviets  of  Peasant 
Deputies. 

These  deputies  were  elected  by  trades  and  occupa- 
tions, not  by  districts.  The  Soviets  consequently 
were  filled,  not  with  glibly  talking  politicians,  but 
with  men  who  knew  their  business;  miners  who 
understood  mining,  machinists  who  understood  ma- 
chinery, peasants  who  understood  land,  soldiers 
who  understood  war,  teachers  who  understood 
children. 

The  Soviets  sprang  up  in  every  city,  town,  hamlet 
and  regiment  throughout  Russia.  Within  a  few 
weeks  after  the  old  state-apparatus  of  Czardom 
went  to  pieces,  one-sixth  the  surface  of  the  earth 
was  dotted  over  with  these  new  social  organizations 
— no  more  striking  phenomenon  in  all  history. 

The    commander    of    the    Russian    battleship 


4  INTRODUCTION 

Peresvet  told  me  his  story:  "My  ship  was  off  the 
coast  of  Italy  when  the  news  arrived.  As  I  an- 
nounced the  Czar's  fall  some  sailors  shouted,  'Long 
live  the  Soviet.'  That  very  day  on  board  ship  a 
Soviet  was  formed,  in  all  aspects  like  the  one  in 
Petrograd.  I  regard  the  Soviet  as  the  natural 
organization  of  the  Russian  people,  finding  its  root 
in  the  mir  (commune)  of  the  village  and  the  artel 
(co-operative  syndicate)  of  the  city." 

Others  find  the  Soviet  idea  in  the  old  New  Eng- 
land town-meetings  or  the  city  assemblies  of  ancient 
Greece.  But  the  Russian  workingman's  contact 
with  the  Soviet  was  much  more  direct  than  that. 
He  had  tried  out  the  Soviet  in  the  abortive  Revolu- 
tion of  1905.  He  had  found  it  a  good  instrument 
then.    He  was  using  it  now. 

After  the  Czar's  overthrow  there  was  a  short 
season  of  good  will  amongst  all  classes  known  as 
the  "honeymoon  of  the  Revolution."  Then  the  big 
fight  began — a  battle  royal  between  the  bourgeoisie 
and  the  proletariat  for  the  mastery  of  state  power 
in  Russia.  On  the  one  side  the  capitalists,  land- 
lords and  finally  the  intelligentsia  lining  up  behind 
the  Provisional  Government.  On  the  other  side  the 
workmen,  soldiers  and  peasants  rallying  to  the 
Soviets. 

I  was  set  down  in  the  midst  of  this  colossal  con- 
flict. For  fourteen  months  I  lived  in  the  villages 
with  the  peasants,  in  the  trenches  with  the  soldiers, 
and  in  the  factories  with  the  workers.  I  saw  the 
Revolution  thru  their  eyes  and  took  part  in  most 
of  the  dramatic  episodes. 

I  have  used  the  names  Communist  and  Bolshevik 
interchangeably,  tho  the  party  did  not  officially 
change  its  name  to  Communist  until  191 8. 


INTRODUCTION  5 

In  the  French  Revolution  the  great  word  was 
"Citizen."  In  the  Russian  Revolution  the  great 
word  is  "Comrade!" — tovarishtch.  I  have  written 
it  more  simply  tovarish. 

For  the  right  to  use  here  some  of  my  articles  I 
am  indebted  to  the  editors  of  Asia,  the  Yale  Review, 
the  Dial,  the  Nation,  the  New  Republic,  and  the 
New  York  Evening  Post. 

The  visitor  to  Soviet  Russia  is  struck  by  the 
multitudes  of  posters — in  factories  and  barracks, 
on  walls  and  railway-cars,  on  telephone-poles — 
everywhere.  Whatever  the  Soviet  does,  it  strives 
to  make  the  people  understand  the  reason  for  it. 
If  there  is  a  new  call  to  arms,  if  rations  must  be 
cut  down,  if  new  schools  or  courses  of  instruction 
are  opened,  a  poster  promptly  appears  telling  why, 
and  how  the  people  can  co-operate.  Some  of  these 
posters  are  crude  and  hurried,  others  are  works  of 
art.  Ten  of  them  are  reproduced  in  this  book  in 
almost  the  exact  colors  of  the  originals.  The  cost 
has  been  borne  by  friends  of  Russia,  and  the  reader 
is  particularly  indebted  to  Mrs.  Jessie  Y.  Kimball 
and  Mr.  Aaron  Berkman. 

On  the  next  page  is  reproduced  the  first  issue  of 
the  first  revolutionary  newspaper — the  official  Soviet 
News  (Izvestia).  It  was  published  on  the  day  of 
the  Czar's  fall  and  every  day  since  then. 


Iir2  1—28  ifieBpann  1917  roAa 


Sl!@T| 

Cropaji  BnocTb  aoseAa  cipoHy  ao  noiHaro  pa3Bono,  a  HopoflT>  ao  ronoAOHln.  T6p« 
nliTb  Aakmw  <a-aAo  HeaojMoadifl.  hjgce/ieH.le  fletporpoAa  Bbiujno  ho  y/iMuy,  MTo6bi  30JiBHTb 
o  CBoeMTs  HCAOBO/ibCTflfe.  tfo  BCTpt>Trt;Hr>a)mgTWr Di'iBciu  Ki<fa'&o^-i»H'c«*fea^ apggJttfeMtga^Q' 

Aa;iO   HOPOAV   CBMHCU-b, 

Ho  COJIAOTbl   He  30XOTt>/1H   HTTM   npOTHBT*   HOpOAa   H  B03CTanM  npOTHBTj  npOBMTOlbCTBO* 

BMt>CTt>  cb  HapoAOMi>  OHH  3axB0THn>i  opywlct  BoeHHbie  cMOAbi  H  poA^  Ba>KHbixi>  ppasH' 

TenbCTBCHHblXb  yMpe>KAeHlB. 

6opb6a  eiue  npoAonwa^TO;  OHa  nonMH?  6biTb  noBeA^Ha  no  KOHua.  Crapasi  enacTb 
nonwHa  6biTb  OKOHnarenbHO  HHaeeprHyra  m  ycrynHTb  MtcTO  HapoAKOMy  npaeneHiio.  6> 
STOAVb  cnaccHic  PocciH. 

flnn  ycntujHaro  saBepiueHlj*  6opb6bi  ei  HHTepeca^cb  neMORpatin  xapoA'b  AOmxeHi 
C03AaTb  CBOio  co6cTBeHHyK>  BnacTHyK)  opraHHsauiio. 

Bnepa  27  OeBpaxn  bt>  cmoAHu'b  oCpasoBaxcfl  CoBt)im>  Pa6c)MHXT>  AcnymainoB"b— 
HST}  BbiCSopHbixi>  npcAcmaBHrneAeii  3aB0A0BT>  h  (t)a6pMk'b,  B03cmaBmHXT>  BOWHckHX'b 
HQcmeii,  a  mak>keAeMokpamHHecknx'b  h  comaAHcmHHeckHXTj  napmiii  M- rpyrinij. 

CoBt)rm>  PaeoHHxij.  AenymamoB-b  sacfcAajomiii  BT>rocyABpcmBeiiHOH  Ayi'^'Bi  Cina- 
BMiTTb  CBoeii  ocHOBHOvi  saAaHCii  opraHHsauiio  HQpoAHbixT>  chatj  h  6opb6y  30  ckoHHOr 
Te/ibHoe  ynpoHCHie  nonnTMHecKoP)  CBo6oflbi  m  HapctiHaro  npas/ieHisi  B"i>  Pocciw. 

CoBtTb  Ha3HaHM/i-b  pa^iOHHuj^-b  KOM-v,Hccapo^"b  ana  yaaHdB/ieHia  HapOflHOfl  B/iacTH  bT)  paflo- 
na)rb    nerporpaaa. 

npumaujaeM-b  ece  Hacenehie  CTonnubi  neMeaneHHO  cnnoTHTbca  Boxpyrb  CoBtra,  oCpasosaa 
HtcTHbie  KOMHieTbi  B\>  paRoHax'b  M   B3aTb  B"b  CBOH  pyKM  ynpasneHie  Bctwn  wtaHblMM  flt/iaMH. 

Bet  BrttcTt,  o6mH«n  wnam  6yz;eM-b  dopoTbca  3a  nonnoe  yapaHeHie  napa^o  npaBHTenbasa  » 
co3UBi>  y^peABTe;n>Raro  coSpanln,  BsGpaoBaro  na  ocBoot  BceoCmaro  p(;BBar<s  iqui« 
uoro  B  TO^Baro  ssCopaTe^iKBaro  upasa. 


6 


NEWS  OF  THE 


of  Workmen  Deputies. 


N9  1~  March  13,1917 


NO  I 


To  the  population  of  Petroqrad  and  Russia 

From  the  Soviet  of  Workmen's  Deputies. 

The  old  authorities  brought  the  country  to  ruin  and  the  people  to  starvation- 
It  became  impossible  to  endure  it  longer.  The  population  of  Petrograd  came  out 
in  the  streets  to  express  its  discontent.  'It  was  met  with  guns.  Instead  of  bread, 
the  government  of  the  Czar  gave  the  people  bullets. 

But  the  soldiers  have  refused  to  go  against  the  people  and  have  revolted 
against  the  government.  Together  with  the  civilians  they  have  seized  the  armories 
the  military  stores  and  many  important  government  institutions. 

The  struggle  is  still  going  on;  it  must  be  brought  to  an  end.  The  old  power 
must  be  deposed  and  replaced  by  a  people's  government.  This  is  the  salvation 
of  Russia. 

To  secure  a  victorious  end  of  this  struggle  in  the  interests  of  democracy,  the 
people  must  create  an  organization  of  its  own  power. 

Yesterday,  March  the  12th,  a  Soviet  of  Workmen  Deputies  was  formed  in 
the  Capital.  It  consists  of  representatives  elected  from  the  shops  and  factories, 
the  revolting  military  detachments  and  also  from  democratic  and  socialistic  parties 
and  groups. 

The  Soviet  of  Workmen  Deputies  now  in  session  at  the  Imperial  Duma  faces 
as  its  basic  problem,  the  organization  of  the  people's  forces  in  the  battle  for  per- 
manent political  freedom  and  self-government  in  Russia. 

The  Soviet  has  appointed  district  commissars  to  execute  the  people's  authority 
in  the  districts  of  Petrograd. 

We  call  upon  the  inhabitants  of  the  capital  to  rally  around  the  Soviet,  to 
form  district  committees  and  to  take  the  administration  of  local  affairs  in  their 
own  hands. 

All  together,  we  unite  our  forces  to  fight  for  the  complete  destruction  of  the 
old  government,  and  for  the  calling  of  a  Constituent  Assembly,  elected  on  the 
basis  of  a  universal,  equal,  direct  and  secret  ballot. 


The  Soviet  of  Workers'  Deputies. 


[This  is   a 
page.} 


reproduction  in  English   of  the  Russian   text   on  the  opposite 


PART  I 
THE  MAKERS  OF  THE  REVOLUTION 

WITH  THE  PEASANTS,  WORKERS  AND  FIGHTERS 


CHAPTER  I 

THE  BOLSHEVIKS   AND  THE   CITY 

/^N  a  white  night  of  early  June,  191 7,  I  first 
^-^  entered  Petrograd,  the  city  that  Hes  almost 
within  the  Arctic  Circle.  Tho  it  was  midnight,  the 
wide  squares  and  prospekts  bathed  in  the  soft  spec- 
tral light  of  this  northern  night  were  all  alluring. 

Past  blue-domed  barbaric  churches  and  the  silver 
rippling  Catherine  Canal  we  drove  along  the  Neva, 
while  across  the  river  the  slender  spire  of  Peter  and 
Paul  rose  like  a  golden  needle.  Then  by  the  Winter 
Palace,  the  burnished  dome  of  Saint  Isaac's  and 
countless  shafts  and  statues  to  the  memory  of  Czars 
who  had  gone. 

But  all  these  were  monuments  to  rulers  of  the  past. 
They  had  no  hold  on  me  for  I  was  interested  in 
the  rulers  of  the  present.  I  wanted  to  hear  the 
great  Kerensky  then  at  the  zenith  of  his  spell-bind- 
ing powers.  I  wanted  to  meet  the  ministers  of  the 
Provisional  Government.  I  met  many  of  them, 
heard  them  and  talked  with  them.  They  were  able, 
amiable  and  eloquent.  But  I  felt  they  were  not  real 
representatives  of  the  masses,  that  they  were 
"Caliphs  of  the  passing  hour." 

II 


12    THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

Instinctively  I  sought  out  the  rulers  of  the  future, 
the  men  in  the  Soviets  elected  directly  out  of  the 
trenches,  factories  and  farms.  These  Soviets  had 
sprung  up  in  almost  every  army  city  and  village  of 
Russia,  over  one-sixth  of  the  surface  of  the  earth. 
These  local  Soviets  were  now  sending  their  delegates 
to  the  First  All-Russian  Congress  of  Soviets  in  Petro- 
grad. 

I  found  the  Soviet  in  session  in 
The  First  All-Russian  the  Military  Academy.  A  tab- 
Congress  of  Soviets.        let  recording  the  fact  that  "His 

Imperial  Majesty,  Nicholas  II, 
made  this  place  happy  by  his  presence  January  28, 
191 6,"  still  hung  on  its  walls,  the  one  relic  of  the 
glittering  past. 

The  gold-braided  officers,  the  smiling  courtiers, 
and  lackeys  had  been  swept  from  the  halls.  His 
Imperial  Majesty,  the  Czar,  was  gone.  His  Repub- 
lican Majesty,  the  Revolution,  ruled  here  now, 
acclaimed  by  hundreds  of  black-bloused,  khaki-clad 
delegates. 

Here  were  men  coming  up  from  the  ends  of  the 
earth.  From  the  frozen  Arctic  and  burning  Tur- 
kestan they  hailed,  slant-eyed  Tartars  and  fair- 
haired  Cossacks,  Russians,  Big  and  Little,  Poles, 
Letts  and  Lithuanians — all  tribes  and  tongues  and 
costumes.  Here  were  toil-scarred  delegates  from 
the  mines,  the  forge  and  the  farm,  battle-scarred 
soldiers  from  the  trenches  and  sea-bronzed  sailors 


THE  BOLSHEVIKS  AND  THE  CITY    13 

from  the  five  fleets  of  Russia.  Here  were  the 
"March"  revolutionists,  colorless  and  quiet  before 
the  March  storm  blew  the  Czar  from  his  throne, 
but  now  daubed  with  red  revolutionary  paint  and 
calling  themselves  Socialists.  Here  were  veterans 
of  the  Revolution,  loyal  to  the  cause  thru  long  years 
of  hunger,  exile  and  Siberia,  tried  and  tested  by 
suffering. 

Cheidze,  the  President  of  the  Soviet  Congress, 
asked  me  why  I  came  to  Russia.  "Ostensibly  as  a 
journalist,"  I  told  him.  "But  the  real  reason  is  the 
Revolution.  It  was  irresistible.  It  drew  me  here  like 
a  magnet.  I  am  here  because  I  could  not  stay  away." 

He  asked  me  to  address  the  Congress.  The 
"Soviet  News"  (Izvestia)  of  July  8,  reports  my 
words  thus: 

Comrades:  I  bring  you  greetings  from  the  Socialists  of  America. 
We  do  not  venture  to  tell  you  here  how  to  run  a  Revolution. 
Rather  we  come  here  to  learn  its  lesson  and  to  express  our  ap- 
preciation for  your  great  achievements. 

A  dark  cloud  of  despair  and  violence  was  hanging  over  man- 
kind threatening  to  extinguish  the  torch  of  civilization  in  streams 
of  blood.  But  you  arose,  comrades,  and  the  torch  flamed  up 
anew.  You  have  resurrected  in  all  hearts  everywhere  a  new 
faith  in   freedom. 

Equality,  Brotherhood,  Democracy,  are  great  and  beautiful 
words.  But  to  the  unemployed  millions  they  are  merely  words.  To 
the  160,000  hungry  children  of  New  York  they  are  hollow  words. 
To  the  exploited  classes  of  France  and  England  they  are  mock- 
ing words.     Your  duty  is  to  change  these   words  into   reality. 

You  have  made  the  Political  Revolution.  Freed  from  the 
threat  of  German  militarism  your  next  task  is  the  Social  Revo- 
lution.    Then  the  workers  of  the  world  will  no  longer  look  to 


14   THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

the  West,  but  to  the  East— toward  great  Russia,  to  the  Field 
of  Mars  here,  in  Petrograd,  where  lie  the  first  martyrs  of  your 
Revolution. 

"Long  live  free  Russia!"    "Long  live  the  Revolution!"    "Long 
live  Peace  to  the  World!" 

In  his  reply  Cheidze  made  a  plea  for  the  workers 
of  all  nations  to  bring  pressure  to  bear  on  their  gov- 
ernments to  stop  "the  horrible  butchery  which  is 
disgracing  humanity  and  beclouding  the  great  days 
of  the  birth  of  Russian  freedom." 

A  storm  of  cheers,  and  the  Congress  took  up  the 
order  of  the  day — the  Ukraine,  Education,  War- 
Widows  and  Orphans,  Provisioning  the  Front,  Re- 
pairing the  Railways,  etc.  This  should  have  been 
the  business  of  the  Provisional  Government.  But 
that  Government  was  flimsy  and  incompetent.  Its 
ministers  were  orating,  wrangling,  scheming  against 
one  another  and  entertaining  diplomats.  But  some- 
body must  do  the  hard  work.  By  default  it  was 
already  passing  into  the  hands  of  these  Soviets  of 
the  people. 

This  First  Congress  of  Soviets  was  domi- 

Enter  the     nated    by    the   intelligentsia — doctors,    en- 

Bolsheviks.  gineers,    journalists.      They    belonged    to 

political  parties  known  as  Menshevik  and 

Socialist-Revolutionary.     At  the  extreme  left  sat 

107  delegates  of  a  decided  proletarian  cast — plain 

soldiers  and  workingmen.     They  were  aggressive, 

united  and  spoke  with  great  earnestness.    They  were 

often  laughed  and  hooted  down — always  voted  down. 


.g      <U.; 


^  > 


•Si  CO 
>  ^ 


•:::  Oh 


o 
o    u5 


THE  BOLSHEVIKS  AND  THE  CITY    15 

"Those  are  the  Bolsheviks,"  my  bourgeois  guide 
informed  me,  venomously.  "Mostly  fools,  fanatics 
and  German  agents."  That  was  all.  And  no  more 
than  that  could  one  learn  in  hotel  lobbies,  salons,  or 
diplomatic  circles. 

Happily,  I  went  elsewhere  for  information.  I 
went  into  the  factory  districts.  In  Nijni  I  met  Sar- 
tov,  a  mechanic  who  invited  me  to  his  home.  A  long 
rifle  stood  in  the  corner  of  the  main  room. 

"Every  workingman  has  a  gun  now,"  Sartov  ex- 
plained. "Once  we  used  it  to  fight  for  the  Czar — 
now  we  fight  for  ourselves." 

In  another  corner  hung  an  ikon  of  Saint  Nicholas, 
a  tiny  flame  burning  before  it. 

"My  wife  is  still  religious,"  Sartov  apologized. 
"She  believes  in  the  Saint — thinks  he  will  fetch  me 
safely  thru  the  Revolution.  As  tho  a  saint  would 
help  a  Bolshevik!"  he  laughed.  "Yeh!  Boguf 
There's  no  harm  in  it.  Saints  are  queer  devils.  No 
telling  what  one  of  them  may  do." 

The  family  slept  on  the  floor,  insisting  that  I  take 
the  bed,  because  I  was  an  American.  In  this  room 
I  found  another  American.  In  the  soft  gleam  of 
the  ikon-light  his  face  looked  down  at  me  from 
the  wall,  the  great,  homely,  rugged  face  of  Abraham 
Lincoln.  From  that  pioneer's  hut  in  the  woods  of 
Illinois  he  had  made  his  way  to  this  workingman's 
hut  here  upon  the  Volga.  Across  half  a  century, 
and  half  a  world,  the  fire  in  Lincoln's  heart  had 


1 6    THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

leaped  to  touch  the  heart  of  a  Russian  workman 
groping  for  the  light. 

As  his  wife  paid  her  devotion  to  Saint  Nicholas, 
the  great  Wonder-Worker,  so  he  paid  his  devotion 
to  Lincoln,  the  great  Emancipator.  He  had  given 
Lincoln's  picture  the  place  of  honor  in  his  home. 
And  then  he  had  done  a  startling  thing.  On  the 
lapel  of  Lincoln's  coat  he  had  fixed  a  button,  a 
large  red  button  bearing  on  it  the  word,  B-o-1- 
s-h-e-v-i-k. 

Of  Lincoln's  life  Sartov  knew  little.  He  knew 
only  that  he  strove  against  injustice,  freed  the 
slaves,  that  he  was  reviled  and  persecuted.  To 
Sartov,  that  was  the  earnest  of  his  kinship  with  the 
Bolsheviks.  As  an  act  of  highest  tribute  he  had 
decorated  Lincoln  with  this  emblem  of  red. 

I  found  that  factories  and  boulevards  were  differ- 
ent worlds.  A  world  of  difference,  too,  in  the  way  they 
said  the  word  "Bolshevik."  Spoken  on  the  boule- 
vards with  a  sneer  and  a  curse,  on  the  lips  of  the 
workers  it  was  becoming  a  term  of  praise  and  honor. 

The  Bolsheviks  did  not  mind  the  bourgeoisie. 
They  were  busy  expounding  their  program  to  the 
workers.  This  program  I  got  first  hand  from  dele- 
gates coming  up  to  the  Soviet  Congress  from  the 
Russian  Army  in  France. 

"Our  demand  is,  not  to  continue  the  war,  but  to 
continue  the  Revolution,"  these  Bolsheviks  blurted 
out. 

"Why  are  you  talking  about  Revolution?"  I  asked, 


THE  BOLSHEVIKS  AND  THE  CITY     17 

taking  the  role  of  Devil's  Advocate.  "You  have  had 
your  Revolution,  haven't  you?  The  Czar  and  his 
crowd  are  gone.  That  was  what  you  were  aiming 
at  for  the  last  hundred  years,  wasn't  it?" 

"Yes,"  they  replied.  "The  Czar  is  gone,  but  the 
Revolution  is  just  begun.  The  overthrow  of  the 
Czar  is  only  an  incident.  The  workers  didn't  take 
the  government  out  of  the  hands  of  one  ruling  class, 
the  monarchists,  in  order  to  put  it  into  the  hands 
of  another  ruling  class,  the  bourgeoisie.  No  matter 
what  name  you  give  it,  slavery  is  the  same." 

I  said  the  world  at  large  held  that  Russia's  task 
now  was  to  create  a  republic,  like  France  or  Amer- 
ica; to  establish  in  Russia  the  institutions  of  the 
West. 

"But  that  is  precisely  what  we  don't  want  to  do," 
they  responded.  "We  don't  cherish  much  admira- 
tion for  your  institutions  or  governments.  We  know 
that  you  have  poverty,  unemployment  and  oppres- 
sion. Slums  on  one  hand,  palaces  on  the  other.  On 
the  one  side,  capitalists  fighting  workmen  with  lock- 
outs, blacklists,  lying  press,  and  thugs.  Workmen 
on  the  other  side,  fighting  back  with  strikes,  boy- 
cotts, bombs.  We  want  to  put  an  end  to  this  war  of 
the  classes.  We  want  to  put  an  end  to  poverty.  Only 
the  workers  can  do  this,  only  a  communistic  system. 
That  is  what  we  are  going  to  have  in  Russia." 

"In  other  words,"  I  said,  "you  want  to  escape  the 
laws  of  evolution.  By  some  magic  you  expect  sud- 
denly to  transfer  Russia  from  a  backward  agri- 


i8    THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

cultural  state  into  a  highly  organized  co-operative 
commonwealth.  You  are  going  to  jump  out  of  the 
eighteenth  century  into  the  twenty-second." 

"We  are  going  to  have  a  new  social  order,"  they 
replied,  "but  we  don't  depend  on  jumping  or  magic. 
We  depend  upon  the  massed  power  of  the  workmen 
and  peasants." 

"But  where  are  the  brains  to  do  this?"  I  inter- 
rupted. "Think  of  the  colossal  ignorance  of  the 
masses." 

"Brains!"  they  exclaimed  hotly.  "Do  you  think 
we  bow  down  before  the  brains  of  our  'betters'? 
What  could  be  more  brainless  and  stupid  and  crimi- 
nal than  this  war?  And  who  are  guilty  of  it?  Not 
the  working  classes,  but  the  governing  classes  in 
every  country.  Surely  the  ignorance  and  inexperi- 
ence of  workmen  and  peasants  could  not  make  a 
worse  mess  than  generals  and  statesmen  with  all 
their  brains  and  culture.  We  believe  in  the  masses. 
We  believe  in  their  creative  force.  And  we  must 
make  the  Social  Revolution  anyhow." 

"And  why?"  I  asked. 

"Because  it  is  the  next  step  in  the  evolution  of 
the  race.  Once  we  had  slavery.  It  gave  way  to 
feudalism.  That  in  turn  gave  way  to  capitalism. 
Now  capitalism  must  leave  the  stage.  It  has  served 
its  purpose.  It  has  made  possible  large  scale  pro- 
duction, world-wide  industrialism.  But  now  it  must 
make  its  exit.  It  is  the  breeder  of  imperialism  and 
war,  the  strangler  of  labor,  the  destroyer  of  civiliza- 


Bolshevik  Poster  in  Russian  and  Arabic  Characters  for  the  Peoples 
OF  the  East:  "Proletarians  of  All  Countries,  Unite!" 


THE  BOLSHEVIKS  AND  THE  CITY    19 

tion.  It  must  in  its  turn  give  place  to  the  next  phase 
— the  system  of  Communism.  It  is  the  historic  mis- 
sion of  the  working-class  to  usher  in  this  new  social 
order,  Tho  Russia  is  a  primitive  backward  land  it 
is  for  us  to  begin  the  Social  Revolution.  It  is  for  the 
working-class  of  other  countries  to  carry  it  on." 

A  daring  program — to  build  the  world  anew. 

No  wonder  the  ideas  of  James  Duncan  of  the 
Root  Mission  seemed  trivial  as  he  came  with  tedious 
talk  of  craft  unions,  the  union  label,  and  the  eight- 
hour  day.  His  hearers  were  amused  or  bored.  Next 
day  a  newspaper  reported  the  two-hour  speech  thus: 
"Last  night  the  Vice-President  of  the  American 
Federation  of  Labor  addressed  the  Soviets.  Coming 
over  the  Pacific  he  evidently  prepared  two  speeches, 
one  for  the  Russian  people  and  the  other  for  the 
ignorant  Eskimos — obviously  last  night  he  thought 
he  was  addressing  the  Eskimos." 

For  the  Bolsheviks  to  put  forward  a  big  revolu- 
tionary program  was  one  thing;  to  get  it  accepted  by 
a  nation  of  160,000,000  was  quite  another — espe- 
cially as  the  Bolshevik  Party  counted  then  not  more 
than  150,000. 

Many  factors,  however,  were 
Bolsheviks  Trained  conspiring  to  give  Bolshevik 
in  America.  ideas  prestige  with  the  people. 

In  the  first  place  the  Bolsheviks 
understood  the  people.  They  were  strong  among 
the  more  literate  strata,  like  the  sailors,  and  com- 


20    THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

prised  largely  the  artisans  and  laborers  of  the  cities. 
Sprung  directly  from  the  people's  loins  they  spoke 
the  people's  language,  shared  their  sorrows  and 
thought  their  thoughts. 

It  is  not  quite  correct  to  say  that  the  Bolsheviks 
understood  the  people.  They  were  the  people.  So 
they  were  trusted.  The  Russian  workingman,  be- 
trayed so  long  by  the  classes  above  him,  puts  faith 
only  in  his  own. 

This  was  brought  home  to  a  friend  of  mine  in  a 
grotesque  manner.  Krasnoschekov  is  his  name,  now 
President  of  the  Far  East  Republic.  Coming  from 
the  Workers'  Institute  in  Chicago,  he  entered  the 
lists  as  a  champion  of  the  workers.  An  able,  elo- 
quent man,  he  was  elected  President  of  the  City 
Council  of  Nikolaievsk.  The  bourgeois  paper 
promptly  appeared  with  an  assault  upon  him  as  an 
"immigrant  roustabout." 

"Citizens  of  great  Russia,"  it  asked,  "do  you  not 
feel  the  shame  of  being  ruled  by  a  porter,  a  window 
cleaner  from  Chicago?" 

Krasnoschekov  wrote  out  a  hot  reply,  pointing 
out  his  distinction  in  America  as  lawyer  and  edu- 
cator. On  the  way  to  the  newspaper  with  his  article 
he  turned  in  at  the  Soviet,  wondering  how  much  this 
assault  had  hurt  him  in  the  eyes  of  the  workers. 

"Tovarish  Krasnoschekov!"  someone  shouted  as 
he  opened  the  door.  With  a  cheer  the  men  rose  to 
their  feet.  "Nash!  Nash!"  (Ours!  Ours!)  they 
cried,  grasping  his  hand.    "We  just  read  the  paper, 


THE  BOLSHEVIKS  AND  THE  CITY    21 

comrade.  It  made  us  all  glad.  We  always  liked 
you,  tho  we  thought  you  were  a  bourgeois.  Now 
we  find  out  you  are  one  of  us,  a  real  workingman, 
and  we  love  you.    We'll  do  anything  for  you." 

Ninety-six  per  cent  of  the  Bolshevik  Party  were 
workingmen.  Of  course  the  Party  had  its  intelli- 
gentsia, not  sprung  directly  from  the  soil.  But 
Lenin  and  Trotzky  lived  close  enough  to  the  hunger 
line  to  know  the  thoughts  of  the  poor. 

The  Bolsheviks  were  mostly  young  men  not  afraid 
of  responsibility,  not  afraid  to  die,*  and,  in  sharp 
contrast  to  the  upper-classes,  not  afraid  to  work. 
Many  of  them  became  my  friends,  particularly  the 
exiles  returning  on  the  immigrant  tide  now  flowing 
back  from  America. 

There  was  Yanishev,  who  was  literally  a  workman 
of  the  world.  Ten  years  earlier  he  had  been  driven 
out  of  Russia  for  inciting  his  fellow-peasants  against 
the  Czar.  He  had  lived  like  a  water-rat  on  the  docks 
of  Hamburg:  he  had  dug  coal  in  the  pits  of  Austria 
and  had  poured  steel  in  the  foundries  of  France. 
In  America  he  had  been  tanned  in  leather-vats, 
bleached  in  textile  mills  and  clubbed  in  strike-lines. 
His  travels  had  given  him  a  knowledge  of  four 
languages  and  an  ardent  faith  in  Bolshevism.  The 
peasant  had  become  now  an  industrial  proletarian. 

Some  satirist  has  defined  a  proletarian  as  a  "talk- 
ing workingman."  Yanishev  was  not  a  talker  by 
nature.    But  now  he  had  to  talk.    The  cry  of  millions 

♦Appendix  I.    The  Death  of  a  Red  Regiment. 


22    THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

of  his  fellow- workers  for  the  light  drew  the  words 
to  his  lips  and  in  mills  and  mines  he  spoke  as  no 
intellectual  could  speak.  Night  and  day  he  toiled 
imtil  midsummer  came  and  he  took  me  on  a  memo- 
rable trip  to  the  villages. 

Another  comrade  was  Woskov,  formerly  agent 
of  New  York  Carpenters'  Union  No.  1008,  now  in 
the  Workers'  Committee  that  ran  the  rifle  factory  at 
Sestroretsk.  Another  was  Volodarsky,  virtually  a 
galley-slave  of  the  Soviet  and  deliriously  happy  in  it. 
Once  he  exclaimed  to  me:  "I  have  had  more  real 
joy  in  these  few  weeks  than  any  fifty  men  ought  to 
have  in  all  their  lives! "  There  was  Neibut,  with  his 
pack  of  books  and  with  eyes  glowing  over  the  English 
in  Brailsford's  The  War  of  Steel  and  Gold!  To 
Bolshevik  propaganda  these  immigrants  brought 
Western  speed  and  method.  In  Russian  there  is  no 
word  "efficient."  These  young  zealots  were  prodi- 
gies of  efficiency  and  energy. 

The  center  of  Bolshevik  action  was  Petrograd. 
In  this  there  is  the  fine  irony  of  history.  This  city 
was  the  pride  and  glory  of  the  great  Czar  Peter. 
He  found  a  swamp  here  and  left  a  brilliant  capital. 
To  make  a  foundation  he  sunk  into  these  marshes 
forests  of  trees  and  quarries  of  stone.  It  is  a  colossal 
monument  to  Peter's  iron  will.  At  the  same  time 
it  is  a  monument  of  colossal  cruelty,  for  it  is  built 
not  only  on  millions  of  wooden  piles,  but  on  millions 
of  human  bones. 

Like  cattle  the  workmen  were  herded  in  these 


THE  BOLSHEVIKS  AND  THE  CITY    23 

swamps  to  perish  of  cold  and  hunger  and  scurvy. 
As  fast  as  they  were  swallowed  up  more  serfs  were 
driven  in.  They  dug  the  soil  with  bare  hands  and 
sticks,  carrying  it  off  in  caps  and  aprons.  With 
thudding  hammers,  cracking  whips,  and  groans  of 
the  dying,  Petrograd  rose  like  the  Pyramids,  in  the 
tears  and  anguish  of  slaves. 

Now  the  descendants  of  these  slaves  were  in 
revolt.  Petrograd  had  become  the  Head  of  the 
Revolution.  Every  day  it  started  out  missionaries 
on  long  crusading  tours.  Every  day  it  poured  out 
bales  and  carloads  of  Bolshevik  gospel  in  print.  In 
June,  Petrograd  was  publishing  Pravda  {Truth)* 
The  Soldier,  The  Village  Poor,  in  millions  of  copies. 
''All  done  on  German  money,"  said  the  Allied 
observers,  as  ostrich-like,  they  sat  with  heads  buried 
in  the  boulevard  cafes,  believing  what  they  preferred 
to  believe.  Had  they  turned  the  corner  they  would 
have  seen  a  long  line  of  men  filing  past  a  desk,  each 
laying  on  it  a  contribution,  ten  copecks,  ten  rubles, 
maybe  a  hundred.  These  were  workers,  soldiers, 
even  peasants,  doing  their  bit  for  the  Bolshevik 
press. 

The  greater  the  success  of  the  Bolsheviks,  the 
louder  the  hue  and  cry  against  them.  While  the 
bourgeois  press  praised  the  sense  and  moderation 
of  the  other  parties,  it  called  for  an  iron  fist  for  the 
Bolsheviks.  While  "Babushka"  and  Kerensky  were 

♦Reproduction  of  this  newspaper  on  pages  ip6-7. 


24    THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

given  regal  quarters  in  the  Winter  Palace,  the  Bol- 
sheviks were  thrown  into  jail. 

In  the  past  all  parties  suffered  for  their  principles. 
Now  it  was  chiefly  the  Bolsheviks  who  suffered. 
They  were  the  martyrs  of  today.  This  gave  them 
prestige.  Persecution  lifted  them  into  prominence. 
The  masses,  now  giving  heed  to  Bolshevik  doctrine, 
found  it  strangely  akin  to  their  own  desires. 

But  it  was  not  the  sacrifice  and  enthusiasm  of  the 
Bolsheviks  that  was  finally  to  bring  the  masses  under 
their  banner.  More  powerful  allies  were  working 
with  them.  Hunger  was  their  chief  ally — a  three- 
fold hunger:  a  mass  hunger  for  bread,  and  peace, 
and  land. 

In  the  rural  Soviets  rose  again  the  ancient  cry 
of  the  peasants,  "The  land  belongs  to  God  and  the 
people."  The  city-workers  left  out  God  and  cried, 
"The  factories  belong  to  the  workers."  At  the 
front  the  soldiers  proclaimed,  "The  war  belongs  to 
the  devil.  We  want  nothing  to  do  with  it.  We  want 
peace." 

A  great  ferment  was  working  in  the  masses.  It 
set  them  organizing  Land  Committees,  Factory  Com- 
mittees, Committees  of  the  Front.  It  set  them  talk- 
ing, so  that  Russia  became  a  nation  of  a  hundred 
million  orators.  It  sent  them  into  the  streets  in  tre- 
mendous mass  demonstrations. 


t 

•  *".*^f  |«.T  ,>^  _  , '  .    't,  « 

1 

1  --^^  _ 

r 

1: 

f~ 

V'^^HjHHj^HMd^^^l 

1 

J 
1 

OQ 


^.TJ 

;-i 

c 

O 

oj 

CJ 

w 

03 

<u 

fe 

o 

> 

u, 

O 

' — 1 

r^ 

ni 

^ 

o 

>. 

(U 

4J 

'S 

1 

»— 1 

<~*^ 

OS 

4-J 

C 

'3 

.9 

Cl, 

03 

)  -. 

d 

in 

I-, 

"H 

d 

c 

S 

'— ' 

B 

0) 

o 

+-> 

O 

s 

"5  2 
^.  g 


^2 


o    <u 


Q 


Ph 


CHAPTER  II 

PETROGRAD  DEMONSTRATES 

'T^HE  spring  and  summer  of  191 7  was  a  series  of 
-'-  demonstrations.  In  this  Russia  always  excelled. 
Now  the  processions  were  longer,  led  not  by  priests 
but  by  the  people,  with  red  banners  instead  of  ikons, 
and  instead  of  church  hymns,  songs  of  revolution. 

Who  can  forget  Petrograd  of  July  first!  Soldiers 
in  drab  and  olive,  horsemen  in  blue  and  gold,  white- 
bloused  sailors  from  the  fleet,  black-bloused 
workmen  from  the  mills,  girls  in  vari-colored  waists, 
surging  thru  the  main  arteries  of  the  city.  On  each 
marcher  a  streamer,  a  flower,  a  riband  of  red;  scar- 
let kerchiefs  around  the  women's  heads,  red  rubash- 
kas  on  the  men.  Above,  like  crimson  foam,  sparkled 
and  tossed  a  thousand  banners  of  red. 

As  this  human  river  flowed  it  sang. 

Three  years  before  I  had  seen  the  German  war 
machine  rolling  down  the  valley  of  the  Meuse  on 
its  drive  towards  Paris.  The  cliffs  resounded  then 
to  ten  thousand  lusty  German  voices  singing 
"Deutschland  iiber  Alles,"  while  ten  thousand  boots 
struck  the  pavement  in  unison.  It  was  powerful  but 
mechanical,  and,  like  every  act  of  those  grey  columns, 
ordered  from  above. 

25 


26    THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

But  the  singing  of  these  red  columns  was  the  spon- 
taneous outpouring  of  a  people's  soul.  Some  one 
would  strike  up  a  revolutionary  hymn;  the  deep 
resonant  voices  of  the  soldiers  would  lift  the  refrain, 
joined  by  the  plaintive  voices  of  the  working-women ; 
the  hymn  would  rise,  and  fall,  and  die  away;  then, 
down  the  line,  it  would  burst  forth  again — the  whole 
street  singing  in  harmony. 

Past  the  golden  dome  of  Saint  Isaac's,  past  the 
minarets  of  the  Mohammedan  Mosque,  marched 
forty  creeds  and  races,  welded  into  one  by  the  fire  of 
the  Revolution.  The  mines,  the  mills,  the  slums  and 
trenches  were  blotted  from  their  minds.  This  was 
the  day  the  people  had  made.  They  would  rejoice 
and  be  glad  in  it. 

But  in  their  joy  they  did  not  forget  those  who,  to 
bring  this  day,  had  marched  bound  and  bleeding  to 
exile  and  death  on  the  plains  of  Siberia.  Close  at 
hand,  too,  were  the  martyrs  of  the  March  Revolu- 
tion; a  thousand  of  them  lying  in  their  red  coffins  on 
the  Field  of  Mars.  Here  the  militant  strains  of  the 
Marseillaise  gave  way  to  the  solemn  measures  of 
Chopin's  Funeral  March.  With  muffled  drums  and 
lowered  banners,  with  bowed  heads,  they  passed 
the  long  grave,  weeping  or  in  silence. 

One  incident,  trivial  in  itself,  but  significant, 
marred  the  peace  of  the  day.  It  was  on  Sadovaya 
where  I  was  standing  with  Alex  Gumberg,  the  little 
Russian-American,  friend  and  pilot  to  so  many 
Americans  in  the  days  of  the  Revolution.     The 


PETROGRAD  DEMONSTRATES         27 

wrath  of  the  sailors  and  workingmen  was  roused  by 
a  red  banner  with  the  inscription  "Long  live  the 
Provisional  Government."  They  started  to  tear  it 
down  and  in  the  melee  some  one  shouted  "The  Cos- 
sacks are  coming." 

The  very  name  of  these  ancient  enemies  of  the 
people  struck  terror  into  the  crowds.  White-faced, 
they  stampeded  like  a  herd,  trampling  the  fallen  and 
yelling  like  madmen.  Happily  it  was  a  false  alarm. 
The  ranks  re-formed  and  with  songs  and  cheers  took 
up  the  march  again. 

But  this  procession  was  more  than  an  outburst 
of  emotion.  It  was  sternly  prophetic,  its  banners 
proclaiming:  "Factories  to  the  Workers!  Land 
to  the  Peasants!  Peace  to  All  the  World!  Down 
with  the  War!  Down  with  the  Secret  Treaties! 
Down  with  the  Capitalist  Ministers!" 

This  was  the  Bolshevik  program  crystallized  into 
slogans  for  the  masses.  There  were  thousands  of 
banners,  so  many  that  even  the  Bolsheviks  were 
surprised.  Those  banners  were  signals  indicating 
a  big  storm  brewing.  Everybody  could  see  that, 
and  everybody  did  see  it,  except  those  sent  to  Russia 
specifically  commissioned  to  see  it — the  Root  Mis- 
sion for  example.  While  these  gentlemen  were  in 
revolutionary  Russia  they  were  absolutely  isolated 
from  the  Revolution.  As  the  Russian  proverb  goes: 
"they  went  to  the  circus,  but  they  did  not  see  the 
elephant." 

On  this  July   ist  the  Americans  were  invited 


28    THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

to  a  special  service  in  the  Cathedral  of  Kazan.  In 
the  church  they  knelt  to  receive  the  kisses  and  bless- 
ings of  the  priests,  while  the  streets  outside  rang 
with  songs  and  cheers  from  the  vast  procession  of 
exalted  people.  Blind  men!  They  did  not  see  that 
faith  that  day  was  not  in  the  mass  within  those 
musty  walls,  but  in  the  masses  without. 

Yet  they  were  no  blinder  than  the  rest  of  the 
diplomats  cheering  the  first  glowing  reports  of 
Kerensky's  drive  on  the  Eastern  Front.  The  drive, 
like  its  leader,  a  dazzling  success  at  first,  turned  into 
a  tragic  fiasco.  It  slaughtered  30,000  Russians, 
shattered  the  morale  of  the  army,  enraged  the  people, 
forced  a  cabinet  crisis,  and  brought  the  disastrous 
repercussion  in  Petrograd,  the  armed  upheaval  of 
July  sixteenth. 

July  I  St  gave  warning  of  the  coming 
The  Armed  storm.    July  i6th  saw  it  break  in  fury. 

Demonstration,  First  long  files  of  older  peasant  soldiers 
with  placards:  "Let  the  40-year-old 
men  go  home  and  harvest  the  crops."  Then  barrack, 
slum  and  factory  belching  out  torrents  of  men  in 
arms  who  converged  on  the  Tauride  Palace,  and, 
for  two  nights  and  a  day,  roared  through  its  gates. 
Armored  cars,  with  sirens  screaming  and  red  flags 
flying  from  the  turrets,  raced  up  and  down  the 
streets.  Motor  trucks,  crammed  with  soldiers,  bayo- 
nets jutting  out  on  every  side,  dashed  by  like 
giant  porcupines  on   a  rampage.     Stretched   full 


PETROGRAD  DEMONSTRATES        29 

length  on  the  car  fenders  lay  sharpshooters,  rifles 
projecting  beyond  the  lamps,  eyes  on  the  watch  for 
provocators. 

This  outpouring  was  much  bigger  than  the  river 
that  ran  thru  these  streets  on  July  first,  and  more 
sinister,  for  it  glittered  with  steel  and  hissed  with 
curses — a  long  grey  line  of  wrath.  It  was  the  spon- 
taneous outburst  of  men  against  their  rulers — ugly, 
reckless,  furious. 

Under  a  black  banner  marched  a  band  of  Anar- 
chists, with  Yarchuk  the  tailor  at  the  head.  On 
him  was  the  stamp  of  the  sweat-shop.  Long  bend- 
ing over  the  needle  had  left  him  undersized.  Now, 
in  place  of  a  needle,  he  was  wielding  a  gun — the  S3mi- 
bol  of  his  deliverance  from  slavery  to  the  needle. 

Gumberg  asked  him,  "What  are  your  political 
demands?" 

"Our  political  demands?"  hesitated  Yarchuk. 

"To  hell  with  the  capitalists!"  interjected  a  big 
sailor.  "And  our  other  political  demands,"  he  added, 
"are — to  hell  with  the  war  and  to  hell  with  the  whole 
damn  Cabinet." 

Backed  up  in  an  alley  was  a  taxi-cab,  the  nozzles 
of  two  machine-guns  poking  thru  the  windows.  In 
answer  to  our  query,  the  driver  pointed  to  a  banner 
reading,  "Down  with  the  Capitalist  Ministers" 

"We  are  tired  of  begging  them  not  to  starve  and 
kill  the  people,"  he  explained.  "When  we  talk  they 
won't  listen;  but  wait  till  these  two  pups  (sobachki) 


30    THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

speak!"  He  patted  the  guns  affectionately.  "They 
will  listen  then  all  right." 

A  mob  with  nerves  at  trigger-tension,  with  such 
weapons  in  its  hands,  and  such  temper  in  its  soul,  did 
not  need  much  provocation.  And  provocators  were 
everywhere.  Agents  of  the  Black  Hundred  phed 
their  trade  of  dissension  among  the  crowds,  inciting 
to  riot  and  pogroms.  They  turned  loose  two  hundred 
criminals  from  Kresty  to  pillage  and  loot.  In  the 
ensuing  ruin  they  hoped  to  see  the  Revolution  killed 
and  the  Czar  restored.  In  some  places  they  did  bring 
on  frightful  slaughter. 

At  a  tense  moment,  in  the  tight-packed  concourse 
of  the  Tauride,  a  provocatory  shot  was  fired.  From 
that  shot  sprang  a  hundred.  From  every  quarter 
rifles  blazed,  comrades  firing  point  blank  into  com- 
rades. The  crowd  screamed,  crashed  up  against  the 
pillars,  surged  back  again,  and  then  fell  flat  upon  the 
ground.  When  the  firing  ceased,  sixteen  could  not 
rise.  During  this  massacre  a  military  band  two 
blocks  away  was  playing  the  Marseillaise. 

Fighting  in  the  streets  is  panicky  business.  At 
night,  v/ith  bullets  spitting  from  hidden  loopholes, 
from  roofs  above  and  cellar- ways  below,  with  the 
enemy  invisible  and  friends  pouring  volleys  into 
friends,  the  crowds  stampeded,  back  and  forth,  flee- 
ing from  a  hail  of  bullets  in  one  street  only  to  plunge 
into  leaden  gusts  sweeping  thru  the  next. 

Three  times  that  night  our  feet  shpped  in  blood 
on  the  pavement.    Down  the  Nevsky  was  blazed  a 


u 


0) 


p^ 


■c 

< 


cu  o 


6  "S 

>.    -^ 


Ms 
2.  rt 


c^ 


'a, 

cd 
a 
•to 


W 


PETROGRAD  DEMONSTRATES         31 

trail  of  shattered  windows  and  looted  shops.  The 
fighting  ranged  from  little  skirmishes,  with  nests  of 
provocators,  to  the  battle  on  Liteiny,  which  left 
twelve  horses  of  the  Cossacks  stretched  upon  the 
cobbles.  [Over  these  horses  stood  a  big  izvoschik 
(cabman),  tears  in  his  eyes.  In  time  of  Revolution 
the  killing  of  56  and  wounding  of  650  men  might 
be  endured,  but  the  loss  of  12  good  horses  was  too 
much  for  an  izvosckik's  heart  to  bear.] 

Only  Petrograd's  long  experience 
The  Bolsheviks  Con-  in  barricade  and  street  fighting, 
trol  the  Rising.  and  the  native  good  sense  of  the 

people,  prevented  the  shambles 
from  being  more  bloody  than  they  v/ere.  Upon 
the  chaotic  insurgent  masses  was  brought  to  bear 
a  stabilizing  force  in  tens  of  thousands  of  work- 
ingmen,  backed  by  the  directing  mind  of  the  Bol- 
shevik Party.  The  Bolsheviks  saw  clearly  that  this 
uprising  was  a  spontaneous  elemental  thing.  They 
saw  these  masses  striking  out  powerfully  but  rather 
blindly.  They  determined  that  they  should  strike 
to  some  purpose.  They  determined  to  let  the  full 
force  of  this  demonstration  reach  the  Soviet  Central 
Executive  Committee.  This  was  a  committee  of 
200  selected  by  the  First  All-Russian  Congress  of 
Soviets  before  it  adjourned.  It  was  in  permanent 
session  in  the  Tauride  Palace,  and  upon  it  the  masses 
were  converging. 

The  Bolsheviks  alone  had  influence  over  these 


32    THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

masses.  All  parties  implored  them  to  use  it.  Plac- 
ing their  speakers  upon  the  central  portico,  they  met 
each  regiment  and  delegation  with  a  short  address. 

From  our  vantage  point  we  could  view  the  whole 
concourse  crammed  with  people,  with  here  and  there 
a  man  lifted  upon  his  artillery  horse,  while  many 
banners  marked  out  a  red  current  thru  the  solid 
mass. 

Below  us  was  a  sea  of  upturned  faces,  the  fears, 
and  hopes,  and  angers  written  on  them  but  half 
legible  in  the  twilight  of  the  Russian  night.  From 
down  the  street  could  be  heard  the  roar  of  march- 
ing hosts,  cheering  the  armored  cars.  The  auto- 
mobile searchlights  focusing  on  the  speaker,  silhou- 
etted him  against  the  walls  of  the  Palace,  a  gigantic 
figure  in  black.  Every  gesture,  ten  times  magnified, 
cut  a  sweeping  shadow  across  the  white  fagade. 

"Comrades,"  said  this  giant  Bolshevik,  "you  want 
revolutionary  action.  The  only  way  to  get  it  is  thru 
a  revolutionary  government.  The  Kerensky  Gov- 
ernment is  revolutionary  in  name  only.  They  prom- 
ise land,  but  the  landlords  still  have  it.  They 
promise  bread,  but  the  speculators  still  hold  it. 
They  promise  to  get  from  the  Allies  a  declaration  of 
the  objects  of  the  war,  but  the  Allies  simply  tell  us  to 
go  on  fighting. 

"In  the  cabinet  a  fundamental  conflict  rages  be- 
tween the  Socialist  and  the  bourgeois  ministers.  The 
result  is  a  deadlock  and  nothing  at  all  is  done. 

"You  men  of  Petrograd  come  here  to  the  Soviet 


PETROGRAD  DEMONSTRATES        33 

Executive  Committee  saying,  'Take  the  Government. 
Here  are  the  bayonets  to  back  you ! '  You  want  the 
Soviets  to  be  the  government.  So  do  we  Bolshe- 
viks. But  we  remember  that  Petrograd  is  not  all 
of  Russia.  So  we  are  demanding  that  the  Central 
Executive  Committee  call  delegates  from  all  over 
Russia.  It  is  for  this  new  congress  to  declare  the 
Soviets  the  government  of  Russia." 

Each  crowd  met  this  declaration  with  cheers  and 
loud  cries,  "Down  with  Kerensky" ;  "Down  with 
the  Bourgeois  Government" ;  "All  Power  to  the 
Soviets." 

"Avoid  all  violence  and  bloodshed,"  was  the  part- 
ing admonition  to  each  contingent.  "Do  not  listen 
to  provocators.  Do  not  dehght  your  enemies  by 
killing  each  other.  You  have  amply  shown  your 
power.  Now  go  home  quietly.  When  the  occasion 
for  force  arises  we  will  call  you." 

In  the  swirling  flood  were  cross  currents  made 
by  the  Anarchists,  the  Black  Hundreds,  German 
agents,  hoodlums,  and  those  volatile  elements  which 
always  join  the  side  with  the  most  machine-guns. 
One  thing  was  now  clear  to  the  Bolsheviks:  the 
revolutionary  workmen  and  soldiers  around  Petro- 
grad were  overwhelmingly  against  the  Provisional 
Government  and  jor  the  Soviet.  They  wanted  the 
Soviet  to  be  the  government.  But  the  Bolsheviks 
were  afraid  this  would  be  a  premature  step.  As  they 
said,  "Petrograd  is  not  Russia.  The  other  cities  and 
the  army  at  the  front  may  not  be  ripe  for  such 


34    THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

drastic  action.    Only  delegates  from  the  Soviets  of 
all  Russia  can  decide  that." 

Inside  the  Tauride  the  Bolsheviks  were  using 
every  argument  to  persuade  the  members  of  the 
Soviet  Executive  Committee  to  call  another  All-Rus- 
sian Congress.  Outside  the  Tauride,  they  were  using 
every  exhortation  to  quiet  and  appease  the  clamoring 
masses.  This  was  a  task  that  taxed  all  their  wits 
and  resources. 

Some  contingents  came  to 
The  Sailors  Demand  the  Tauride  very  belliger- 

*'All  Power  to  the  Soviets."      ent.    The  Cronstadt  sailors 

arrived  in  a  particularly 
ugly  temper.  In  barges  they  came  up  the  river, 
eight  thousand  strong.  Two  of  their  number  had 
been  killed  along  the  way.  It  had  been  no  holiday 
excursion,  and  they  had  no  intention  of  gazing  at 
the  walls  of  the  Palace,  filling  the  courtyard  with 
futile  clamor,  then  turning  around  and  going  home. 
They  sent  in  a  demand  that  the  Soviet  produce  a 
Socialist  Minister,  and  produce  him  at  once. 

Chernov,  Minister  of  Agriculture,  came  out.  He 
took  for  his  rostrum  the  top  of  a  cab. 

"I  come  to  tell  you  that  three  bourgeois  Ministers 
have  resigned.  We  now  look  to  the  future  with  great 
hope.  Here  are  the  laws  which  give  the  land  to  the 
peasant." 

"Good,"  cried  the  hearers.  "Will  these  laws  be 
put  into  operation  at  once?" 


PETROGRAD  DEMONSTRATES        35 

"As  soon  as  possible,"  Chernov  answered. 

"Soon  as  possible!"  they  mocked  him.  "No,  no! 
We  want  it  now,  now.  All  the  land  for  the  peasant 
now!  What  have  you  been  doing  all  these  weeks 
anyhow?" 

"I  am  not  answerable  to  you  for  my  deeds," 
Chernov  replied,  white  with  rage.  "It  is  not  you 
that  put  me  in  my  office.  It  was  the  Peasants' 
Soviet.    To  them  alone  I  make  my  reckoning." 

At  this  rebuff  a  howl  of  derision  went  up  from  the 
sailors.  With  it  went  the  cry:  "Arrest  Chernov! 
Arrest  him! "  A  dozen  hands  stretched  out  to  clutch 
the  Minister  and  drag  him  off.  Others  sought  to 
drag  him  back.  In  a  vortex  of  fighting  friends  and 
foes,  his  clothes  torn,  the  Minister  was  being  borne 
away.    But  Trotzky,  coming  up,  secured  his  release. 

Meanwhile,  Saakian  scrambled  up  on  the  cab.  He 
struck  an  attitude  of  stern  command. 

"Listen!"  he  cried.  "Do  you  know  who  is  now 
addressing  you?" 

"No,"  a  voice  called  out.  "And  we  don't  give 
a  damn." 

"The  man  who  is  now  addressing  you,"  resumed 
Saakian,  "is  the  Vice-President  of  the  Central  Execu- 
tive Committee  of  the  First  All-Russian  Congress 
of  Soviets  of  Soldiers'  and  Workmen's  Deputies." 

This  prodigious  title  instead  of  serving  to  impress 
and  quiet  the  crowd,  was  greeted  by  laughter  and 
cries  of  "Down  with  html"  {doloi,  doloi).    But  he 


36    THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

had  come  out  to  tame  this  mob,  and  with  great  vim 
he  fired  into  it  a  fusillade  of  short  abrupt  sentences. 

"My  name — Saakian!"  (The  mob:  "Down  with 
him!") 

"My  party — Socialist  Revolutionary!"  ("Down 
with  him!") 

"My  official  religion — according  to  the  passport — 
Armenian-Gregorian!"     ("Down  with  him!") 

"My  real  religion — Socialism!"  ("Down  "with 
him!") 

"My  relation  to  the  war — two  brothers  killed." 
A  voice:    "There  should  have  been  a  third." 

"My  advice  to  you — trust  us,  your  leaders  and 
best  friends.  Stop  this  foolish  demonstration.  You 
are  disgracing  yourself,  disgracing  the  Revolution, 
bringing  disaster  to  Russia." 

These  sailors  were  already  enraged.  To  slap 
them  in  the  face  thus  was  an  idiotic  act.  Pande- 
monium broke  loose.    Again  Trotzky  to  the  rescue. 

He  steps  upon  the  platform,  the  hero  and  idol  of 
the  Cronstadt  sailors.  He  knows  the  temper  of  his 
hearers.  He  knows,  today,  they  have  no  ears  for 
censure. 

"Revolutionary  sailors,  pride  and  flower  of  the 
revolutionary  forces  of  Russia!"  he  began.  "In  this 
battle  for  the  Social  Revolution  we  fight  together. 
Together,  comrades,  our  fists  beat  upon  the  doors 
of  this  Palace  until  the  ideals  for  which  our  blood 
has  flowed  shall  at  last  be  incarnated  in  the  consti- 
tution of  this  country.    Hard  and  long  has  been  the 


PETROGRAD  DEMONSTRATES         37 

heroic  struggle !  But  out  of  it  will  come  a  free  life 
for  free  men  in  a  great  free  land.    Am  I  not  right?" 

"Right  you  are,  Trotzky,"  yells  the  crowd. 

Trotzky  moves  away. 

"But  you  haven't  told  us  anything,"  they  cry. 
"What  are  you  going  to  do  about  the  Cabinet?" 
They  may  be  a  mob,  with  an  appetite  for  flattery, 
but  they  are  not  so  unthinking  as  to  be  pacified  by 
phrases,  even  from  Trotzky. 

"I  am  too  hoarse  to  talk  more,"  he  pleads. 
"Riazanov  will  tell  you." 

"No,  you  tell  us!"  Trotzky  again  mounts  the  cab. 

"Only  the  All-Russian  Congress  can  assume  full 
power  of  government.  The  Labor  Section  has 
agreed  to  call  this  congress.  The  Military  Section 
will  without  doubt  follow.  In  two  weeks  the  dele- 
gates can  be  here." 

"Two  weeks!"  they  cry  in  astonishment.  "Two 
weeks  is  too  long.    We  want  it  now!" 

But  Trotzky  prevails.  The  sailors  acquiesce, 
cheering  the  Soviets  and  the  coming  Revolution. 
They  move  peacefully  away,  convinced  that  the 
Second  All-Russian  Congress  will  be  called. 

This  is  precisely  what  the 
Downing  the  Demonstra-  leaders  in  the  Soviet  Execu- 
tion,  then  the  Bolsheviks,     tive  Committee  do  not  want. 

They  are  dead  set  against 
the  Soviet  becoming  the  government.  They  have 
many  reasons  to  give.    But  the  real  reason  is  fear 


38    THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

of  these  very  masses  by  whom  they  have  been  lifted 
to  their  exalted  stations.  The  intelligentsia  distrust 
the  masses  below  them.  At  the  same  time  they  ex- 
aggerate the  abilities  and  good  intentions  of  the 
grand  bourgeoisie  above  them. 

They  do  not  want  the  Soviets  to  take  the  power. 
They  have  no  intention  of  calling  a  Second  All- 
Russian  Congress  in  two  weeks,  two  months,  or  at 
all.  But  they  are  frightened  by  these  turbulent 
crowds  crashing  into  the  courtyard,  hammering  at 
the  doors.  Their  tactics  are  to  placate  the  mob, 
and  they  seek  help  from  the  Bolsheviks.  At  the 
same  time  these  intelligentsia  play  another  game. 
They  join  the  Provisional  Government  in  calling 
regiments  from  the  front  "to  quell  the  mutiny  and 
restore  order  in  the  city." 

On  the  third  day  the  troops  arrive.  Bicycle  bat- 
talions, the  reserve  regiments,  and  then  long  grim 
lines  of  horsemen,  the  sun  glancing  on  the  tips  of 
their  lances.  They  are  the  Cossacks,  ancient  foes 
of  the  revolutionists,  bringing  dread  to  the  workers 
and  joy  to  the  bourgeoisie.  The  avenues  are  filled 
now  with  well-dressed  throngs  cheering  the  Cos- 
sacks, crying  "Shoot  the  rabble.^'  "String  up  the 
Bolsheviks." 

A  wave  of  reaction  runs  thru  the  city.  Insurgent 
regiments  are  disarmed.  The  death  penalty  is  re- 
stored. The  Bolshevik  papers  are  suppressed. 
Forged  documents  attesting  the  Bolsheviks  as  Ger- 
man agents  are  handed  to  the  press.    Alexandrov, 


PETROGRAD  DEMONSTRATES         39 

the  Czar's  prosecutor,  hales  them  before  the  bar, 
indicted  for  high  treason  under  section  108  of  the 
Penal  Code.  Leaders  like  Trotzky  and  Kollontai 
are  thrown  into  prison.  Lenin  and  Zinoviev  are 
driven  into  hiding.  In  all  quarters  sudden  seizures, 
assaults  and  murder  of  workingmen. 

In  the  early  morning  of  July  i8th  I  am  suddenly 
wakened  by  piercing  cries  from  the  Nevsky.  With 
the  clattering  of  horses'  hoofs  are  mingled  shouts, 
desperate  pleas  for  mercy,  curses — one  terrible 
blood-curdling  scream.  Then,  the  thud  of  a  falling 
body,  the  groans  of  a  man  dying,  and  silence.  An 
officer  coming  in  explains  that  some  workingmen 
had  been  caught  pasting  up  Bolshevik  posters  along 
the  Nevsky.  A  squad  of  Cossacks  had  ridden  them 
down,  lashing  out  with  whips  and  sabres,  cleaving 
one  man  open,  and  leaving  him  dead  on  the  pave- 
ment. 

At  this  new  turn  of  events  the  bourgeoisie  are 
elated.  Ill-based  elation!  They  do  not  know  that 
the  screams  of  this  murdered  workman  will  pene- 
trate the  furthermost  corners  of  Russia,  rousing  his 
comrades  to  wrath  and  arms.  This  July  day  they 
cheer  the  Volynsk  regiment,  as  with  band  playing  it 
enters  the  city  to  suppress  this  uprising,  whose  pur- 
pose is  to  offer  all  power  to  the  Soviets.  Ill-starred 
cheers !  They  do  not  know  that  on  a  coming  Novem- 
ber night  they  will  see  this  regiment  in  the  forefront 
of  the  rising  that  triumphantly  delivers  all  power  to 
the  Soviets. 


40    THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

The  troops  are  called  in  to  conquer  Petrograd; 
but  in  the  end  Petrograd  conquers  them.  The  in- 
fection of  this  Bolshevik  stronghold  is  irresistible. 
It  is  a  huge  blast  furnace  of  the  Revolution,  burn- 
ing away  all  dross  and  indifference.  No  matter 
how  cold  and  sluggish  they  may  enter  the  city,  out 
of  it  they  go  fired  by  the  spirit  of  the  Revolution. 

The  city  rose  in  tears  and  blood,  in  hunger  and 
cold,  in  the  forced  labor  of  myriads  of  the  starved 
and  beaten.  Their  bones  lie  buried  deep  in  the 
mud  below.  But  their  outraged  spirits  seem  to  live 
again  in  the  Petrograd  workingmen  of  today — 
spirits  powerful  and  avenging.  The  serfs  of  Peter 
built  the  city;  presently  their  descendants  will  be 
coming  into  their  own. 

It  does  not  appear  thus  in  midsummer  19 17.  The 
black  shadow  of  reaction  hovers  over  them.  But 
the  Bolsheviks  bide  their  time.  History,  they  feel, 
is  on  their  side.  Their  ideas  are  working  out  in 
the  villages,  in  the  fleet  and  at  the  front. 

To  these  places  I  now  make  my  way. 


CHAPTER  III 


A   PEASANT    INTERLUDE 


O  out    among  the    forests  and   the  people," 
said  Bakunin. 

"In  the  capitals  the  orators  thunder  and  rage 
But  in  the  village  is  the  silence  of  centuries." 

We  craved  a  taste  of  this  silence.  Three  months 
we  had  heard  the  roar  of  Revolution.  I  was 
saturated  with  it:  Yanishev  was  exhausted  by  it.  His 
voice  had  failed  thru  incessant  speaking  and  he  had 
been  ordered  by  the  Bolshevik  Party  to  take  a  ten 
days'  respite.  So  we  started  out  for  the  Volga  basin 
bound  for  the  little  village  of  Spasskoye  (Salvation), 
from  which  Yanishev  had  been  driven  out  in  1907. 

It  was  high  noon  one  August  day  when  we  left 
the  Moscow  train  and  set  out  on  the  road  leading 
across  the  fields.  Sun-drenched  in  these  last  weeks 
of  summer,  the  fields  had  turned  into  wide  rolling 
seas  of  yellow  grain,  dotted  here  and  there  with 
islands  of  green.  These  were  the  tree-shaded  peasant 
villages  of  the  province  of  Vladimir.  From  a  rise 
in  the  road  we  could  count  sixteen  of  them,  each 
with  its  great  white  church  capped  with  glistening 
domes.  It  was  a  holiday  and  the  distant  belfries  were 

41 


42    THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

flooding  the  fields  with  music  as  the  sun  had  flooded 
them  with  color. 

After  the  cities  this  was  to  me  a  land  of  peace 
and  quiet.  But  to  Yanishev  it  was  a  land  of  poig- 
nant memories.  After  ten  years  of  wandering  the 
exile  was  returning  home. 

"In  that  village  over  there,"  he  said,  pointing  to 
the  west,  "my  father  was  a  teacher.  The  people 
liked  his  teaching,  but  one  day  the  gendarmes  came, 
closed  the  school,  and  led  him  off.  In  that  next 
village  Vera  lived.  She  was  very  pretty  and  very 
kind  and  she  was  my  sweetheart.  I  was  too  bashful 
to  tell  her  then,  and  now  it  is  too  late.  She  is  in 
Siberia.  In  the  woods  yonder  a  few  of  us  used  to 
meet  to  talk  about  the  revolution.  One  night  the 
Cossacks  came  riding  down  on  us.  That  bridge  is 
where  they  killed  Yegor,  the  bravest  of  our  com- 
rades." 

It  was  not  a  happy  home-coming  for  the  exile. 
Every  turn  in  the  road  started  up  some  recollection. 
Handkerchief  in  hand  Yanishev  walked  along,  pre- 
tending that  it  was  only  perspiration  he  was  wiping 
from  his  face. 

As  we  came  across  the  village  green  of  Spass- 
koye  we  saw  an  old  peasant  in  a  bright  blue  smock 
sitting  on  a  bench  before  his  hut.  He  shaded  his 
eyes,  puzzled  by  the  appearance  of  these  two  dust- 
stained  foreigners.  Then  in  joyful  recognition  he 
cried  "Mikhail  Petrovich!"  and  throwing  his  arms 
around  Yanishev,  kissed  him  on  both  cheeks.    Then 


A  PEASANT  INTERLUDE  43 

he  turned  to  me.  I  told  him  that  my  name  was 
Albert. 

"And  your  father's  name?"  he  inquired  gravely. 

"David,"  I  replied. 

"Albert  Davidovich  (Albert,  son  of  David),  wel- 
come to  the  home  of  Ivan  Ivanov.  We  are  poor, 
but  may  God  give  you  his  richest  blessing." 

Ivan  Ivanov  stood  straight  as  an  arrow,  long- 
bearded,  clear-eyed,  hard-muscled.  But  it  was 
not  his  strength  of  body,  nor  his  warmth  of  feeling, 
nor  his  quaint  formaUty  of  speech  that  struck  me.  It 
was  his  quiet  dignity.  It  was  the  dignity  of  a  natural 
object,  a  tree  whose  roots  run  deep  into  the  soil. 
And  it  was  indeed  out  of  the  soil  of  this  mir  that 
Ivan  Ivanov  for  sixty  years  had  drawn  his  suste- 
nance, as  had  his  fathers  for  generations.  His 
little  izba  was  made  of  logs,  its  deep  thatched  roof 
now  green  with  weeds,  its  garden  gay  with  flowers. 

Ivan's  wife,  Tatyana,  and  daughter,  Avdotia, 
having  saluted  us,  brought  a  table  from  the  house. 
On  it  they  set  a  samovar,  and  lifting  its  top,  placed 
eggs  along  the  steaming  sides.  Ivan  and  his  house- 
hold made  the  sign  of  the  cross  and  we  sat  down 
at  the  table. 

"Of  what  we  are  rich  in,  we  gladly  give  you,"  said 
Ivan,  (Chem  bogaty,  ty  ee  rady). 

The  women  brought  in  a  big  bowl  of  cabbage- 
soup  (shtckee),  and  for  each  person  a  wooden  spoon. 
Eyery  one  was  supposed  to  dip  hi^  soup  from  the 
common  bowl.    Seeing  this,  I  stood  not  upon  the 


44    THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

order  of  the  dipping,  but  dipped  at  once.  When 
the  first  bowl  was  empty,  they  brought  a  second, 
full  of  porridge  (kasha).  It  was  followed  by  a  bowl 
of  boiled  raisins.  Ivan  presided  at  the  samovar,  dis- 
pensing tea,  black  bread  and  cucumbers.  It  was  a 
special  feast,  for  this  was  a  special  holiday  in 
Spasskoye. 

Even  the  crows  seemed  to  be  aware  of  it.  Great 
flocks  wheeling  overhead  threw  swift  cloud-shadows 
across  the  ground,  or  alighted  on  the  church  roof  and 
covered  it  completely.  The  domes,  all  green  or 
glistening  gold,  would  in  a  minute  be  blackest  jet. 

I  told  Ivan  that  in  America  farmers  killed  crows 
because  they  ate  the  grain. 

"Yes,"  said  Ivan,  "our  crows  eat  the  grain.  But 
they  eat  the  field-mice,  too.  And  even  if  they  are 
crows,  they  are  like  us  and  want  to  live." 

Tatyana  held  a  like  attitude  toward  the  flies  that 
swarmed  around  the  table.  Descending  on  a  piece 
of  sugar  they  would  turn  it  as  black  as  the  crow- 
covered  church. 

"Never  mind  the  flies,"  said  Tatyana.  "Poor 
things,  in  a  month  or  two  they'll  be  dead,  anyhow." 

It  was  the  Feast  of  Transfigura- 

The  Village  Takes        tion,  and  from  all  the  countryside 

a  Holiday.  around  came  the  poor,  the  crippled 

and  the  aged.    Again  and  again 

we  heard  the  tapping  of  a  cane  and  a  plaintive  voice 

asking  alms  radi  Christa,   for  the  Christ's  sake. 


A  PEASANT  INTERLUDE  45 

Yanishev  and  I  dropped  a  few  copecks  into  the 
bags  they  thrust  before  them.  The  women  fol- 
lowed with  large  pieces  cut  from  the  big  black  loaves, 
while  Ivan  solemnly  deposited  in  each  sack  a  great 
green  cucumber.  Cucumbers  were  scarce  this  year, 
so  it  was  truly  a  gift  of  love.  But  whether  we  gave 
cucumbers  or  bread  or  copecks,  back  to  each  of  us 
came  the  plaintive  sing-song  blessing  of  the  beggar. 

Even  the  roughest,  poorest  Russian  peasant  is 
moved  to  profound  pity  by  the  spectacle  of  human 
misery.  His  own  life  teaches  him  the  meaning  of 
pain  and  privation.  But  this  does  not  dull  his  S3mi- 
pathy;  it  makes  him  the  more  sensitive  to  the  suf- 
ferings of  others. 

To  Ivan  the  city  workingmen  cooped  up  in  their 
hot  dusty  streets  were  "poor  fellows"  (bedniakee); 
the  criminals  locked  up  in  jails  were  "unfortunates" 
(neschastnenkie) ;  while  a  group  of  war-prisoners 
in  Austrian  uniforms  cut  him  deepest  of  all.  They 
seemed  jolly  enough  as  they  came  rollicking  by,  and 
I  said  so. 

"But  they  are  so  far  away  from  home,"  said  Ivan. 
"How  can  they  be  happy?" 

"Well,"  I  said,  "here  am  I,  farther  from  home 
than  they  are,  and  I  am  happy." 

"Yes,"  assented  the  others,  "that  is  right." 

"No,"  said  Ivan  Ivanov,  "that  is  wrong.  Albert 
Davidovich  is  here  because  he  wanted  to  come. 
The  prisoners  are  here  because  we  made  them  come." 

Naturally  two  foreigners  sitting  at  the  table  of 


46    THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

Ivan  Ivanov  made  a  sensation  among  the  natives 
of  Spasskoye.  But  the  elders  did  not  let  their  curi- 
osity overcome  their  sense  of  the  proprieties.  Only 
a  few  children  came  down,  and  fixed  their  gaze  upon 
us.  I  smiled  at  the  children  and  they  looked  thun- 
derstruck. Again  I  smiled,  and  three  of  them  almost 
fell  backwards.  This  seemed  a  peculiar  reaction  to 
my  friendly  overtures.  At  the  third  smile  they  cried, 
"Zolotiyeh  zooby!"  and  clasping  hands  they  ran 
away.  Before  I  could  grasp  the  meaning  of  this 
behavior  they  came  rushing  back  with  a  score  of 
recruits.  In  semi-circle  they  stood  around  the  table 
with  all  their  wistful  eyes  converged  on  me.  There 
was  nothing  for  me  to  do  but  smile  again.  "Yes, 
yes! "  they  cried.  "Zolotiyeh  zooby  f  He  is  the  man 
with  golden  teeth!"  This  was  why  my  smile  had 
startled  them.  And  what  could  be  more  marvelous 
than  the  arrival  of  a  foreigner  whose  mouth  grew 
golden  teeth?  Had  I  arrived  in  Spasskoye  with  a 
golden  crown  upon  my  head  I  could  not  have  more 
deeply  stirred  the  community  than  by  wearing  a 
golden  crown  upon  my  tooth.  But  this  I  learned  on 
the  morrow. 

Now  from  the  farther  end  of  the  village  came 
the  strains  of  music.  There  was  a  chorus  of  young 
voices  accompanied  by  the  thrumming  of  the  bala- 
laika, the  clanging  of  cymbals  and  the  throbbing 
of  a  kind  of  tambourine  (bouben).  Clearer  and 
nearer  came  the  music,  until  suddenly  around  the 
corner  of  the  church  emerged  the  procession  of 


A  PEASANT  INTERLUDE  47 

players  and  singers.  The  girls  were  in  the  gay  rich 
costumes  of  the  peasants;  the  boys  wore  smocks  of 
green  and  orange  and  brightest  hue,  belted  by  cords 
with  tasseled  ends.  The  boys  played  the  instru- 
ments, while  the  girls  sang  in  response  to  the  pre- 
centor, a  clean-looking,  tousle-haired  lad  of  seven- 
teen, one  of  the  last  to  be  drafted  to  the  front.  In 
clear  lusty  voice,  with  abandon  of  emotion  he  sang 
an  old  folk-song,  adding  new  verses  of  his  own  as  he 
strode  along.    Later  he  wrote  them  down  for  me. 

At  the  window  a  birch  tree  stands 

The  golden  days  are  gone 
Pity  us,  fair  maidens  all, 

We  are  now  recruits! 

Why  have  they  taken  me  as  a  soldier? 

I,  my  father's  only  son? 
The  reason  probably  is  this, 

I've  courted  the  maidens  all  too  long. 

From  the  trenches  a  lad  steps  out 

Cr>'ing,  "Oh,  my  fathers! 
All  my  comrades  have  been  killed! 

Soon  my  turn  will  come." 

Why,  my  darling,  don't  you  meet  me 

In  the  midst  of  fields? 
Don't  you  feel  some  pain  or  sorrow 

That  a  soldier  boy  am  I? 

Father,  mother,  dig  a  grave, 

Bury  me  deep  below. 
For  my  courting,  for  my  freedom, 

Bury  my  naughty  head. 

Three  times  they  circled  the  village  green.    Then 
gathering  on  the  grass  before  the  church,  they  sang 


48    THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

and  danced  till  morning.  The  rush  and  joyous  fling 
of  the  dancers,  the  colors  of  their  costumes  lit  by  the 
pine-torches,  the  laughter  and  snatches  of  song  rising 
out  of  the  dark,  the  young  lovers  with  their  caresses 
frank  and  unashamed,  the  church  bell  at  intervals 
crashing  like  a  great  temple  gong  and  the  startled 
birds  wheeling  overhead,  all  combined  to  create  an 
impression  of  primitive  energy  and  beauty.  It  car- 
ried me  back  across  the  centuries  to  the  days  when 
the  race  was  young,  and  men  drew  life  and  inspira- 
tion directly  from  the  soil. 

It  was  a  dream  world,  an  idyllic  com- 
Yanishev  Tells  mune,  bound  together  in  a  fellowship 
of  America.  of  toil  and  play  and  feasting.     With 

its  spell  upon  me  I  made  my  way  to 
the  izba,  opened  the  door,  and  came  suddenly  face 
to  face  with  the  twentieth  century  again.  It  was  in 
the  person  and  words  of  Yanishev,  Yanishev  the  arti- 
san, the  Socialist  and  the  Internationalist.  To  the 
peasants  ringed  around  him  he  was  describing  the 
America  of  today.  It  was  not  the  usual  story  of  the 
bitter  experiences  of  the  Russian  in  America,  the 
story  of  slums  and  strikes  and  poverty  that  thousands 
of  returning  exiles  have  spread  over  Russia.  Yani- 
shev, with  husky  voice  but  face  aglow,  was  telling  the 
wonders  of  America.  To  peasants  with  houses  one 
story  high  he  pictured  the  houses  of  New  York, 
forty,  fifty  and  sixty  stories  high.  To  men  who  had 
never  seen  a  shop  larger  than  the  blacksmith's,  he 


A  PEASANT  INTERLUDE  49 

told  of  great  plants  where  a  hundred  trip  hammers 
pounded  night  and  day.  From  their  serene  Mus- 
covite plain  he  took  them  to  great  cities  with  sub- 
way trains  tearing  up  the  night,  Great  White  Ways 
flooded  with  pleasure-seekers,  and  clanging  factories 
where  millions  surged  in  and  out. 

The  villagers  listened  attentively.  They  were 
not  overawed  or  wonder  struck.  Yet  we  could  not 
complain  of  any  lack  of  appreciation. 

"The  Americans  do  wonderful  things,"  said  one 
old  mujik,  shaking  our  hands. 

"Yes,"  agreed  his  companion,  "they  do  things 
more  wonderful  than  even  the  leshey  (the  wood 
spirit)." 

But  in  their  kindly  comments  we  felt  a  certain 
reserve,  as  if  they  were  trying  to  be  polite  to  stran- 
gers. Next  morning  a  conversation  overheard  by 
chance  gave  us  their  real  opinion. 

Ivan  was  speaking.  "No  wonder  Albert  and 
Mikhail  are  white-faced  and  tired.  Think  of  being 
brought  up  in  a  country  like  that."  And  Tatyana 
said,  "It's  a  hard  life  we  live,  but  God  knows  it 
looks  harder  over  there." 

I  glimpsed  for  the  first  time  a  truth  that  grew 
clearer  as  the  months  went  by.  The  peasant  has  a 
mind  of  his  own,  which  he  uses  to  make  judgments 
of  his  own.  This  is  startling  to  the  foreigner,  to 
whom  the  Russian  peasant  is  a  shambling  creature 
of  the  earth,  immersed  in  the  night  of  mediaevalism, 
chained  by  superstition,  steeped  in  poverty.    It  is 


so    THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

startling  to  discover  that  this  peasant,  unable  to  read 
or  write,  is  able  to  think. 

His  thought  is  primal,  elemental,  with  the  stamp 
of  the  soil  on  it.  It  reflects  the  centuries  of  living 
on  the  far-stretching  plains  and  steppes  under  the 
wide  Russian  sky  and  through  the  long  winter.  He 
brings  a  fresh  untutored  mind  to  bear  upon  all  ques- 
tions in  a  manner  penetrating  and  often  disconcert- 
ing. He  challenges  our  long-held  convictions.  He 
revises  our  estimate  of  western  civilization.  It  is 
not  at  all  obvious  to  him  that  it  is  worth  the  price 
we  pay  for  it.  He  is  not  mesmerized  by  machinery, 
efficiency,  production.  He  asks,  "What  is  it  for? 
Does  it  make  men  happier?  Does  it  make  them 
more  friendly?" 

His  conclusions  are  not  always  profound.  Some- 
times they  are  only  naive  and  curious.  When  the 
mir  assembled  on  Monday  morning  the  village  Elder 
(starosta)  politely  extended  to  me  the  greetings  of 
the  village.  He  said  apologetically  that  the  children 
had  brought  home  a  report  about  my  golden  teeth, 
but  that  it  did  not  seem  reasonable,  and  they  didn't 
know  whether  to  believe  it  or  not.  There  was 
nothing  to  do  but  demonstrate.  I  opened  my  mouth 
while  the  Elder  peered  long  and  intently  into  it  and 
then  gravely  confirmed  the  report.  Thereupon  the 
seventy  bearded  patriarchs  formed  in  line  while  I 
stood  with  mouth  agape.  Each  gazed  his  fill  and 
then  moved  along  to  give  place  to  the  next  man 


The  paradoxes  of  Russia — the  peasants,  shrewd  and  superstitious,  cruel  and 

kind,  communistic  and  individuahstic,  baffling  to  Tolstoy,  irritating  to  Gorky. 

What  will  they  make  of  the  new  Russia? 


Author  with  the  wood-choppers  starting  for  the  forjests. 


••  M 


Across  the  fields  with  the  children  gleaning  the  oats  and  rye. 


A  PEASANT  INTERLUDE  51 

until  all  the  members  of  the  mir  had  filed  past 
my  open  mouth. 

I  had  to  explain  that  it  is  the  custom  of  Americans 
to  put  cement  and  gold  and  silver  in  their  crumbling 
teeth.  One  old  man  of  eighty,  whose  fine  clean  teeth 
showed  not  the  slightest  need  of  dentistry,  gave 
his  opinion  that  Americans  must  eat  food  very 
strange  and  strong  to  work  such  havoc.  Several  said 
it  might  be  all  right  for  Americans  to  have  golden 
teeth,  but  that  it  would  never  do  for  Russians,  who 
were  always  drinking  so  much  tea  and  such  very 
hot  tea  that  it  would  surely  melt  the  gold.  At  this 
point  Ivan  Ivanov,  who  had  been  enjoying  the  pres- 
tige of  harboring  the  unusual  visitors,  spoke  up.  He 
insisted  that  his  tea  was  as  hot  as  any  in  the  village, 
and  testified  that  he  had  drawn  at  least  ten  glasses 
for  me,  yet  there  had  been  no  melting. 

Abroad  the  term  ''American"  is  almost  synony- 
mous with  "man  of  wealth."  Gold  on  my  eye-glasses 
and  on  my  fountain  pen  convinced  them  that  I  must 
be  a  man  of  super- wealth.  Yet  I  came  to  marvel 
at  their  lavish  display  of  gold  quite  as  much  as  they 
at  mine.  For  this  peasant  village  had  gold  in 
abundance,  only  it  was  not  on  the  persons  of  the  vil- 
lagers. It  was  in  their  church.  As  one  stepped  thru 
the  church  doors  there  loomed  up  a  beautiful  reredos 
twenty  or  thirty  feet  high,  covered  with  a  glistening 
sheen  of  gold.  At  one  time  the  villagers  had  raised 
ten  thousand  rubles  to  decorate  this  temple. 

While  this  httle  village  was  far  removed  from  the 


52    THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

currents  of  Europe  and  America,  still  there  were 
marks  of  culture  and  civilization  advancing  from  the 
West.  There  were  cigarettes  and  Singer  sewing- 
machines,  men  whose  limbs  had  been  shot  off  by 
machine-guns,  and  two  boys  from  the  factory- 
towns  with  store-clothes  and  celluloid  collars — ugly 
contrasts  to  the  smocks  and  kaftans  of  the  village. 

One  night  standing  before  a  neighbor's  hut  we 
were  startled  to  hear  thru  the  curtains  a  soft  and 
modulated  voice  asking  "Parlez-vous  Frangais?"  It 
was  a  pretty  peasant  girl  raised  in  the  village  but 
with  all  the  airs  and  graces  which  belong  to  a  girl 
raised  in  a  court.  She  had  served  in  a  French  house- 
hold in  Petrograd  and  had  come  home  to  give  birth 
to  her  child. 

Thus  in  varied  ways  the  outside  world  was  filter- 
ing into  the  village  stirring  it  from  the  slumber  of 
centuries.  Stories  of  big  cities  and  of  lands  across 
the  seas  came  by  way  of  prisoners  and  soldiers,  trad- 
ers and  zemstvo  men.  It  resulted  in  a  strange  mis- 
cellany of  ideas  about  foreign  lands — a  curious  com- 
pound of  facts  and  fancies.  One  time  a  grotesque 
half-fact  about  America  was  brought  home  to  me 
pointedly  and  in  an  embarrassing  manner. 

We  were  at  the  supper  table  and  I  was  explain- 
ing that  in  my  note-book  I  was  writing  down  all  the 
customs  and  habits  of  the  Russians  that  struck  me 
as  strange  and  peculiar. 

"For  example,"  I  said,  "instead  of  having  indi- 
vidual dishes  you  eat  out  of  one  great  common  bowl. 


A  PEASANT  INTERLUDE  S3 

That  is  a  curious  custom."  "Yes,"  said  Ivan.  "I 
suppose  we  are  a  curious  people." 

"And  that  big  stove!  It  takes  up  a  third  of  the 
room.  You  bake  bread  in  it.  You  sleep  on  top  of 
it.  You  get  inside  and  take  a  steam  bath  in  it.  You 
do  everything  with  it  and  in  a  most  peculiar  man- 
ner." "Yes,"  nodded  Ivan  again,  "I  suppose  we 
are  a  peculiar  people." 

I  felt  something  step  on  my  foot.  I  thought  it 
was  a  dog  but  it  proved  to  be  a  pig.  "There!"  I 
exclaimed.  "That  is  the  most  peculiar  custom  of  all. 
You  let  pigs  and  chickens  walk  right  into  your  din- 
ing-room." 

At  this  moment  the  baby  in  Avdotia's  arms  began 
kicking  its  feet  up  and  down  upon  the  table 
in  baby  fashion.  Addressing  the  child,  she  said, 
"Here,  baby!  Take  your  feet  off  the  table.  Remem- 
ber you  are  not  in  America."  And  turning  to  me 
she  added  courteously,  "What  peculiar  customs  you 
have  there  in  America." 

It  was  the  day  after  the  holiday,  and  the 
We  Harvest      visitors  from  neighboring  towns  still  tar- 
the  Crops.         ried.    There  were  games  and  dancing  on 
the  village  green;  and  a  band  of  children, 
having  come  into  possession  of  an  accordion,  pa- 
raded solemnly  about,  singing  the  songs  of  yes- 
terday,  quaint   little   understudies   of   their   elder 
brothers  and  sisters.    An  after-the-holiday  lethargy 
lingered  over  most  of  the  village.    But  not  over  the 


54    THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

household  of  Ivan  Ivanov.  Everybody  was  busy 
there.  Avdotia  was  twisting  straw  into  bands  to 
bind  the  sheaves.  Tatyana  was  plaiting  strips  of 
bark  and  shaping  them  into  sandals.  Olga,  Avdo- 
tia's  elder  child,  was  forcibly  teaching  the  cat  to 
drink  tea.  Ivan  sharpened  the  scythes,  and  we  all 
set  out  for  the  fields. 

At  this  move  the  young  people  came  out  of  the 
izbas.  "Please  don't  go  to  the  fields.  Stay  at 
home,"  they  teased.  As  we  proceeded  they  became 
quite  serious.    I  asked  why  we  should  not  go. 

"If  one  family  starts  for  the  fields  all  the  others 
follow,"  they  said.  "Then  our  holiday  fun  will  be 
over.    Please  don't  go!" 

But  the  ripened  harvest  was  calling.  The  sun 
was  shining,  and  there  was  no  telling  how  soon  the 
rains  would  fall.  So  Ivan  marched  along,  and  when, 
fifteen  minutes  later,  we  reached  a  rise  of  ground, 
we  looked  back  to  see  the  paths  dotted  with  black 
figures  making  for  the  fields.  Like  a  beehive  the 
village  was  sending  out  its  workers  to  garner  its 
food-stores  for  the  oncoming  winter.  As  we  reached 
the  rye-field  Yanishev  quoted  from  Nekrassov's 
national  epic.  Who  Can  Be  Happy  and  Free  in 
Russia? 

"You  full  yellow  cornfields! 

To  look  at  you  now 
One  would  never  imagine 

How  sorely  God's  people 
Had  toiled  to  array  you. 

'Tis  not  by  warm  dewdrops 


A  PEASANT  INTERLUDE  55 

That  you  have  been  moistened; 

The  sweat  of  the  peasant 
Has  fallen  on  you. 

"The  peasants  are  gladdened 

At  sight  of   the   oats, 
And  the  rye  and  the  barley, 

But  not  by  the  wheat, 
For  it  feeds  but  the  chosen. 

'We  love  you  not,  Wheat! 
But  the  rye  and  the  barley 

We  love — they  are  kind, 
They  feed  all  men  alike.'  " 

As  each  one  turned  to  his  task  I  joined  in  the 
work,  fetching  water,  tying  sheaves,  swinging  a 
scythe,  watching  the  light-brown  stalks  come  tum- 
bling down.  The  scythe  demands  skill  and  practice. 
So  the  figure  I  cut  and  the  swathe  I  cut  were  not 
heroic,  nor  did  I  add  to  the  prestige  of  American 
reapers.  Ivan  was  too  polite  to  criticize  my  tech- 
nique but  I  could  see  that  it  was  inciting  him  to  sup- 
pressed merriment.  In  his  comment  to  Avdotia  I 
picked  up  the  Russian  word  for  camel.  I  was 
indeed  hunched  over  like  a  camel  while  Ivan  Ivanov 
stood  erect,  handling  his  scythe  like  a  master- 
craftsman.  I  turned  upon  Ivan  and  accused  him  of 
likening  me  to  a  camel.  He  was  embarrassed.  But 
when  he  saw  that  I  was  amused,  and  admitted  my 
likeness  to  that  humped  creature,  he  laughed  and 
laughed. 

"Tatyana !  Mikhail ! "  he  roared.  "Albert  Davido- 
vich  says  that  when  he  cuts  the  grain  he  looks  like 
a  camel.    Ho!  ho!  ho!"    Two  or  three  times  after 


56    THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

that  he  broke  into  sudden  laughter.  The  camel 
must  have  helped  him  thru  many  weary  wastes  in 
the  long  winter. 

Writers  dwell  upon  the  laziness  of  the  Russian 
peasant.  Watching  the  mujik  lounging  around  mar- 
ket places  and  vodka-shops  gives  one  that  impression. 
But  trying  to  keep  up  with  the  mujik  in  the  fields 
very  quickly  takes  it  away.  With  the  sun  beating 
down  on  their  heads  and  the  dust  rising  from  under 
their  feet  they  mowed  and  raked  and  bound  and 
stacked  until  the  last  straw  had  been  gleaned  from 
the  field.    Then  they  tramped  back  into  the  village. 

Since  our  arrival  the  villagers  had 

The  Peasants  been  asking  Yanishev  to  make  a 

Wary  of  Bolshevism,    speech.    In  the  early  evening  there 

arrived  a  delegation  beseeching 

him. 

"Think  of  it,"  said  Yanishev.  "Ten  years  ago  if 
these  peasants  had  suspected  that  I  was  a  Socialist 
they  would  have  come  to  kill  me.  Now,  knowing 
that  I  am  a  Bolshevik,  they  come  begging  me  to  talk. 
Things  have  gone  a  long,  long  way  since  then." 

Yanishev  was  not  a  gifted  man  unless  it  be  a  gift 
to  be  deeply  sensitive  to  the  sorrows  of  the  world. 
Tormented  by  the  sufferings  of  others,  he  had  chosen 
privation  for  himself.  As  an  artisan  in  America  he 
earned  six  dollars  a  day.  Out  of  this  he  took  enough 
for  a  cheap  room  and  meals.  With  the  rest  he 
bought  "literature"  and  carried  it  from  door  to  door. 


A  PEASANT  INTERLUDE  57 

In  the  poor  quarters  of  Boston,  Detroit,  Moscow 
and  Marseilles,  they  still  speak  of  Yanishev  as  the 
comrade  who  gave  everything  to  the  cause. 

In  Tokio  a  fellow-exile  once  found  an  excited 
coolie  trying  to  drag  Yanishev,  protesting,  into  a 
rickshaw.  "I  just  got  in  his  rickshaw,"  Yanishev 
explained,  "and  he  began  pulling  and  sweating  like 
a  horse.  I  may  be  a  fool,  but  I  can't  let  a  man  work 
like  a  beast  for  me.  So  I  paid  him  and  got  out. 
I'll  never  get  into  a  rickshaw  again." 

Since  his  return  to  Russia  he  had  travelled  night 
and  day  addressing  enormous  crowds  until  his  voice 
failed  him  and  he  could  only  whisper  and  gesture 
He  had  come  to  his  home  village  to  recuperate.    But 
even  here  the  Revolution  would  not  let  him  rest. 

"Will  Mikhail  Petrovich  give  us  a  little  speech?" 
the  peasants  pleaded.    "Only  a  little  speech." 

Yanishev  could  not  deny  them.  The  committee 
drew  a  wagon  out  upon  the  village  green  and  when 
the  throng  was  thick  around  it,  Yanishev  mounted 
this  rostrum  and  began  telling  the  Bolshevik  story 
of  the  Revolution,  the  War,  and  the  Land. 

They  stood  listening  while  evening  darkened  into 
night.  Then  they  brought  torches,  and  Yanishev 
talked  on.  His  voice  grew  husky.  They  brought 
him  water,  tea  and  kvass.  His  voice  failed,  and 
they  waited  patiently  till  it  came  back  again.  These 
peasants  who  had  labored  all  day  in  the  fields  stood 
there  late  into  the  night,  more  eager  to  gather  stores 
for  their  mind  than  they  had  been  to  gather  food  for 


S8    THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

their  bodies.  It  was  a  symbolic  sight,  this  torch  of 
knowledge  flaming  in  the  darkness  of  the  village — 
one  of  tens  of  thousands  scattered  over  the  Ukrain- 
ian steppes,  the  plains  of  Muscovy  and  the  far 
stretches  of  Siberia.  In  hundreds  of  them  that  night 
torches  were  flaming  and  other  Yanishevs  were  tell- 
ing the  story  of  the  Revolution. 

So  much  reverence  and  age-old  longings  in  those 
eager  faces  pressing  around  the  speaker.  So  much 
hunger  in  these  questions  rising  out  of  the  dark. 
Yanishev  toiled  on  until  he  was  utterly  exhausted. 
Only  when  he  could  go  no  further  did  they  reluc- 
tantly disperse.  I  listened  to  their  comments.  Were 
these  "ignorant  illiterate  mujiks"  ready  to  swallow 
this  new  doctrine,  to  be  swayed  by  the  passion  of  a 
propagandist? 

"Mikhail  Petrovich  is  a  good  man,"  they  were 
saying.  "We  know  that  he  has  gone  far  and  seen 
many  things.  What  he  believes  may  be  good  for 
some  people,  but  we  do  not  know  whether  it  is  good 
for  us."  Yanishev  had  poured  out  his  soul,  explain- 
ing, expounding  the  creed  of  Bolshevism — and  not  a 
single  convert.  Yanishev  himself  said  so,  as  he 
dragged  himself  up  into  the  hayloft  where  we  had 
gone  to  escape  from  the  stuffy  cabin.  One  young 
peasant,  Fedossiev,  seemed  to  divine  the  lonehness 
and  spiritual  emptiness  of  a  preacher  who  gives  his 
best  and  seemingly  is  rejected. 

"It  is  all  so  new,  Mikhail  Petrovich,"  he  said. 
"We  are  a  slow  people.     We  must  have  time  to 


A  PEASANT  INTERLUDE  59 

think  it  over  and  talk  it  over.  Only  today  we 
reaped  the  grain  in  the  fields;  it  was  months  and 
months  ago  that  we  sowed  it  in  the  ground." 

I  tried  to  add  a  reassuring  word.  "Never  mind," 
whispered  Yanishev,  with  the  zealot's  confidence 
in  the  ultimate  triumph  of  his  faith.  "Of  course, 
they  will  believe."  He  lay  in  collapse  on  the  hay, 
his  body  trembling  and  coughing,  but  with  serenity 
in  his  face. 

I  doubted.  But  Yanishev  was  right.  Eight 
months  later  he  made  another  speech  on  the  village 
green.  It  was  on  invitation  of  the  Comm.unist  Party 
of  the  village  of  Spasskoye.  Fedossiev  was  chair- 
man of  the  meeting. 

Morning  brought  many  peasants  to  the 

Yanishev  Talks    door  with  questions.     Above  all  was 

of  the  Land.         the  problem  of  the  land.  The  Bolshevik 

solution  at  that  time  was,  "Leave  it 

to  the  local  land  committees.    Let  them  take  over 

the  great  estates  and  put  them  into  the  hands  of  the 

people."     The  peasants  pointed  out  that  this  did 

not  solve  the  land  problem  of  Spasskoye,  for  here 

there  were  no  crown  or  church  or  private  domains. 

"All  the  land  around  here  already  belongs  to  us," 

said  the  Elder.    "It  is  too  little,  for  God  gives  us 

many  children.    The  Bolshe\dks  may  be  as  good  as 

Mikhjiil  Petrovich  says  they  are,  but  if  they  take 

the.  governmeDt,  can  they  make  more  I^nd?    No. 

Only  God  can  do  that.    We  want  a  government 


6o    THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

with  money  enough  to  send  us  to  Siberia  or  to  any 
place  where  there  is  land  in  plenty.  Will  the  Bol- 
sheviks do  that?" 

Yanishev  explained  the  colonizing  scheme,  and 
then  turned  to  the  agricultural  commune  which  the 
Bolsheviks  were  projecting  for  Russia.  It  was 
ultimately  to  change  the  mir  into  a  cooperative 
large-scale  farming  enterprise.  He  pointed  out  the 
wastage  of  the  present  system  in  Spasskoye.  Here,  as 
usual,  the  land  was  divided  into  four  sections.  One 
was  held  for  common  pasturage.  To  make  sure  of  a 
fair  division  of  the  good,  the  bad  and  the  medium 
ground,  each  peasant  was  allotted  a  field  in  each 
of  these  respective  sections.  Yanishev  pointed  out 
the  time  lost  in  going  from  field  to  field.  He  showed 
the  gain  that  would  come  if  the  fields,  instead  of 
being  cut  into  checkerboards,  were  worked  as  a  unit 
on  a  grand  scale.  He  pictured  the  gang-plow  and 
the  harvester  at  work.  Two  of  the  peasants  had 
seen  their  magic  performances  in  another  province 
and  testified  that  for  working  they  were  regular 
"devils"  (tcherti). 

"And  will  America  send  them  to  us?"  the  peas- 
ants asked. 

"For  a  while,"  Yanishev  replied.  "Then  we  shall 
build  great  shops  and  make  them  right  here  in  Rus- 
sia." 

Again  he  took  his  hearers  out  of  their  quiet  rural 
haunts  into  the  roar  and  clamor  of  a  great  modern, 
plant.    And  again  there  was  that  same  uneasy  re- 


A  PEASANT  INTERLUDE  6i 

action  to  his  tale.  They  were  more  afraid  than 
enamoured  of  modern  industrialism.  They  wanted 
our  wonderful  machinery.  But  they  thought  it 
would  be  a  dubious  blessing  if  they  must  pay  the 
price  of  seeing  chimneys  belching  black  smoke-clouds 
over  their  land  of  green  and  white.  The  peasants 
dread  the  idea  of  "being  cooked  in  a  factory  boiler." 
Necessity  goaded  some  of  them  into  mines  and 
mills,  but  since  the  Revolution  they  have  gone  flock- 
ing back  to  the  land. 

Besides  their  social  questions,  there  were  many 
personal  problems  that  confronted  Yanishev. 
Should  he  recommend  his  political  creed  by  com- 
promising his  personal  convictions?  For  example, 
should  he  who  had  left  the  Greek  Church,  make  the 
sign  of  the  cross  before  and  after  meals.  Yanishev 
decided  against  it  and  prepared  himself  for  ques- 
tions from  Ivan  Ivanov.  But  though  the  old  peasant 
looked  perplexed  and  his  wife  grieved  when  Yanishev 
omitted  the  ceremony,  they  never  asked  for  explana- 
tions. 

In  Russia  the  customary  salutation  to  the  toiler 
in  the  fields  is  "God's  help  to  you."  (Bog  v  porno- 
shch).  Yanishev  decided  to  use  that  greeting  in- 
stead of  the  formal  "Good  morning."  He  also  stood 
thru  the  long  service  for  Fedossiev's  baby.  In  Rus- 
sian villages  bells  toll  often  for  the  death  of  a  child. 

"Many  children  God  gives  us,"  said  the  Elder. 
"And  to  keep  bread  in  the  mouths  of  those  that  live 
we  must  not  neglect  the  fields."    So  the  others  went 


62    THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

to  their  work  while  the  priest  and  the  parents, 
Yanishev  and  I,  went  to  the  church.  Beside  the 
mother  stood  her  nine  children.  Each  year  she  had 
borne  a  child  and,  ranged  according  to  age,  they 
formed  a  flight  of  steps  with  here  and  there  a  gap. 
That  year  the  child  had  died.  And  now  this  year's 
child  was  dead.  It  was  a  tiny  thing,  no  larger  than 
the  lily  beside  it,  so  small  and  fragile  in  its  little 
blue  coffin,  with  the  massive  walls  and  pillars  of 
the  church  rising  around  it. 

This  village  of  Spasskoye  was  fortunate  in  its 
priest.  He  was  a  kind  and  sympathetic  man,  liked 
and  trusted  by  the  people.  Tho  called  so  often 
to  say  the  children's  mass,  he  was  trying  not  to 
make  it  a  thing  of  routine.  Gently  he  lit  the 
candles  on  the  coffin,  laid  the  cross  on  the  baby's 
breast,  and  began  the  mass,  filling  the  church  with 
his  resonant  voice.  Priest  and  deacon  chanted  the 
service,  while  father,  mother  and  children  crossed 
themselves  and  knelt  and  touched  their  foreheads 
to  the  floor.  Opposite  the  priest  Yanishev  stood 
stolidly  with  half-bowed  head. 

They  faced  each  other  with  the  mystery  of  life 
and  death  between  them;  the  one  a  priest  of  the 
Holy  Orthodox  church,  the  other  a  prophet  of  the 
Social  Revolution;  the  one  consecrating  himself 
to  making  children  happy  and  secure  in  the  paradise 
beyond,  the  other  devoting  his  life  to  making  the 
earth  secure  and  happy  for  living  children. 


A  PEASANT  INTERLUDE  63 

I  went  with  Yanishev  upon  many  of  his  mission- 
ary journeys  thru  the  Russian  towns  and  cities. 
From  the  skilled  artisans  in  the  textile-center  of 
Ivanovo,  we  ranged  thru  all  ranks  of  the  proletarians 
down  to  the  slum  of  the  thieves  in  Moscow,  im- 
mortalized in  Maxim  Gorky's  The  Night  Asylum, 
But  alwa3'^s  the  thoughts  of  Yanishev  were  going 
back  to  the  villages. 

Six  months  later  I  said  good-bye  to  him  at  the 
Fourth  Soviet  Congress  in  Moscow.  Clinging  to  his 
arm  was  a  woman  of  seventy,  very  withered  and 
bent.  Yanishev  introduced  her  reverently  as  his 
"teacher."  Beyond  the  confines  of  Russia  or  out- 
side the  working-classes  her  name  was  quite  un- 
known. But  to  the  young  rebels  among  the  workers 
and  peasants  her  name  was  everything.  With  them 
she  had  shared  hardship,  pain  and  prison.  The  long 
years  of  toil  and  hunger  had  left  her  white  and 
feeble,  an  object  inspiring  pity  until  one  saw  her 
eyes.  In  them  were  still  the  fires  which  had  kindled 
the  spirits  of  scores  of  young  men  like  Yanishev 
and  sent  them  out  as  flaming  apostles  of  the  Social 
Revolution.  For  the  Revolution  she  had  given  her 
life,  but  had  hardly  dared  dream  that  she  would 
see  it. 

Now  it  had  come  and  she  was  sitting  among  her 
own,  with  hands  clasped  in  the  hand  of  her  young 
disciple.  True,  industry  was  in  ruin,  the  Germans 
were  at  the  gates,  and  hunger  and  cold  walked 
thru  the  city,  yet  as  she  sat  in  the  ancient  Hall  of 


64    THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

Nobles,  listening  to  Lenin,  she  was  seeing  the  new 
day  coming,  bringing  peace  to  all  people  and  to 
her  a  chance  to  live  on  the  land. 

"We  both  came  from  the  land  and  we  both  love 
it,"  she  whispered  to  me.  "And  when  the  Revolu- 
tion is  complete  Mikhail  and  I  are  going  back  to 
live  in  the  villages."  * 

♦Appendix  lU.    The  Burial  of  Yanishev. 


Some  father  has  driven 
His  daughter,  disheveled. 
Into  the  street. 
Without  cause  or  mercy. 


The  snoiv  cuts  her  Jace, 
The  wind' s  breath  is  icy. 
But  the  heart  of  the  father 
Is  colder  than  these. 


is  the  father  to  blame 
For  mistreating  his  daughter? 
He  was  taught  by  the  priest 
That  woman  is  sin. 


Now  the  Soviet  teaches 
A  new  vision  of  women, 
As  comrades  of  men, 
Old  woes  are  forgotten. 


The  lot  of  Russian  peasant  women  under  the  old  regime  was  not  all  so  happy 

as  depicted  in  the  foregoing  chapter.    Their  social  position  was  d:'stinctly 

inferior  to  men  and  they  were  often  treated  as  drudges  and  menials. 


Two  old  women  lament 
Old  days  of  sorrow, 
When  prayers  went  unheard 
And  the  grave  was  relief. 


But  no  more  does  the  stick 
Fall  upon  women's  shoulders. 
Free  and  equal  they  march, 
Comrades  of  men! 


"Dry  your  tears,  Women! 
A  new  day  is  here. 
When  old  superstitions 
Bring  no  ignorant  fear. 


Shake  off  slavish  bonds. 
Discover  your  wings, 
Fly  from  ancient  darkness 
To  the  light  of  new  days." 


When  the  Soviet  later  came  into  power  it  sought  to  make  women  conscious 

of  their  new  rights  and  privileges.     To  this  end  the  Soviet  Government 

issued  posters  like  this  one:  FORWARD  TO  THE  LIGHT. 


CHAPTER  IV 

THE  MAN  ON  HORSEBACK 

TN  the  summer  of  191 7  I  travelled  far  and  wide 
■*■  thru  Russia.  From  all  sides  rose  the  lamentation 
of  a  stricken  people.  I  heard  it  in  the  textile  mills  of 
Ivanovo,  the  Fair  grounds  of  Nijni  and  the  market- 
squares  of  Kiev.  It  came  to  me  from  the  holds  of 
steamers  on  the  Volga  and  at  night  from  rafts  and 
barges  drifting  down  the  Dnieper.  The  burden  of 
the  people's  sorrow  was  the  war/'The  cursed  war!" 

Everywhere  I  saw  the  blight  and  wreckage  of 
war.  In  the  Ukraine  I  drove  out  over  those  rolling 
lands  which  made  Gogol  exclaim:  "You  steppes!  O 
God!  How  lovely  you  are!"  We  stopped  at  a  little 
village  folded  in  the  hills  and  about  three  hundred 
women,  forty  old  men  and  boys  and  a  score  of  crip- 
pled soldiers  gathered  round  our  zemstvo  wagon. 
When  I  stood  up  to  address  them  I  asked:  "How 
many  ever  heard  of  Washington?"  One  lad  raised 
his  hand.  "How  many  have  heard  of  Lincoln?" 
Three  hands.  "Kerensky?"  About  ninety. 
"Lenin?"  Ninety  again.  "Tolstoi?"  One  hundred 
and  fifty  hands. 

They  enjoyed  this,  laughing  together  at  the  for- 
65 


66    THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

eigner  and  his  funny  accent.  Then  a  foolish  blunder. 
I  asked,  "Who  of  you  have  lost  someone  in  the  war?" 
Nearly  every  hand  went  up,  and  a  wail  swept  thru 
that  laughing  throng,  like  a  winter  wind  moaning  in 
the  trees.  Two  old  peasants  fell  against  the  wagon- 
wheels  sobbing,  and  shaking  my  platform.  A  lad 
ran  out  of  the  crowd,  crying:  "My  brother — they 
killed  my  brother ! "  And  the  women,  drawing  their 
platoks  to  their  eyes,  or  clasped  in  each  other's 
arms,  wept  and  wept,  until  I  wondered  where  all  the 
tears  could  come  from.  Who  would  have  dreamed 
that  behind  those  placid  faces  lay  so  much  grief? 

This  was  but  one  of  the  thousands  of  Russian  vil- 
lages which  the  war  had  stripped  of  every  able- 
bodied  man.  It  was  one  of  countless  villages  to 
which  the  wounded  came  crawling  back,  crippled, 
eyeless,  or  armless.  Millions  never  returned  at  all. 
They  lay  in  that  great  grave,  1500  miles  long 
stretching  from  the  Black  Sea  to  the  Baltic — the 
Russian  front  against  the  Germans.  There  peasants 
with  only  clubs  in  their  hands,  driven  up  against  the 
machine  guns  of  the  Germans,  were  mowed  down 
en  masse. 

There  were  plenty  of  guns  in  Archangel.  They 
had  even  been  loaded  on  cars,  and  started  for  the 
front.  But  merchants  who  wanted  those  cars  for 
their  wares,  slipped  a  few  thousand  rubles  to  the  offi- 
cials; so,  ten  miles  out  of  Archangel,  the  munitions 
were  dumped  and  the  cars  shunted  back  to  be  re- 


THE  MAN  ON  HORSEBACK  67 

loaded  with  champagnes,  automobiles,  and  Parisian 
dresses. 

Life  was  gay  and  dazzling  in  Petrograd  and  the 
big  cities — big  profits  in  this  war  business — but  it 
was  cold  and  bloody  business  for  12,000,000  soldiers 
driven  into  the  trenches  by  order  of  the  Czar. 

And  now  under  Kerensky  there  were  still  i2,oqo,- 
000  under  arms.  They  were  conscripts,  dragged 
from  ploughs  and  workshops  to  have  guns  thrust  in 
their  hands.  The  ruling-class  used  every  device  to 
keep  those  weapons  in  the  soldiers'  hands.  It  waved 
the  flag  and  screamed  "Victory  and  glory."  It 
organized  Women's  Battalions  of  Death  crying 
"Shame  on  you  men  to  let  girls  do  your  fighting." 
It  placed  machine-guns  in  the  rear  of  rebelling  regi- 
ments declaring  certain  death  to  those  who  re- 
treated.   But  all  to  no  avail. 

In  thousands  the  soldiers  were  throwing 
The  Soldiers  down  their  guns  and  streaming  from  the 
in  Revolt.  front.    Like  plagues  of  locusts  they  came, 

clogging  railways,  highways  and  water- 
ways. They  swarmed  down  on  trains,  packing  roofs 
and  platforms,  clinging  to  car-steps  like  clusters  of 
grapes,  sometimes  evicting  passengers  from  their 
berths.  A  Y.  M.  C.  A.  man  swears  he  saw  this  sign: 
"Tovarisk  Soldiers:  Please  do  not  throw  passengers 
out  of  the  window  after  the  train  is  in  motion." 
Perhaps  an  exaggeration.  But  they  did  throw  our 
suitcases  out  of  the  window. 


68    THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

It  happened  on  a  trip  I  made  to  Moscow  with 
Alex  Gumberg.  Our  compartment  was  crowded,  and 
the  Russians,  having  almost  hermetically  sealed  door 
and  window  against  the  night  air,  went  blissfully  to 
sleep.  The  place,  soon  steaming  like  a  Turkish 
bath,  became  unbearable.  To  let  in  a  breath  of 
air,  I  slid  the  door  open,  then  joined  the  sleepers. 
In  the  morning  I  woke  to  a  harsh  surprise.  Our 
suitcases  were  gone. 

"Some  tovarish  robbers  in  uniform  threw  them 
out  of  the  window  and  then  jumped  off  the  train," 
explained  the  old  conductor.  His  consolation  for  our 
grief  was  that  they  had  likewise  stolen  the  baggage 
of  an  officer  in  the  next  compartment.  We  grieved 
not  so  much  for  the  loss  of  our  clothes  as  for  the  in- 
valuable passports,  notebooks  and  letters  of  intro- 
duction our  bags  contained. 

Two  weeks  later  we  got  another  surprise — a  sum- 
mons from  the  station-master  in  Moscow.  There 
was  one  of  our  suitcases  forwarded  to  us  by  the 
robbers.  It  contained  none  of  our  clothes  but  all 
our  documents  and  the  officers'  papers — not  a  single 
one  was  missing. 

After  all,  considering  the  plight  of  the  hordes  of 
deserting  soldiers  that  swept  across  the  land,  one 
wonders  not  at  the  number  of  thefts  and  excesses 
they  committed  but  at  the  fewness  of  them.  And  if 
the  tales  of  awful  conditions  in  the  trenches  were 
true,  the  wonder  is  not  that  so  many  soldiers  de- 
serted but  that  so  many  still  remained  at  the  front. 


THE  MAN  ON  HORSEBACK  69 

I  wanted  to  see  conditions  for  myself.  Many 
times  I  tried  to  get  a  pass  to  the  front.  At  last  in 
September  I  succeeded.  With  John  Reed  and  Boris 
Reinstein,  I  started  for  the  Riga  Sector. 

With  us  was  a  Russian  priest,  a  big  bearded 
fellow,  gentle  and  amiable,  but  with  a  terrible  thirst 
for  tea  and  conversation.  On  the  door  of  our  com- 
partment the  guard  slapped  up  a  sign  that  said: 
"Americajt  Mission."  Under  this  aegis  we  slept  and 
ate  as  the  train  crept  thru  the  autumn  drizzle  and  the 
priest  talked  endlessly  on  about  his  soldiers. 

"In  the  old  text  of  the  church  prayers,"  he  said, 
"God  is  called  Czar  of  Heaven  and  the  Virgin, 
Czarina.  We've  had  to  leave  that  out.  The  people 
won't  have  God  insulted,  they  say.  The  priest  prays 
for  peace  to  all  nations.  Whereupon  the  soldiers  cry 
out,  'Add  "without  annexations  and  indemnities"  '. 
Then  we  pray  for  travellers,  for  the  sick  and  the 
suffering.  And  the  soldiers  cry  Tray  also  for  the 
deserters'.  The  Revolution  has  made  havoc  with 
the  Faith,  yet  the  masses  of  soldiers  are  religious. 
Much  can  still  be  done  in  the  name  of  the  cross. 

"But  the  Imperialists  tried  to  do  too  much  with 
it.  'On  with  the  war!'  they  cried.  'On  with  the 
war,  until  we  plant  the  cross  glittering  over  the  dome 
of  Saint  Sophia's  in  Constantinople.'  And  the  sol- 
diers replied:  'Yes!  But  before  we  plant  the  cross 
on  Saint  Sophia's,  thousands  of  crosses  will  be 
planted  on  our  graves.  We  don't  want  Constanti- 
nople.   We  want  to  go  home.    We  don't  want  other 


70    THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

people  to  take  our  land  away  from  us.  Neither  will 
we  fight  to  take  other  people's  land  away  from 
them.' " 

But  even  if  they  had  the  will  to  fight,  what  could 
they  fight  with?  At  Wenden,  the  old  city  of  the 
Teutonic  Knights,  we  were  set  down  in  the  midst  of 
an  army  in  ruins.  Out  of  a  gray  sky  the  rain  poured 
down,  turning  roads  into  rivers,  and  the  soldiers' 
hearts  into  lead.  Out  of  the  trenches  gaunt  skele- 
tons rose  up  to  stare  at  us.  We  saw  famine-stricken 
men  falling  on  fields  of  turnips  to  devour  them  raw. 
We  saw  men  walking  barefoot  in  the  stubbled 
fields,  summer  uniforms  arriving  at  the  beginning 
of  winter,  horses  dropping  dead  in  mud  up  to  their 
bellies.  Above  the  lines  brazenly  hovered  the 
armored  planes  of  the  enemy  watching  every  move. 
There  were  no  air-craft  guns,  no  food,  no  clothes. 
And  to  crown  all,  no  faith  in  their  superiors. 

Because  their  officers  and  government  would  or 
could  do  nothing  for  them  the  soldiers  were  doing 
things  for  themselves.  On  all  sides,  even  in  trenches 
and  gun-positions,  new  Soviets  were  springing  up. 
Here  in  Wenden  there  were  three — (Is-ko-sol,  Is- 
ko-lat,  Is-ko-strel). 

We  were  guests  of  the  last,  the  Soviet  of  Lettish 
Sharp-Shooters,  the  most  literate,  the  most  valiant, 
the  most  revolutionary  of  all.  For  protection  against 
the  German  planes,  tib/^  conveoed  in  a  tree-§creened 
Vajlejr,  ten  tl^c^ii^dfb'rtAra  uniforms;  bJeiOjiipg  with 
the  aijtuton  tinted  leaves.     Even  with  the  threat 


THE  MAN  ON  HORSEBACK  71 

above  them,  every  mention  of  Kerensky's  name  drew 
gales  of  laughter,  every  mention  of  peace  thunders 
of  applause. 

"We  are  not  cowards  or  traitors,"  declared  the 
spokesmen.  "But  we  refuse  to  fight  until  we  know 
what  we  are  fighting  for.  We  are  told  this  is  a  war 
for  democracy.  We  do  not  believe  it.  We  believe 
the  Allies  are  land-grabbers  like  the  Germans.  Let 
them  show  that  they  are  not.  Let  them  declare  their 
peace  terms.  Let  them  publish  the  secret-treaties. 
Let  the  Provisional  Government  show  it  is  not  hand 
in  glove  with  the  Imperialists.  Then  we  will  lay 
down  our  lives  in  battle  to  the  last  man." 

This  was  the  root  of  the  debacle  of  the  great  Rus- 
sian armies.  Not  primarily  that  they  had  nothing 
to  fight  with  but  that  they  felt  they  had  nothing  to 
fight  jor. 

Backed  by  the  workingmen  the  soldiers  were  de- 
termined that  the  war  should  stop. 

The  bourgeoisie  backed  by  the  Al- 

Fate  of  the  hes   and   the   General   Staff   were 

Man  on  Horseback,     equally  determined   that  the  war 

should  go  on.    Continuing  the  war 

would  give  three  things  to  the  bourgeoisie:     (i)  It 

would  continue  to  give  them  enormous  profits  out  of 

army  contracts.     (2)  In  case  of  victory  it  would 

give  them,  as  their  share  in  the  loot,  the  Straits  and 

Constantinople.     (3)  It  would  give  them  a  chance 


72    THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

of  staving  off  the  ever  more  insistent  demands  of  the 
masses  for  land  and  factories. 

They  were  following  the  wisdom  of  Cath- 
erine the  Great  who  said:  "The  way  to  save  our 
empire  from  the  encroachment  of  the  people  is  to 
engage  in  war  and  thus  substitute  national  passions 
for  social  aspirations."  Now  the  social  aspirations 
of  the  Russian  masses  were  endangering  the  bour- 
geois empires  of  land  and  capital.  But  if  the  war 
could  go  on,  the  day  of  reckoning  with  the  masses 
would  be  postponed.  The  energies  absorbed  in 
carrying  on  the  war  could  not  be  used  in  carrying 
on  the  Revolution.  "On  with  the  war  to  a  vic- 
torious end!"  became  the  rallying  cry  of  the  bour- 
geoisie. 

But  the  Kerensky  government  no  longer  could 
control  the  soldiers.  They  no  longer  responded  to 
the  eloquence  of  this  romantic  man  of  words.  The 
bourgeoisie  set  out  to  find  a  Man  of  the  Sword.  .  .  . 
"Russia  must  have  a  strong  man  who  will  tolerate 
no  revolutionary  nonsense,  but  who  will  rule  with  an 
iron  hand,"  they  said.    "Let  us  have  a  Dictator." 

For  their  Man  on  Horseback  they  picked  the 
Cossack  General,  Kornilov.  At  the  conference  in 
Moscow  he  had  won  the  hearts  of  the  bourgeoisie 
by  calling  for  a  policy  of  blood  and  iron.  On  his 
own  initiative  he  had  introduced  capital  punishment 
in  the  army.  With  machine  guns  he  had  destroyed 
battalions  of  refractory  soldiers  and  placed  their 
stiffened  corpses  in  rows  along  the  fences.    He  de- 


THE  MAN  ON  HORSEBACK  73 

dared  that  onl}'-  drastic  medicine  of  this  kind  could 
cure  the  ills  of  Russia. 

On  September  9,  Kornilov  issued  a  proclamation 
declaring:  "Our  great  country  is  dying.  Under 
pressure  of  the  Bolshevik  majority  in  the  Soviet,  the 
Kerensky  government  is  acting  in  complete  accord 
with  the  plans  of  the  German  General  Staff.  Let  all 
who  believe  in  God  and  the  temples  pray  to  the 
Lord  to  manifest  the  miracle  of  saving  our  native 
land." 

He  drew  70,000  picked  troops  from  the  front. 
Many  of  them  were  Mohammedans — his  Turkoman 
bodyguard,  his  Tartar  horsemen  and  Circassian 
mountaineers.  On  the  hilts  of  their  swords  the  offi- 
cers swore  that  when  Petrograd  was  taken,  the 
atheist  Socialists  would  be  forced  to  finish  building 
the  great  mosque  or  be  shot.  With  aeroplanes,  Brit- 
ish armored  cars  and  the  blood-thirsty  Savage  Di- 
vision, he  advanced  on  Petrograd  in  the  name  of 
God  and  Allah. 

But  he  did  not  take  it. 

In  the  name  of  the  Soviets  and  the  Revolution  the 
masses  rose  as  one  man  to  the  defense  of  the  capital. 
Kornilov  was  declared  a  traitor  and  an  outlaw. 
Arsenals  were  opened  and  guns  put  in  the  hands  of 
the  workingmen.  Red  Guards  patrolled  the  streets, 
trenches  were  dug,  barricades  hastily  erected. 
Moslem  Socialists  rode  into  the  Savage  Division  and 
in  the  name  of  Marx  and  Mohammed  exhorted  the 
mountaineers  not  to  advance  against  the  Revolution. 


74    THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

Their  pleas  and  arguments  prevailed.  The  forces 
of  Kornilov  melted  away  and  the  "Dictator"  was 
captured  without  firing  a  single  shot.  The  bour- 
geoisie were  depressed  as  the  White  Hope  of  the 
Counter-Revolution  went  down  so  easily  before  the 
blows  of  the  Revolution. 

The  proletarians  were  correspondingly  elated. 
They  saw  the  strength  and  unity  of  their  forces. 

They  felt  anew  the  solidarity  binding  together  all 
sections  of  the  toiling  masses.  Trench  and  factory 
acclaimed  one  another.  Soldiers  and  workingmen 
paid  special  tribute  to  the  sailors  for  the  big  part 
they  played  in  this  affair. 


CHAPTER  V 

COMRADES    OF   THE    SEA 

WT  HEN  the  news  of  Kornilov's  advance  on  Petro- 
^  *  grad  was  flashed  to  Kronstadt  and  the  Baltic 
fleet,  it  aroused  the  sailors  like  a  thunderbolt.  From 
their  ships  and  island  citadel  they  came  pouring  out 
in  tens  of  thousands  and  bivouacked  on  the  Field 
of  Mars.  They  stood  guard  at  all  the  nerve  centres 
of  the  city,  the  railways  and  the  Winter  Palace. 
With  the  big  sailor  Dybenko  leading,  they  drove 
headlong  into  the  midst  of  Kornilov's  soldiers  ex- 
horting them  not  to  advance.  They  put  the  fear  of 
the  Revolution  into  the  hearts  of  the  Whites  and 
the  fire  and  zest  of  the  Revolution  into  the  blood 
of  their  fellow  Reds. 

In  July  Trotzky  had  hailed  them  as  "Pride  and 
Flower  of  the  Revolutionary  Forces!"  When  they 
had  been  damned  on  all  sides  for  some  brash  deeds 
at  Kronstadt  he  had  said:  "Yes,  but  when  & 
counter-revolutionary  general  tries  to  throw  a  noose 
around  the  neck  of  the  Revolution,  the  Cadets  will 
grease  the  rope  with  soap,  while  the  sailors  will 
come  to  fight  and  die  with  us  together!" 

So  it  proved  in  this  adventure  of  Kornilov.  And 
it  was  qjways  so.  Ail  over  Russia  I  had  met  these 
bluie'-blo'used  men  with  the  roll  of  the  sea  in  their 

75 


76    THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

carriage  and  the  tang  of  the  salt  winds  in  their 
blood.  Everywhere  they  went  expounding  the  doc- 
trines of  Socialism.  I  had  heard  them  in  forum  and 
market-places  stirring  the  sluggish  to  action.  I  had 
seen  them  in  remote  villages  starting  the  flow  of 
food  to  the  cities.  Later  when  the  Yunkers  rose 
against  the  Soviets  I  was  to  see  these  sailors  heading 
the  storming  party  that  rushed  the  telephone-sta- 
tion and  dug  the  Yunkers  from  their  nests.  Always 
they  were  first  to  sense  danger  to  the  Revolution, 
always  first  to  hurry  to  its  rescue. 

The  Revolution  was  precious  to  the  Russian  sailor 
because  it  meant  deliverance  from  the  past.  That 
past  was  a  nightmare.  The  old  Russian  naval  offi- 
cers came  exclusively  from  the  privileged  caste. 
The  count  against  them  was  that  they  imposed,  not 
a  rigid  discipline,  but  one  that  was  arbitrary  and 
personal.  The  weal  of  a  sailor  was  at  the  mercy 
of  the  whims,  jealousies  and  insane  rage  of  petty 
officers  whom  he  despised.  He  was  treated  like  a 
dog  and  humiliated  by  signs  that  read:  "For  Dogs 
and  Sailors." 

Like  the  soldier's,  the  sailor's  replies  to  his  su- 
perior were  limited  to  the  three  phrases:  "Quite 
so"  {tak  tochno)  "No  indeed"  (nekak  niet)  "Glad 
to  try  my  best"  {rad  staratsd),  with  the  salutation, 
"Your  nobility."  Any  added  remark  might  bring 
him  a  blow  in  the  face.  The  most  trivial  offense 
met  with  the  most  severe  penalty.  In  four  years 
2527  men  were  executed,  sent  to  the  penitentiary  or 


Obliterating'  the   Past.      Colossal   statue  cf   Czar  Alexander   III  being  dis- 
mantled after  the  Soviet  came  into  power.      Note  the  workman  at  extreme 
top  fixing  rope  on  the  crown.     (See  next  page.) 


u 


COMRADES  OF  THE  SEA  77 

to  hard  labor.    All  done  in  the  name  of  the  Czar. 

Now  the  Czars  were  gone;  their  very  names  were 
being  blotted  out.  The  ships  were  being  re-chris- 
tened with  names  fitting  the  new  republican  order. 

By  this  ceremony  the  Emperor  Paul  the  First  be- 
came The  Republic.  The  Emperor  Alexander  II 
emerged  from  its  baptism  of  paint  as  the  Dawn  of 
Liberty.  Here  was  revolution  enough  to  make  these 
ancient  autocrats  turn  in  their  graves.  But  it  was 
even  harder  on  the  living  Czar  and  his  son.  The 
Czarevitch  was  renamed  the  Citizen,  while  Nicholas 
II  came  forth  as  the  good  ship  Comrade.  Comrade ! 
This  ex-Czar,  now  living  in  exile  in  Tobolsk,  knew 
that  the  meanest  coal-heaver  was  now  a  "Comrade." 

The  new  names  appeared  in  gold  on  the  jaunty 
ribboned  caps  of  the  sailors.  And  the  sailors  ap- 
peared everywhere  as  missionaries  of  Liberty,  Com- 
radeship and  the  Republic. 

To  make  these  changes  in  the  names  of  the  ships 
was  very  easy.  Yet  they  were  not  mere  surface 
changes,  but  symbolized  a  change  in  reality.  They 
were  the  outward  and  visible  signs  of  an  inward  and 
spiritual  fact — the  democratization  of  a  great  fleet. 

In  September  I  had  my  first  contact 
The  Sailors  Rule  with  the  sailor  at  home.  It  was  at 
the  Navy.  Helsingfors    where    the    Baltic    fleet 

stood  as  a  barricade  on  the  water- 
road  to  Petrograd.  Tied  up  to  the  dock  was  the 
Polar  Star,  the  yacht  of  the  former  Czar.    Our  guide. 


78    THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

an  old  ex-officer,  pointed  out  a  strip  of  yellow  wood 
that  ran  around  the  ship. 

"That  moulding  is  of  best  mahogany,"  he  whis- 
pered to  us.  "It  cost  twenty-five  thousand  rubles, 
but  these  damned  Bolsheviks  are  too  lazy  now  to 
keep  it  polished,  so  they  painted  it  yellow.  In  my 
day  a  sailor  was  a  sailor;  he  knew  that  his  job  was 
to  scrub  and  polish,  and  he  tended  to  his  job.  If  he 
didn't  we  knocked  him  down.  But  the  devil  is  loose 
among  them  now.  Think  of  it!  On  this  very 
yacht  belonging  to  the  Czar  himself,  ordinary  sea- 
men sit  about  making  laws  for  managing  the  ships, 
the  fleet  and  the  country.  And  they  don't  stop 
there.  They  talk  about  managing  the  world.  In- 
ternationalism and  democracy  they  call  it,  but  I 
call  it  downright  treason  and  insanity." 

There  in  brief  was  the  issue  between  the  old 
regime  and  the  new.  In  the  old  order,  discipline 
and  control  were  superimposed  from  above;  in  the 
new,  they  proceeded  from  the  men  themselves.  The 
old  was  a  fleet  of  officers,  the  new  a  fleet  of  sailors. 
In  the  change  a  new  set  of  values  had  been  created. 
Now  the  polishing  of  the  sailor's  wits  upon  democ- 
racy and  internationalism  had  higher  rating  than 
polishing  the  brass  and  mahogany. 

The  second  index  of  the  temper  of  the  new  fleet 
came  to  us  as  we  climbed  the  gangway  of  the  Polar 
Star,  where  Rasputin  and  his  associates  once  had 
their  fling.  Here  Bessie  Beatty,  the  American  cor- 
respondent, was  gravely  informed  that  the  presence 


COMRADES  OF  THE  SEA  79 

of  her  sex  upon  the  ships  was  taboo — it  was  one  of 
the  new  rules  of  the  Soviet  of  Sailors.  The  captain 
was  polite,  much  adorned  with  gold  braid,  but  very 
helpless. 

"I  can  do  nothing  at  all,"  he  explained  dole- 
fully. "Everything  is  in  the  hands  of  the  'Com- 
mittee'." 

"But  she  has  come  ten  thousand  versts  to  see  the 
fleet." 

"Well,  we  can  see  what  the  Committee  says,"  he 
answered. 

The  messenger  came  back  with  a  special  dis- 
pensation from  the  Committee  and  we  were  on  our 
way  again.  Everywhere  members  of  the  crew  would 
challenge  the  presence  of  a  woman  in  our  party, 
politely  capitulating,  however,  as  the  captain  ex- 
plained, "By  special  permit  of  the  Committee." 

This  Central  Committee  of  the  Baltic  Sea,  or,  as 
it  was  familiarly  known,  the  Centrobalt,  sat  in  the 
great  cabin  de  luxe.  It  was  simply  a  Soviet  of  the 
ships.  Each  contingent  of  1,000  sailors  had  a  repre- 
sentative in  the  committee,  which  consisted  of  65 
members,  45  of  whom  were  Bolsheviks.  There  were 
four  general  departments:  Administrative,  PoHtical, 
War  and  Marine,  transacting  all  the  affairs  of  the 
fleet.  The  captain  had  one  of  the  former  princes' 
suites,  but  from  the  great  cabin  he  was  debarred. 
Happily  my  credentials  were  an  open  sesame  to  the 
committee  and  the  cabin. 

The  irony  of  history  1     Here  in  these  chairs  a 


8o    THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

few  months  ago  lolled  a  mediaeval  autocrat  with  his 
ladies  and  his  lackeys.  Now  big  bronzed  seamen  sat 
in  them,  hammering  out  problems  of  the  most  ad- 
vanced Socialism.  The  cabin  had  been  cleared  for 
action.  The  piano  and  many  decorations  had  been 
placed  in  a  museum.  The  tables  and  lounges  were 
covered  with  brown  canvas  burlap.  The  grand 
salon  was  now  a  workshop.  Here  hard  at  work  were 
ordinary  seamen  suddenly  turned  legislators,  di- 
rectors and  clerks.  They  were  a  bit  awkward  in 
their  new  role,  but  they  clung  to  it  with  desperate 
earnestness,  sixteen  hours  a  day.  For  they  were 
dreamers  gripped  by  an  idea,  the  drive  and  scope 
of  which  appear  in  the  following  address: 

To    the   Representative    of   the   American   Social 

Democracy,  Albert  Williams,  in  Reply  to  his 

Greetings. 

The  Russian  democracy  in  the  person  of  the  representatives  of 
the  Baltic  Fleet  sends  warm  greetings  to  the  proletariat  of  all 
countries  and  hearty  thanks  for  the  greetings  from  our  brothers 
in  America. 

Comrade  Williams  is  the  first  swallow  come  flying  across  to 
us  on  the  cold  waves  of  the  Baltic  Sea,  which  now  for  over  three 
years  has  been  dyed  by  the  blood  of  the  sons  of  one  family,  the 
International. 

The  Russian  proletariat  will  strive,  up  to  its  last  breath,  to 
unite  everybody  under  the  red  banner  of  the  International.  When 
starting  the  Revolution,  we  did  not  have  in  view  a  Political 
Revolution  alone.  The  task  of  all  true  fighters  for  freedom  is 
the  making  of  a  Social  Revolution.  For  this  the  advance  guard 
of  the  Revolution,  in  the  person  of  the  sailors  of  the  Russian 
Fleet,  and  the  workmen,  will  fight  to  the  end. 


COMRADES  OF  THE  SEA  8i 

The  flame  of  the  Russian  Revolution,  we  are  sure,  will  spread 
over  the  world  and  light  a  fire  in  the  hearts  of  the  workers  of  all 
lands,  and  we  shall  obtain  support  in  our  struggle  for  a  speedy 
general  peace. 

The  free  Baltic  Fleet  impatiently  awaits  the  moment  when  it 
can  go  to  America  and  relate  there  all  that  Russia  suffered  under 
the  yoke  of  Czarism,  and  what  it  is  feeling  now  when  the 
banner  of  the  struggle  for  the  freedom  of  peoples  is  unfurled. 

LONG  LIFE  TO  THE  AMERICAN  SOCIAL-DEMOCRACY. 

LONG  LIVE  THE  PROLETARIAT  OF  ALL  LANDS. 

LONG  LIVE  THE  INTERNATIONAL. 

LONG  LIVE  GENERAL  PEACE. 

The  Central  Committee  of  the  Baltic  Fleet,  Fourth  Convention. 

On  this  table  where  in  good  will  and  amity  they 
had  written  this  address  to  me,  these  sailors  dipped 
their  pens  in  vitriol  and  wrote  another.  It  was 
addressed  to  their  Commander-in-Chief,  Kerensky. 
He  was  unable  to  explain  his  part  in  the  Kornilov 
mix-up  and  had  just  made  an  offensive  reference  to 
the  sailors.  They  returned  the  compliment  in  this 
wise: 

We  demand  the  immediate  removal  from  the  Government  of 
the  "Socialist"  political  adventurer,  Kerensky,  who  is  ruining  the 
great  Revolution  by  his  shameless  political  blackmail  in  behalf  of 
the   bourgeoisie. 

To  you,  Kerensky,  traitor  to  the  Revolution,  v/e  send  our 
curses.  When  our  comrades  are  drowning  in  the  Gulf  of  Riga, 
and  when  all  of  us,  as  one  man, stand  ready  to  lay  down  our  lives 
for  freedom,  ready  to  die  in  open  fight  on  the  sea  or  on  the  bar- 
ricades, you  strive  to  destroy  the  forces  of  the  fleet.  To  you  we 
send  our  maledictions.  .  .  . 

This  day,  however,  the  men  were  in  festive  mood. 
They  were  happy  over  a  big  fund  just  raised  for 


82    THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

their  soldier  comrades  on  the  Riga  front,  and  now 
were  playing  host  to  their  first  foreign  comrade.  The 
Secretary  of  the  Committee  escorted  me  on  the  pilot- 
boat  to  his  battleship,  the  Republic.  The  entire  crew 
was  on  deck  cheering  our  approach  across  the  waters. 
After  an  official  welcome  there  were  loud  demands 
for  a  speech.  My  knowledge  of  Russian  was  very 
meagre  then,  and  my  interpreter  knew  but  little 
English.  I  had  to  fall  back  on  the  current  revolu- 
tionary phrases.  But  the  mere  reiteration  of  the 
new  battle  cries  had  power  to  charm  these  new  disci- 
ples of  Socialism.  The  sounding  of  these  slogans 
in  my  foreign  accent  drew  an  outburst  of  applause 
that  echoed  like  a  salvo  from  all  the  ship's  batteries. 
It  was  in  these  waters  that  the  historic  meeting 
between  the  Kaiser  and  the  Czar  had  been  staged. 
The  applause  could  not  have  been  more  thunderous 
(certainly  not  so  spontaneous)  than  when,  as  an 
American  Internationalist,  I  shook  hands  with  Ave- 
rishkin,  the  Russian  Internationalist,  on  the  bridge 
of  this  battleship  off  the  coast  of  Finland. 

After  our  love-feast  on  deck  we 
A  Ship's  Menu,  retired  to  the  quarters  of  the 

a  Club  and  a  College.      ship's  committee.     I  was  plied 

with  innumerable  questions  about 
the  American  navy,  ranging  from  "Do  American 
navy  officers  reflect  solely  the  viewpoint  of  the  upper 
classes?"  to  ''Are  American  battleships  kept  as  clean 
as  this  one  of  ours?"    As  we  talked,  eggs  and  steak 


COMRADES  OF  THE  SEA  83 

were  brought  to  me,  while  each  member  of  the  com- 
mittee was  served  with  a  large  plate  of  potatoes.  I 
commented  on  the  difference  in  the  dishes. 

"Yours  is  officer's  fare,  ours  is  sailor's,"  they  ex- 
plained. 

"Then  why  did  you  make  a  revolution?"  I  asked 
banteringly. 

They  laughed  and  said,  "The  Revolution  has 
given  us  what  we  wanted  most — freedom.  We  are 
masters  of  our  ships.  We  are  masters  of  our  own 
lives.  We  have  our  own  courts.  We  can  have  shore- 
leave  when  not  on  duty.  Off  duty  we  have  the  right 
to  wear  civilian  clothes.  We  do  not  demand  every- 
thing of  the  Revolution." 

The  world-wide  rise  of  the  workers,  however,  is 
based  on  their  desire,  not  solely  for  the  first  neces- 
sities of  life,  but  for  a  larger  part  in  its  amenities. 
Driving  through  Helsingfors  one  night  we  missed  the 
usual  bands  of  sailors  rolling  down  the  streets.  Sud- 
denly we  were  brought  sharply  up  before  a  building 
with  fagade  and  dimensions  of  a  great  modern  hotel. 
We  entered  and  were  guided  by  the  music  to  the 
dining-hall.  There,  in  a  room  set  with  palms  and 
glistening  with  mirrors  and  silver,  sat  the  diners, 
listening  to  Chopin  and  Tchaikovsky,  interspersed 
with  occasional  ragtime  from  the  American  conduc- 
tor. It  was  a  hotel  of  the  first  class,  but  instead  of 
the  usual  clientele  of  a  big  hotel — bankers,  specula- 
tors, politicians,  adventurers  and  ornate  ladies — it 
was  crowded  with  bronzed  seamen  of  the  war  fleet 


84    THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

of  the  Russian  Republic,  who  had  commandeered 
the  entire  building.  Thru  its  curtained  halls  now 
streamed  a  procession  of  laughing,  jesting,  arguing 
sailors  in  their  suits  of  blue. 

Outside  in  big  letters  was  the  sign  "Sailors*  Club" 
with  its  motto,  "A  welcome  to  all  the  sailors  of  the 
world."  It  opened  with  ten  thousand  dues-paying 
members,  ninety  per  cent  of  whom  were  literate. 
The  club  boasted  a  much-used  magazine  room,  the 
nucleus  of  a  library,  and  an  excellent  illustrated 
weekly,  The  Seaman  (Moryak). 

They  had  founded,  too,  a  "University,"  with 
courses  ranging  from  the  most  elementary  to  the 
most  advanced.  In  the  committee  on  curriculum  I 
blunderingly  asked  the  chairman  from  what  uni- 
versity he  came. 

"No  university,  no  school,"  he  replied  regretfully. 
"I  come  from  the  dark  people,  but  I  am  a  revolution- 
ist. We  did  away  with  the  Czar,  but  a  worse  enemy 
is  ignorance.  We  shall  do  away  with  that.  That  is 
the  only  way  to  get  a  democratic  fleet.  Now  we 
have  a  democratic  machine,  but  most  of  our  officers 
have  not  the  democratic  spirit.  We  must  train  our 
officers  out  of  the  ranks."  In  his  courses  he  had 
enlisted  professors  from  the  university,  men  from 
the  scientific  societies  and  some  officers. 

How  did  all  this  new  discipline  and  comfort  affect 
the  fleet?  Opinions  differed.  Many  officers  said 
that  in  destroying  the  old  discipline  the  technical 
efficiency  was  lowered.    Others  said  that  consider- 


.  vv vv vv 


:< 


> 


f AJV^gr;^:,^  |---^-M^-%S^^^y 


HErPAAOTHblHroT^KECAEnOH 

BCfOAy  EFO  >KAYT  HEYAAHH   H  HECHACTb^  • 


"THE  ILLITERATE  IS  A  BLIND  MAN:    Everywhere  Pitfalls  and 
Misfortunes  Await  Him." — Soviet  Poster  to  Encourage  Education. 


COMRADES  OF  THE  SEA  85 

ing  its  ordeal  by  war  and  revolution  the  fleet  was  in 
good  trim.  As  the  test  of  its  moral  efficiency,  they 
pointed  to  the  battle  of  the  Monsund  Isles.  Out- 
numbered by  the  Germans,  and  out-distanced  in 
speed  and  gun-range,  these  revolutionary  sailors  had 
fought  a  brilliant  engagement  with  the  enemy.  All 
admitted  that  their  fighting  morale  was  superb. 

There  was  no  doubt  of  the  enthusiasm  of  the 
sailors  for  their  fleet.  They  had  a  feeling  of  com- 
munal ownership  in  it.  When  the  pilot-boat  carried 
me  away  from  the  Republic,  Averishkin  with  a  ges- 
ture that  took  in  all  the  gray  ships  riding  in  the  bay, 
exclaimed,  "Our  fleet!  Our  fleet!  We  shall  make 
it  the  best  fleet  in  the  world.  May  it  always  fight 
for  justice!"  Then,  as  if  looking  thru  the  gray 
mists  which  hung  above  the  water  and  beyond  the 
red  mists  of  the  world  war,  he  added,  "Until  we  make 
the  Social  Revolution  and  the  end  of  all  wars." 

In  Russia  this  Social  Revolution  was  coming  on 
apace  and  these  men  of  the  fleet  were  shortly  to  be 
in  the  vortex  of  it. 


PART  II 

THE  REVOLUTION  AND  THE  DAYS 
AFTER 


AMONG    THE    WHITES    AND    THE    REDS 


CHAPTER  VI 

"all  power  to  the  soviet" 

A  NOTHER  winter  is  bearing  down  upon  hungry, 
•*-  ^  .  heartsick  Russia.  The  last  October  leaves  are 
falling  from  the  trees,  and  the  last  bit  of  confidence 
in  the  government  is  falling  with  them. 

Everywhere  recklessness  and  orgies  of  specula- 
tion. Food  trains  are  looted.  Floods  of  paper 
money  pour  from  the  presses.  In  the  newspapers 
endless  columns  of  hold-ups,  murders  and  suicides. 
Night  life  and  gambling-halls  run  full  blast  with 
enormous  stakes  V7on  and  lost. 

Reaction  is  open  and  arrogant.  Kornilov,  in- 
stead of  being  tried  for  high  treason,  is  lauded  as 
the  Great  Patriot  by  the  bourgeoisie.  But  with 
them  patriotism  is  tawdry  talk  and  a  sham.  They 
pray  for  the  Germans  to  come  and  cut  off  Petrograd, 
the  Head  of  the  Revolution. 

Rodzianko,  ex-President  of  the  Duma,  brazenly 
writes:  "Let  the  Germans  take  the  city.  Tho  they 
destroy  the  fleet  they  will  throttle  the  Soviets." 
The  big  insurance  companies  announce  one-third  off 
in  rates  after  the  German  occupation.     "Winter 

89 


90    THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

always  was  Russia's  best  friend,"  say  the  bourgeoisie. 
"It  may  rid  us  of  this  cursed  Revolution." 

Winter,  sweeping  down  out  of  the 
Despair  Foments  North,  hailed  by  the  privileged, 
Rebellion.  brings  terror  to  the  suffering  masses. 

As  the  mercury  drops  toward  zero, 
the  prices  of  food  and  fuel  go  soaring  up.  The 
bread  ration  grows  shorter.  The  queues  of  shiv- 
ering women  standing  all  night  in  the  icy  streets 
grow  longer.  Lockouts  and  strikes  add  to  the 
millions  of  workless.  The  rancor  in  the  hearts  of  the 
masses  flares  out  in  bitter  speeches  like  this  from  a 
Viborg  workingman: 

"Patience,  patience,  they  are  always  counselling 
us.  But  what  have  they  done  to  make  us  patient? 
Has  Kerensky  given  us  more  to  eat  than  the  Czar? 
More  words  and  promises — yes !  But  not  more  food. 
All  night  long  we  wait  in  the  lines  for  shoes  and 
bread  and  meat,  while,  like  fools,  we  write  'Liberty' 
on  our  banners.  The  only  liberty  we  have  is  the 
same  old  liberty  to  slave  and  starve." 

It  is  a  sorry  showing  after  eight  months  of  plead- 
ing and  parading  thru  the  streets.  All  they  have 
got  are  lame  feet,  aching  arms,  and  the  privilege 
of  starving  and  freezing  in  the  presence  of  mocking 
red  banners:  "Land  to  the  Peasants!"  "Factories 
to  the  Workers!"    "Peace  to  all  the  World!" 

But  no  longer  do  they  carry  their  red  banners 
thru  the  streets.    They  are  done  with  appealing  and 


"ALL  POWER  TO  THE  SOVIET"        91 

beseeching.  In  a  qicod  born  of  despair  and  disillu- 
sion they  are  acting  now — reckless,  violent,  icono- 
clastic, but — acting. 

In  the  cities  revolting  employees  are  driving  mill- 
owners  out  of  their  offices.  Managers  try  to  stop  it, 
and  are  thrown  into  wheel-barrows  and  ridden  out 
of  the  plant.  Machinery  is  put  out  of  gear,  mate- 
rials spoiled,  industry  brought  to  a  standstill. 

In  the  army  soldiers  are  throwing  down  their 
guns  and  deserting  the  front  in  hundreds  of  thou- 
sands. Emissaries  try  to  stop  them  with  frantic 
appeals.  They  may  as  well  appeal  to  a  landslide. 
"If  no  decisive  steps  for  peace  are  taken  by  Novem- 
ber first,"  the  soldiers  say,  "all  the  trenches  will 
be  emptied.  The  entire  army  will  rush  to  the  rear." 
In  the  fleet  is  open  insubordination. 

In  the  country,  peasants  are  overrunning  the 
estates.  I  ask  Baron  Nolde,  "What  is  it  that  the 
peasants  want  on  your  estate?" 

"My  estate,"  he  answers. 

"How  are  they  going  to  get  it?" 

"They've  got  it." 

In  some  places  these  seizures  are  accompanied  by 
wanton  spoliation.  The  skies  around  Tambov  are 
reddened  with  flames  from  the  burning  hay-ricks  and 
manor-houses.  Landlords  flee  for  their  lives.  The 
infuriated  peasants  laugh  at  the  orators  trying  to 
quiet  them.  Troops  sent  dovm  to  suppress  the  out- 
bursts go  over  to  the  side  of  the  peasants. 

Russia  is  plunging  headlong  towards  the  abyss. 


92    THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

Over  this  spectacle  of  misery  and  ruin  presides  a 
handful  of  talkers  called  the  Provisional  Govern- 
ment. It  is  almost  a  corpse,  treated  to  hypodermic 
injections  of  threats  and  promises  from  the  Allies. 
Before  tasks  calling  for  the  strength  of  a  giant  it  is 
weak  as  a  baby.  To  all  demands  of  the  people  it 
has  just  one  reply,  "Wait."  First,  it  was  "Wait 
till  the  end  of  the  war."  Now,  "Wait  till  the  Con- 
stituent Assembly." 

But  the  people  will  wait  no  longer.  Their  last 
shred  of  faith  in  the  government  is  gone.  They 
have  faith  in  themselves;  faith  that  they  alone  can 
save  Russia  from  going  over  the  precipice  to  ruin  and 
night;  faith  alone  in  the  institutions  of  their  own 
making.  They  look  now  to  the  new  authority  cre- 
ated out  of  their  own  midst.  They  look  to  the 
Soviets. 

Summer  and  fall  have  seen  the 
"Let  the  Soviets  Be     steady    growth    of    the    Soviets. 
the  Government."         They  have  drawn  to  themselves 
the  vital  forces  in  each  commu- 
nity.   They  have  been  schools  for  the  training  of  the 
people,  giving  them  confidence.     The  net-work  of 
local  Soviets  has  been  wrought  into  a  wide  firmly 
built  organization,  a  new  structure  which  has  risen 
within  the  shell  of  the  old.    As  the  old  apparatus  was 
going  to  pieces,  the  new  one  was  taking  over  its  func- 
tions.    The   Soviets  in  many  ways  were  already 
acting  as  a  government.    It  was  necessary  only  to 


"ALL  POWER  TO  THE  SOVIET"        93 

proclaim  them  the  government.  Then  the  Soviets 
would  be  in  name  what  they  were  already  in  reality. 

From  the  depths  now  lifted  up  a  mighty  cry: 
"All  power  to  the  Soviets'*  The  demand  of  the 
capital  in  July  became  the  demand  of  the  country. 
Like  wildfire  it  swept  thru  the  land.  Sailors  on  the 
Baltic  Fleet  flung  it  out  to  their  comrades  on  the 
Black  and  White  and  Yellow  seas,  and  from  them 
it  came  echoing  back.  Farm  and  factory,  barracks 
and  battle  front  joined  in  the  cry,  swelling  louder, 
more  insistent  every  hour. 

Petrograd  came  thundering  into  the  chorus  on 
Sunday,  November  4th,  in  sixty  enormous  mass 
meetings.  Trotzky  having  read  the  Reply  of  the 
Baltic  Fleet  to  my  Greetings  asked  me  to  speak 
at  the  People's  House. 

Here  great  waves  of  human  beings  dashed  against 
the  doors,  sv/irled  inside  and  sluiced  along  the  cor- 
ridors. They  poured  into  the  halls,  filling  them 
full,  splashing  hundreds  up  on  the  girders  where 
they  hung  like  garlands  of  foam.  Out  of  the  eddy- 
ing throngs,  a  mighty  voice  rose  and  fell  and  broke 
like  surf,  thundering  on  the  shore — hundreds  of 
thousands  of  throats  roaring  "Down  with  the  Pro- 
visional Government,"  "All  Power  to  the  Soviets'' 
Hundreds  of  thousands  of  hands  were  raised  in  a 
pledge  to  fight  and  die  for  the  Soviets. 

The  patience  of  the  poor  at  an  end;  the  pawns  and 
cannon-fodder  in  revolt!  The  dark  masses,  long 
inert,  but  roused  at  last,  refusing  longer  to  be  brow- 


94    THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

beaten  or  hypnotized  by  the  word-juggling  of  states- 
men, scorning  their  threats,  laughing  at  their  prom- 
ises, take  the  initiative  into  their  own  hands,  de- 
manding of  their  "leaders"  to  move  forward  into 
revolution  or  resign.  For  the  first  time  the  slaves 
and  the  exploited,  consciously  choosing  the  time  of 
their  deliverance,  vote  for  insurrection,  investing 
themselves  with  the  government  of  one-sixth  of  the 
world.  A  big  venture  for  men  unschooled  in  state 
affairs.  Are  they  equal  to  these  tasks?  Can  they 
control  the  currents  now  being  loosed  in  the  city? 
At  any  rate  these  masses  show  complete  control  of 
themselves.  From  these  blood-stirring  revolutionary 
meetings  they  pour  forth  in  orderly  fashion. 

The  poor  frightened  bourgeoisie  are  reassured. 
They  see  no  houses  looted,  no  shops  wrecked,  no 
white-collared  gentry  shot  down  in  the  streets.  To 
their  minds,  therefore,  all  is  well;  there  will  be  no 
insurrection.  The  true  import  of  this  restraint  quite 
escapes  them.  The  people  indulge  in  no  sporadic 
outbursts  because  they  have  better  use  for  their 
energies.  They  have  a  Revolution  to  make,  not  a 
riot.  And  a  Revolution  requires  order,  plan,  labor — 
much  hard  intensive  labor. 

These  insurgent  masses  go 
The  Masses  Conducting  home  to  organize  committees, 
their  Revolution.  draw  up  lists,  form  Red  Cross 

units,  collect  rifles.  Hands 
lifted  in  a  vote  for  Revolution  now  are  holding  guns. 


"ALL  POWER  TO  THE  SOVIET"        95 

They  get  ready  for  the  forces  of  the  Counter-Revo- 
lution  now  mobilizing  against  them.  In  Smohiy 
sits  the  Military  Revolutionary  Committee  from 
which  these  masses  take  orders.  There  is  another 
committee,  the  Committee  of  a  Hundred  Thousand; 
that  is,  the  masses  themselves.  There  are  no  by- 
streets, no  barracks,  no  buildings  where  this  com- 
mittee does  not  penetrate.  It  reaches  into  the  coun- 
cils of  the  Black  Hundred,  the  Kerensky  Govern- 
ment, the  intelligentsia.  With  porters,  waiters,  cab- 
men, conductors,  soldiers  and  sailors,  it  covers  the 
city  like  a  net.  They  see  everything,  hear  every- 
thing, report  everything  to  headquarters.  Thus, 
forewarned,  they  can  checkmate  every  move  of  the 
enemy.  Every  attempt  to  strangle  or  sidetrack  the 
Revolution  they  paralyze  at  once. 

Attempt  is  made  to  break  the  faith  of  the  masses 
in  their  leaders  by  furious  assault  upon  them.  Ker- 
ensky cries  from  the  tribunal  "Lenin,  the  state  crimi- 
nal, inciting  to  pillage  .  .  .  and  the  most  terrible 
massacres  which  will  cover  with  eternal  shame  the 
name  of  free  Russia."  Immediately  the  masses 
reply  by  bringing  Lenin  out  of  hiding  with  a  tre- 
mendous ovation  and  turning  Smolny  into  an  arsenal 
to  guard  him. 

Attempt  is  made  to  drown  the  Revolution  in 
blood  and  disorder.  The  Dark  Forces  keep  calling 
the  people  to  rise  up  and  slaughter  Jews  and  Socialist 
leaders.     Forthwith  the  workmen  placard  the  city 


96    THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

with  posters  saying  "Citizens!  We  call  upon  you 
to  maintain  complete  quiet  and  self-possession.  The 
cause  of  order  is  in  strong  hands.  At  the  first 
instance  of  robbery  and  shooting,  the  criminals  will 
be  wiped  off  the  face  of  the  earth." 

Attempts  are  made  to  isolate  the  different  sections 
of  the  revolutionists.  Telephones  are  cut  off  be- 
tween Soviets  and  barracks;  immediately  communi- 
cations are  established  by  setting  up  telephono- 
graph  apparatus.  The  Yunkers  turn  the  bridges, 
cutting  off  the  working-class  districts;  the  Kronstadt 
sailors  close  them  again.  The  offices  of  the  Com- 
munist papers  are  locked  and  sealed,  cutting  off 
the  flow  of  news;  the  Red  Guards  break  the  seals 
and  set  the  presses  running  again. 

Attempt  is  made  to  suppress  the  Revolution  by 
force  of  arms.  Kerensky  begins  calling  "depend- 
able" troops  into  the  city;  that  is,  troops  that  may 
be  depended  upon  to  shoot  down  the  rising  workers. 
Among  these  are  the  Zenith  Battery  and  the  Cyclists' 
Battalion.  Along  the  highroads  on  which  these 
units  are  advancing  into  the  city  the  Revolution 
posts  its  forces.  They  attack  the  enemy,  not  with 
guns  but  with  ideas.  They  subject  these  troops  to 
a  withering  fire  of  arguments  and  pleas.  Result: 
these  troops  that  are  being  rushed  to  the  city  to 
crush  the  Revolution  enter  instead  to  aid  and  abet  it. 

To  these  zealots  of  the  Communist  faith,  all  sol- 
diers succumb,  even  the  Cossacks.    "Brother  Cos- 


TM    C     KEM? 

€  HAM  H  HAH  CUM  mm: 


The  Red  Peasant.   Soldier   and   Workingman    (on    the   left)    to  the 

Cossack    (center)  :   Cossack,  with  whom  are  you?     With  us  or 

WITH  them? — (The  Landlords,  Generals  and  Capitalists). 


"ALL  POWER  TO  THE  SOVIET"        97 

sacks!"  reads  the  appeal  to  them,  "you  are  being 
incited  against  us  by  grafters,  parasites,  landlords 
and  by  our  own  Cossack  generals  who  wish  to  crush 
our  Revolution.  Comrade  Cossacks!  Do  not  fall 
in  with  this  plan  of  Cain."  And  the  Cossacks  like- 
wise line  up  under  the  banner  of  the  Revolution. 


CHAPTER  VII 

NOVEMBER   7TH — A  NEW  DATE  IN  HISTORY 

TXT" HILE  Petrograd  is  in  a  tumult  of  dashing  pa- 
^  "  trols  and  contending  voices,  men  from  all  over 
Russia  come  pouring  into  the  city.  They  are  dele- 
gates to  the  Second  All-Russian  Congress  of  Soviets 
convening  at  Smolny.  All  eyes  are  turned  towards 
Smolny. 

Formerly  a  school  for  the  daughters  of  the  no- 
bility, Smolny  is  now  the  center  of  the  Soviets.  It 
stands  on  the  Neva,  a  huge  stately  structure,  cold 
and  grey  by  day.  But  by  night,  glowing  with  a 
hundred  lamp-lit  windows,  it  looms  up  like  a  great 
temple — a  temple  of  Revolution,  The  two  watch 
fires  before  its  porticos,  tended  by  long-coated 
soldiers,  flame  like  altar-fires.  Here  are  centered  the 
hopes  and  prayers  of  untold  millions  of  the  poor 
and  disinherited.  Here  they  look  for  release  from 
age-long  suffering  and  tyranny.  Here  are  wrought 
out  for  them  issues  of  life  and  death. 

That  night  I  saw  a  laborer,  gaunt,  shabbily-clad, 
plodding  down  a  dark  street.  Lifting  his  head  sud- 
denly he  saw  the  massive  fagade  of  Smolny,  glowing 
golden  thru  the  falling  snow.  Pulling  off  his  cap, 
he  stood  a  moment  with  bared  head  and  outstretched 

98 


A  NEW  DATE  IN  HISTORY  99 

arms.  Then  crying  out,  '^The  Commune!  The 
People!  The  Revolution!"  he  ran  forward  and 
merged  with  the  throng  streaming  thru  the  gates. 

Out  of  war,  exile,  dungeons,  Siberia,  come  these 
delegates  to  Smolny.  For  years  no  news  of  old 
comrades.  Suddenly,  cries  of  recognition,  a  rush 
into  one  another's  arms,  a  few  words,  a  moment's 
embrace,  then  a  hastening  on  to  conferences,  cau- 
cuses, endless  meetings. 

Smolny  is  now  one  big  forum,  roaring  like  a  gigan- 
tic smithy  with  orators  calling  to  arms,  audiences 
whistling  or  stamping,  the  gavel  pounding  for  order, 
the  sentries  grounding  arms,  machine-guns  rumbling 
across  the  cement  floors,  crashing  choruses  of  revo- 
lutionary hymns,  thundering  ovations  for  Lenin  and 
Zinoviev  as  they  emerge  from  underground. 

Everything  at  high  speed,  tense  and  growing 
tenser  every  minute.  The  leading  workers  are  dyna- 
mos of  energy;  sleepless,  tireless,  nerveless  miracles 
of  men,  facing  momentous  questions  of  Revolution. 

At  ten-forty  on  this  night  of  November  7th,  opens 
the  historic  meeting  so  big  with  consequences  for  the 
future  of  Russia  and  the  whole  world.  From  their 
party  caucuses  the  delegates  file  into  the  great 
assembly-hall.  Dan,  the  anti-Bolshevik  chairman, 
is  on  the  platform  ringing  the  bell  for  order  and 
declares,  ''The  first  session  of  the  Second  Congress 
of  Soviets  is  now  open." 

First  comes  the  election  of  the  governing  body  of 
the  congress  (the  presidium).    The  Bolsheviks  get 


100  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

14  members.  All  other  parties  get  11.  The  old 
governing  body  steps  down  and  the  Bolshevik  lead- 
ers, recently  the  outcasts  and  outlaws  of  Russia,  take 
their  places.  The  Right  parties,  composed  largely 
of  intelligentsia,  open  with  an  attack  on  credentials 
and  orders  of  the  day.  Discussion  is  their  forte. 
They  delight  in  academic  issues.  They  raise  fine 
points  of  principle  and  procedure. 

Then,  suddenly  out  of  the  night,  a  rumbling  shock 
brings  the  delegates  to  their  feet,  wondering.  It  is 
the  boom  of  cannon,  the  cruiser  Aurora  firing  over 
the  Winter  Palace.  Dull  and  muffled  out  of  the 
distance  it  comes  with  steady,  regular  rhythm,  a 
requiem  tolling  the  death  of  the  old  order,  a  saluta- 
tion to  the  new.  It  is  the  voice  of  the  masses  thun- 
dering to  the  delegates  the  demand  for  ''All  Power 
to  the  Soviets"  So  the  question  is  acutely  put  to 
the  Congress:  "Will  you  now  declare  the  Soviets 
the  government  of  Russia,  and  give  legal  basis  to  the 
new  authority?" 

Now  comes  one  of  the  startling  para- 

The  Intelligentsia     doxes  of  history,  and  one  of  its  co- 

Desert.  lossal  tragedies — the  refusal  of  the 

intelligentsia.    Among  the  delegates 

were  scores  of  these  intellectuals.    They  had  made 

the   "dark  people"   the  object  of  their   devotion. 

"Going  to  the  people"  was  a  religion.    For  them  they 

had  suffered  poverty,  prison  and  exile.     They  had 

stirred    the    quiescent    masses   with    revolutionary 


A  NEW  DATE  IN  HISTORY  loi 

ideas,  inciting  them  to  revolt.  The  character  and 
nobility  of  the  masses  had  been  ceaselessly  extolled. 
In  short,  the  intelligentsia  had  made  a  god  of  the 
people.  Now  the  people  were  rising  with  the  wrath 
and  thunder  of  a  god,  imperious  and  arbitrary. 
They  were  acting  like  a  god. 

But  the  intelligentsia  reject  a  god  who  will  not 
listen  to  them  and  over  whom  they  have  lost  control. 
Straightway  the  intelligentsia  became  atheists.  They 
disavow  all  faith  in  their  former  god,  the  people. 
They  deny  their  right  to  rebellion. 

Like  Frankenstein  before  this  monster  of  their 
own  creation,  the  intelligentsia  quail,  trembling  with 
fear,  trembling  with  rage.  It  is  a  bastard  thing,  a 
devil,  a  terrible  calamity,  plunging  Russia  into  chaos, 
"a  criminal  rebellion  against  authority."  They  hurl 
themselves  against  it,  storming,  cursing,  beseeching, 
raving.  As  delegates  they  refuse  to  recognize  this 
Revolution.  They  refuse  to  allow  this  Congress  to 
declare  the  Soviets  the  government  of  Russia. 

So  futile !  So  impotent!  They  may  as  well  refuse 
to  recognize  a  tidal  wave,  or  an  erupting  volcano  as 
to  refuse  to  recognize  this  Revolution.  This  Revo- 
lution is  elemental,  inexorable.  It  is  everywhere,  in 
the  barracks,  in  the  trenches,  in  the  factories,  in  the 
streets.  It  is  here  in  this  congress,  officially,  in  hun- 
dreds of  workmen,  soldier  and  peasant  delegates. 
It  is  here  unofficially  in  the  masses  crowding  every 
inch  of  space,  climbing  up  on  pillars  and  window- 
sills,  making  the  assembly  hall  white  with  fog  from 


102  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

their  close-packed  steaming  bodies,  electric  with  the 
intensity  of  their  feelings. 

The  people  are  here  to  see  that  their  revolutionary- 
will  is  done;  that  the  congress  declares  the  Soviets 
the  government  of  Russia.  On  this  point  they  are 
inflexible.  Every  attempt  to  becloud  the  issue,  every 
effort  to  paralyze  or  evade  their  will  evokes  blasts  of 
angry  protest. 

The  parties  of  the  Right  have  long  resolutions 
to  offer.  The  crowd  is  impatient.  "No  more  reso- 
lutions! No  more  words!  We  want  deeds!  We 
want  the  Soviet!" 

The  intelligentsia,  as  usual,  wish  to  compromise 
the  issue  by  a  coalition  of  all  parties.  "Only  one 
coalition  possible,"  is  the  retort.  "The  coalition  of 
workers,  soldiers  and  peasants." 

Martov  calls  out  for  "a  peaceful  solution  of  the 
impending  civil  war."  "Victory!  Victory! — the 
only  possible  solution,"  is  the  answering  cry. 

The  officer  Kutchin  tries  to  terrify  them  with  the 
idea  that  the  Soviets  are  isolated,  and  that  the  whole 
army  is  against  them.  "Liar!  Staff!"  yell  the 
soldiers.  "You  speak  for  the  staff — not  the  men  in 
the  trenches.  We  soldiers  demand  'All  Power  to  the 
Soviets!'" 

Their  will  is  steel.  No  entreaties  or  threats  avail 
to  break  or  bend  it.  Nothing  can  deflect  them  from 
their  goal. 

Finally  stung  to  fury,  Abramovich  cries  out,  "We 
cannot  remain  here  and  be  responsible  for  thfesfe 


A  NEW  DATE  IN  HISTORY  103 

crimes.  We  invite  all  delegates  to  leave  this  con- 
gress." With  a  dramatic  gesture  he  steps  from  the 
platform  and  stalks  towards  the  door.  About  eighty 
delegates  rise  from  their  seats  and  push  their  way 
after  him. 

''Let  them  go,"  cries  Trotzky,  "let  them  go! 
They  are  just  so  much  refuse  that  will  be  swept  into 
the  garbage-heap  of  history." 

In  a  storm  of  hoots,  jeers  and  taunts  of  "Rene- 
gades! Traitors!"  from  the  proletarians,  the  in- 
telligentsia pass  out  of  the  hall  and  out  of  the 
Revolution.  A  supreme  tragedy !  The  intelligentsia 
rejecting  the  Revolution  they  had  helped  to  create, 
deserting  the  masses  in  the  crisis  of  their  struggle. 
Supreme  folly,  too.  They  do  not  isolate  the  Soviets, 
they  only  isolate  themselves.  Behind  the  Soviets 
are  rolling  up  solid  battalions  of  support. 

Every  minute  brings  news  of 
The  Soviets  Proclaimed  fresh  conquests  of  the  Revo- 
the  Government.  lution— the  arrest  of  ministers, 

the  seizure  of  the  State  Bank, 
telegraph  station,  telephone  station,  the  staff  head- 
quarters. One  by  one  the  centers  of  power  are 
passing  into  the  hands  of  the  people.  The  spectral 
authority  of  the  old  government  is  crumbling  be- 
fore the  hammer  strokes  of  the  insurgents. 

A  commissar,  breathless  and  mud-spattered  from 
riding,  climbs  the  platform  to  announce:  "The 
garrison  of  Tsarskoye  Selo  for  the  Soviets.    It  stands 


104  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

guard  at  the  gates  of  Petrograd."  From  another: 
"The  Cyclists'  Battalion  for  the  Soviets.  Not  a 
single  man  found  willing  to  shed  the  blood  of  his 
brothers."  Then  Krylenko,  staggering  up,  telegram 
in  hand:  "Greetings  to  the  Soviet  from  the  Twelfth 
Army!  The  Soldiers'  Committee  is  taking  over 
the  command  of  the  Northern  Front." 

And  finally  at  the  end  of  this  tumultuous  night,  out 
of  this  strife  of  tongues  and  clash  of  wills,  the 
simple  declaration:  *'The  Provisional  Government  is 
deposed.  Based  upon  the  will  of  the  great  majority 
of  workers,  soldiers  and  peasants,  the  Congress  of 
Soviets  assumes  the  power.  The  Soviet  authority 
will  at  once  propose  an  immediate  democratic  peace 
to  all  nations,  an  immediate  truce  on  all  fronts.  It 
will  assure  the  free  transfer  of  lands  .  .  .  etc." 

Pandemonium!  Men  weeping  in  one  another's 
arms.  Couriers  jumping  up  and  racing  away.  Tele- 
graph and  telephone  buzzing  and  humming.  Autos 
starting  off  to  the  battle- front;  aeroplanes  speeding 
away  across  rivers  and  plains.  Wireless  flashing 
across  the  seas.    All  messengers  of  the  great  news! 

The  will  of  the  revolutionary  masses  has  tri- 
umphed.   The  Soviets  are  the  government. 

This  historic  session  ends  at  six  o'clock  in  the 
morning.  The  delegates,  reeling  from  the  toxin  of 
fatigue,  hollow-eyed  from  sleeplessness,  but  exultant, 
stumble  down  the  stone  stairs  and  thru  the  gates  of 
Smolny.  Outside  it  is  still  dark  and  chill,  but  a  red 
dawn  is  breaking  in  the  east. 


w. 


Pi 


Ph    o 


T 


CHAPTER  VIII 

LOOTING  THE  WINTER  PALACE 

HE  Russian  poet,  Tyutchev,  writes: 

"Blessed  is  he  who  visited  this  world 
In  moments  of  its  fateful  deeds: 
The  highest  Gods  invited  him  to  come, 
A  guest,  with  them  to  sit  at  feast 
And  be  a  witness  of  their  mighty  spectacle* 

Twice  blessed  were  five  Americans:  Louise 
Bryant,  John  Reed,  Bessie  Beatty,  Gumberg  and 
myself.  We  were  spectators  of  the  great  drama 
enacted  in  the  halls  of  Smolny:  we  also  saw  the  other 
big  event  of  the  night  of  November  7th — the  taking 
of  the  Winter  Palace. 

We  had  been  sitting  in  Smolny,  gripped  by  the 
pleas  of  the  speakers,  when  out  of  the  night  that 
other  voice  crashed  into  the  lighted  hall — the  cannon 
of  the  cruiser  Aurora,  firing  at  the  Winter  Palace. 
Steady,  insistent,  came  the  ominous  beat  of  the 
cannon,  breaking  the  spell  of  the  speakers  upon 
us.    We  could  not  resist  its  call  and  hurried  away. 

Outside,  a  big  motor-truck  with  engines  throbbing 
was  starting  for  the  city.  We  climbed  aboard 
and  tore  thru  the  night,  a  plunging  comet,  flying  a 
tail  of  white  posters  in  our  wake.  From  alleys  and 
doorways  dim  figures  darted  out  to  snatch  them 
up  and  read: 

los 


Ki»  roaMCAaHaMii  Poccih. 

BpeMeasoe  Dpasmn^cTso  mmma.  h'm* 
STsemn  mm  sepema  si  pp  opm  leTpo- 
rpaparoCuskPagoiiisiiHCoweKmllenjTa- 
m  loeRHO-FessffiQijosBaro  E9M6?a,  cro^iiaro 

IB  rJiasHe^orpaparo  spompiaTa  s  rapssso&a. 

UtE  3a  KDTop  6opu  Hapojn;  BeMepeioe  mi- 
iiei  poKpamcra  ma,  om^i  noMnibiii 

ilOSCTBeHHOGTH  1 380,  paM  iHTPOJIIi  Hajili  UPOHSBOA- 

GTim  mm  Mmm  (IpHreiGTBa-ai 


IlA3JIPMByETbPEB011Piim.C0Jin 
HKPMbili! 

BoeBaO'Feaojztoj^ioBBMA  JVoAtvreTX 
npa  HeTporpa^cKOnx^  Cob±vM 
PaGovax'B  a  Cojijia.TcisBX'B  .^eiryTaroas. 

2d  OKTJiCpa  tW  r.  10  ^  ytpa. 

io6 


From  t]ie  War-RevoluMonary  Committee  of  the  Petrograd 
Soviet  of  Workmen  and  Soldiers  Deputies. 


To  the  Citizens  of  Russia: 

Ihe  Provisional  GoYernmtisiieposed.'Ilie  State 
powerliaspassedintothe  hands  ofthe  organ  of  the 
PetrogradSovietoflrkersandSold{eisDeputies,the 
litargEeyoktionary  Comniittee,whichMatthe 

head  of  the  Petrograd  proletariat  andgarrison. 

IteiisforwMclithepeoiilewefigltinji-iittpraposal 
ofaileicraticpeaceitiollyfliiiipiDpertrtlitsMe 
WJaloraiMQverpiflWonmatioDofaSoyiBtGoviiiiiefll 
-teaistaveteMcliM. 

LOiG  UVEMMOlUraOFlMEKSOlElSMD 

PEASANTS! 

MUitaru-^RevoJutionary  Cpmrnittee 

of  the  Petrograd  So^ne^  of 

Wortters  and  Soldier's 'Deputies. 

November  7. 1917 

[Reproduction  in  English  of  the  Russian  text  on  opposite  page.] 
107 


io8  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

This  announcement  is  a  trifle  previous.  The  min- 
isters of  the  Provisional  Government,  minus  Ker- 
ensky,  still  sit  at  council  in  the  Winter  Palace.  That 
is  why  the  guns  of  the  Aurora  are  in  action.  They 
are  thundering  into  the  ears  of  the  ministers  the 
summons  to  surrender.  True,  only  blank  shells  are 
firing  now,  but  they  set  the  air  shivering,  shaking 
the  building  and  the  nerves  of  the  ministers  within. 

As  we  come  into  the  Palace  Square  the  booming 
of  the  guns  dies  away.  The  rifles  no  longer  crackle 
thru  the  dark.  The  Red  Guards  are  crawling  out 
to  carry  off  their  dead  and  dying.  Out  of  the  night 
a  voice  cries,  ''The  Yunkers  surrender."  But  mind- 
ful of  their  losses,  the  besieging  sailors  and  soldiers 
cling  to  cover. 

New  throngs  gather  on  the  Nevsky. 

The  Mob  Enters    Forming  a  column,  they  pour  thru  the 

the  Palace.  Red  Arch  and  creep  forward,  silent. 

Near  the  barricade  they  emerge  into 

the  light  blazing  from  within  the  Palace.     They 

scale  the  rampart  of  logs,  and  storm  thru  the  iron 

gateway  into  the  open  doors  of  the  east  wing — the 

mob  swarming  in  behind  them. 

From  cold  and  darkness,  these  proletarians  come 
suddenly  into  v/armth  and  light.  From  huts  and 
barracks  they  pass  into  glittering  salons  and  gilded 
chambers.  This  is  indeed  Revolution — the  builders 
entering  into  the  Palace  they  built. 
And  such  a  building!    Ornate  with  statues  of  gold 


LOOTING  THE  WINTER  PALACE     109 

and  bronze,  and  carpeted  with  Oriental  rugs,  its 
rooms  hung  with  tapestries  and  paintings,  and 
flooded  with  a  million  lights  from  the  twinkling  crys- 
tal chandeliers,  its  cellars  crammed  with  rare  wines 
and  liquors  of  ancient  vintage.  Riches  beyond  their 
dreams  are  within  their  grasp.  Why  not  grasp 
them? 

A  terrible  lust  lays  hold  of  the  mob — the  lust  that 
ravishing  beauty  incites  in  the  long  starved  and  long 
denied — the  lust  of  loot.  Even  we,  as  spectators, 
are  not  immune  to  it.  It  burns  up  the  last  vestige 
of  restraint  and  leaves  one  passion  flaming  in  the 
veins — the  passion  to  sack  and  pillage.  Their  eyes 
fall  upon  this  treasure-trove,  and  their  hands  follow. 

Along  the  walls  of  the  vaulted  chamber  we  enter 
there  runs  a  row  of  huge  packing-cases.  With  the 
butts  of  their  rifles,  the  soldiers  batter  open  the 
boxes,  spilling  out  streams  of  curtains,  linen,  clocks, 
vases  and  plates. 

Scorning  such  petty  booty,  the  throngs  swirl  past 
to  richer  hunting-grounds.  The  vanguard  presses 
forward  thru  gorgeous  chambers  opening  into  ever 
more  gorgeous  ones,  lined  with  cabinets  and  ward- 
robes. They  fall  upon  them  with  shouts  of  expectant 
joy.  Then  cries  of  anger  and  chagrin.  They  find 
mirrors  shattered,  panels  kicked  in,  drawers  rifled — 
everywhere  the  trail  of  vandals  who  have  gone 
before.  The  Yunkers  have  taken  the  cream  of  the 
plunder. 

So  much  is  gone!     So  much  intenser,  then,  the 


110  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

struggle  for  what  remains.  Who  shall  gainsay  them 
the  right  to  this  Palace  and  its  contents?  All  of  it 
came  out  of  their  sweat  and  the  sweat  of  their 
fathers.  It  is  theirs  by  right  of  creation.  It  is  theirs, 
too,  by  right  of  conquest.  By  the  smoking  guns  in 
their  hands  and  the  courage  in  their  hearts  they  have 
taken  it.  But  how  long  can  they  keep  it?  For  a 
century  it  was  the  Czar's.  Yesterday  it  was  Ker- 
ensky's.  Today  it  is  theirs.  Tomorrow  it  shall  be 
— whose?  No  one  can  tell.  This  day  the  Revolu- 
tion gives.  Next  day  the  Counter-Revolution  may 
snatch  away.  Now  while  the  prize  is  theirs  shall 
they  not  make  the  most  of  it?  Here  where  cour- 
tiers wantoned  for  a  century  shall  they  not  revel  for 
a  night?  Their  outraged  past,  the  feverish  present, 
the  uncertain  future — everything  urges  them  to  grasp 
what  they  can  now. 

Pandemonium  breaks  loose  in  the  Palace.  It 
rolls  and  echoes  with  myriad  sounds.  Tearing  of 
cloth  and  wood,  clatter  of  glass  from  splintered  win- 
dows, clumping  of  heavy  boots  upon  the  parquet 
floor,  the  crashing  of  a  thousand  voices  against  the 
ceiling.  Voices  jubilant,  then  jangling  over  division 
of  the  spoils.  Voices  hoarse,  high-pitched,  mutter- 
ing, cursing. 

Then  another  voice  breaks  into  this  babel — the 
clear,  compelling  voice  of  the  Revolution.  It  speaks 
thru  the  tongues  of  its  ardent  votaries,  the  Petro- 
grad  workingmen.  There  is  just  a  handful  of  them, 
weazened  and  undersized,  but  into  the  ranks  of 


LOOTING  THE  WINTER  PALACE     iii 

these  big  peasant  soldiers  they  plunge,  crying  out — 
"Take  nothing.  The  Revolution  forbids  it.  No 
looting.     This  is  the  property  of  the  people." 

Children  piping  against  a  cyclone,  dwarfs  attack- 
ing an  army  of  giants.  So  seem  these  protesters,  try- 
ing to  stem  with  words  the  onslaught  of  soldiers 
flushed  with  conquest,  pillage-bent.  The  mob  goes 
on  pillaging.  Why  should  it  heed  the  protest  of  a 
handful  of  workmen? 

But  these  workmen  will  be 
The  Restraining  Hand  heeded.  Back  of  their  words 
oj  Revolution.  they  feel  the  will  of  the  Revo- 

lution. It  makes  them  fearless 
and  aggressive.  They  turn  upon  the  big  soldiers 
with  fury,  hurl  epithets  into  their  faces,  wrest  the 
booty  out  of  their  hands.  In  a  short  time  they  have 
them  on  the  defensive. 

A  big  peasant  making  off  with  a  heavy  woolen 
blanket  is  waylaid  by  a  little  workingman.  He 
grabs  hold  of  the  blanket,  tugs  away  at  one  end  of 
it,  scolding  the  big  fellow  like  a  child. 

"Let  go  the  blanket,"  growls  the  peasant,  his 
face  convulsed  with  rage.    "It's  mine." 

"No,  no,"  the  workingman  cries,  "it's  not  yours. 
It  belongs  to  all  the  people.  Nothing  goes  out  of 
the  Palace  tonight." 

"Well,  this  blanket  goes  out  tonight.  It's  cold  in 
the  barracks!" 

"I'm  sorry  you're  cold,  tovarish.    Better  for  you 


112  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

to  suffer  cold  than  the  Revolution  to  suffer  disgrace 
by  your  looting." 

"Devil  take  you/'  exclaims  the  peasant.  "What 
did  we  make  the  Revolution  for,  anyhow?  Wasn't 
it  to  give  clothes  and  food  to  the  people?" 

"Yes,  tovarish,  the  Revolution  will  give  every- 
thing you  need  in  due  time,  but  not  tonight.  If  any- 
thing goes  out  of  here  we  will  be  called  hooligans  and 
robbers — not  true  Socialists.  Our  enemies  will  say 
that  we  came  here  not  for  revolution,  but  for  loot. 
So  we  must  take  nothing.  For  this  is  the  property 
of  the  people.  Let  us  guard  it  for  the  honor  of  the 
Revolution." 

"Socialism!  The  Revolution!  Property  of  the 
People!"  With  this  formula  the  peasant  saw  his 
blanket  taken  away  from  him.  Always  these  ab- 
stract ideas  adorned  with  capital  letters  taking 
things  away  from  him.  Once  it  was  done  with 
"Czardom,  The  Glory  of  God."  Now  it  was  being 
done  with  "Socialism,  Revolution,  Property  of  the 
People." 

Still  there  was  something  in  this  last  concept  that 
the  peasant  could  grasp.  It  was  in  line  with  his 
communal  training.  As  it  took  hold  of  his  brain  his 
hold  on  the  blanket  relaxed,  and  with  a  last  tragic 
look  at  his  precious  treasure  he  shambled  away. 
Later  I  saw  him  expounding  to  another  soldier.  He 
was  talking  about  the  "Property  of  the  People." 

Relentlessly  the  workingmen  press  home  their 
advantage,  using  every  tactic,  pleading,  explaining, 


LOOTING  THE  WINTER  PALACE     113 

threatening.  In  an  alcove  is  a  Bolshevik  working- 
man,  furiously  shaking  one  hand  at  three  soldiers, 
the  other  hand  on  his  revolver, 

"I  hold  you  responsible,  if  you  touch  that  desk," 
he  cries. 

"Hold  us  responsible!"  jeer  the  soldiers.  "Who 
are  you?  You  broke  into  the  Palace  just  as  we 
did.    We  are  responsible  to  no  one  but  ourselves." 

"You  are  responsible  to  the  Revolution,"  retorts 
the  workingman  sternly.  So  deadly  earnest  is  he 
that  these  men  feel  in  him  the  authority  of  the  Revo- 
lution.   They  hear  and  obey. 

The  Revolution  loosed  the  daring  and  ardor  j.b 
these  masses.  It  used  them  to  storm  the  Palace. 
Now  it  leashes  them  in.  Out  of  bedlam  it  brings 
forth  a  controlling  power — quieting,  imposing  order, 
posting  sentries. 

"All  out!  Clear  the  Palace!"  sounds  thru  the 
corridors,  and  the  throng  begins  to  flow  toward  the 
doors.  At  each  exit  stands  a  self-appointed  Com- 
mittee of  Search  and  Inspection.  They  lay  hold  oi 
each  man  as  he  comes  along,  exploring  his  pockets, 
shirt  and  even  his  boots,  gathering  in  a  varied  line  of 
souvenirs;  statuettes,  candles,  clothes-hangers,  dam- 
ask, vases.  The  owners  plead  like  children  for  thei* 
trophies,  but  the  committee  is  adamant  repeating 
constantly,  "Nothing  goes  out  of  the  Palace  tonight." 

And  nothing  does  go  out  that  night  on  the  persons 
of  the  Red  Guards,  tho  prowlers  and  vandals  later 
on  make  off  with  many  valuables. 


114  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

The  commissars  now  turn  to  the  Provisional  Gov- 
ernment and  their  defenders.  They  are  rounded  up 
and  escorted  to  the  exit.  First,  come  the  ministers, 
seized  in  session  around  the  green  baize  table  in  the 
Hall  of  State.  They  file  down  in  silence.  From  the 
crowd  inside  not  a  word  or  a  jeer.  But  from  the 
mob  outside  rises  a  blast  of  denunciation  when  a 
sailor  calls  for  an  automobile.  "Make  them  walk, 
they  have  ridden  long  enough,"  the  mob  yells, 
making  a  lunge  at  the  frightened  ministers.  The 
Red  Sailors,  with  fixed  bayonets,  close  around  their 
captives  and  lead  them  out  across  the  bridges  of  the 
Neva.  Towering  above  all  the  convoy  is  Tere- 
schenko,  the  Ukrainian  capitalist,  bound  now  from 
the  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs  to  the  Prison  of 
Peter-Paul,  reversing  the  journey  of  the  Bolshevik, 
Trotzky,  from  the  Prison  of  Peter-Paul  to  the  office 
of  Foreign  Affairs. 

The  Yunkers  were  led  out  to  cries  of  'Trovoca- 
tors!  Traitors!  Murderers!" — a  sorry  crestfallen 
lot.  That  morning  each  Yunker  had  vowed  to  us 
that  he  would  fight  until  just  one  bullet  was  left. 
This  last  one,  he  would  put  thru  his  own  brain 
rather  than  surrender  to  the  Bolsheviks.  Now  he 
was  giving  up  his  arms  to  these  Bolsheviks,  solemnly 
promising  never  to  take  weapons  against  them  again. 
(Unhappy  fellows!  They  were  to  break  their 
promise.) 

Last  of  the  captives  to  leave  the  Palace  were  the 
members  of  the  Women's  Battalion.    Most  of  them 


LOOTING  THE  WINTER  PALACE     115 

were  of  proletarian  birth.  "Shame!  Shame !"  cried 
the  Red  Guards,  "Working-women  fighting  against 
workingmen."  To  drive  home  the  indignation  they 
felt,  some  grabbed  the  girls  by  the  arms,  shaking 
and  scolding  them. 

This  was  about  the  sum  total  of  the  casualties 
among  the  soldier  girls,  tho  later  one  of  them  com- 
mitted suicide.  Next  day  the  hostile  press  spread 
tales  of  gruesome  atrocities  against  the  Women's 
Battalion,  alongside  of  stories  of  sack  and  pillage  of 
the  Palace  by  the  Red  Guards. 

Yet  nothing  is  more  alien  to  the  essential  nature 
of  the  working-class  than  destructiveness.  Were  it 
not  so,  history  might  have  a  different  story  to  tell  of 
the  morning  of  November  eighth.  It  might  have  to 
record  that  the  magnificent  edifice  of  the  Czars  was 
left  a  heap  of  crumbling  stones  and  smoking  embers 
by  the  vengeance  of  a  long-suffering  people. 

For  a  century  it  had  stood  there  upon  the  Neva, 
a  cold  and  heartless  thing.  The  people  had  looked 
to  it  for  light,  and  it  had  brought  forth  darkness. 
They  had  cried  to  it  for  compassion,  and  it  had 
answered  with  the  lash,  the  knout,  the  burning  of 
villages,  exile  in  Siberia.  One  winter  morning  in 
1905  thousands  of  them  had  come  here,  defenseless, 
petitioning  the  Little  Father  for  redress  of  wrongs. 
The  Palace  had  answered  with  rifle  and  cannon, 
reddening  the  snow  with  their  blood.  To  the  masses 
the  building  was  a  monument  of  cruelty  and  oppres- 
sion.    Had  they  razed  it  to  the  ground,  it  would 


ii6  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

have  been  but  one  more  instance  of  the  wrath  of  an 
outraged  people,  removing  from  their  eyes  forever 
the  hated  symbol  of  their  suffering. 

Instead  they  proceeded  to  remove  the  historic 
landmark  from  all  likelihood  of  damage. 

Kerensky  had  done  the  opposite.  He  had  reck- 
lessly put  the  Winter  Palace  in  the  arena  of  conflict 
by  making  it  the  center  of  his  cabinet  and  his  own 
sleeping  quarters.  But  the  representatives  of  these 
storming  masses  who  had  captured  the  Palace,  de- 
clared that  it  was  not  theirs  nor  the  Soviets',  but 
the  heritage  of  all.  By  Soviet  decree  it  was  made 
the  Museum  of  the  People.  The  custody  of  it  was 
formally  placed  in  the  hands  of  a  committee  of 
artists. 

So  events  gave  the  lie  to  another 
A  New  Attitude         dire  prophecy.    Kerensky,  Dan  and 
Towards  Property,     other    of    the    intelligentsia    had 
shrieked   against   the    Revolution, 
predicting  a  hideous  orgy  of  crime  and  plunder,  the 
loosing  of  the  basest  passions  of  the  mob.     Once 
the  hungry  and  embittered  masses  got  in  motion, 
they  said,  like  a  maddened  herd  they  would  go 
trampling  down,  wrecking,  and  destroying  every- 
thing.    "Even  Gorky  was  prophesying  the  end  of 
the  world"  (Trotzky). 

And  now  the  Revolution  has  come.  There  are, 
indeed,  isolated  acts  of  vandalism;  rich-clad  bour- 
geois still  return  home  minus  their  great  fur  coats; 


LOOTING  THE  WINTER  PALACE     117 

mobs  work  havoc  before  the  Revolution  can  rein 
them  in. 

But  there  is  one  outstanding  fact.  The  first  fruits 
of  the  Revolution  are  law  and  order.  Never  was 
Petrograd  safer  than  after  passing  into  the  hands  of 
the  masses.  Unprecedented  quiet  reigns  in  the 
streets.  Hold-ups  and  robberies  drop  almost  to  zero. 
Robbers  and  thugs  quail  before  the  iron  hand  of  the 
proletariat. 

It  is  not  merely  negative  restraint — order  rising 
out  of  fear.  The  Revolution  begets  a  singular  re- 
spect for  the  rights  of  property.  In  the  shattered 
windows  of  the  shops,  within  hands'  reach  of  passing 
men  in  desperate  need,  are  foodstuffs  and  clothing. 
They  remain  untouched.  There  is  something  pa- 
thetic in  the  sight  of  hungry  men  having  food  within 
their  grasp  and  not  grasping  it,  something  awesome 
in  the  constraint  engendered  by  the  Revolution.  It 
exerts  its  subtle  influence  everywhere.  Into  the  far- 
off  villages  it  reaches.  No  longer  are  the  peasants 
burning  the  great  estates. 

Yet  it  is  the  upper  classes  who  assert  that  in  them 
lies  true  respect  of  the  sanctity  of  property.  A 
curious  claim  at  the  end  of  the  World  War  for 
which  the  governing  classes  are  responsible.  By 
their  fiat,  cities  were  given  to  the  torch,  the  face  of 
the  land  covered  with  ashes,  the  bottom  of  the  sea 
strewn  with  ships,  the  structure  of  civilization  shot 
to  pieces,  and  even  now  still  more  terrible  instru- 
ments of  destruction  are  being  prepared. 


ii8  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

What  basis  is  there  for  true  respect  of  property 
in  the  bourgeoisie?  Actually  they  produce  little  or 
nothing.  To  the  privileged,  property  is  something 
that  comes  by  cleverness,  by  chance  inheritance,  by 
stroke  of  fortune.  With  them  it  is  largely  a  matter 
of  titles,  deeds  and  papers. 

But  to  the  working  classes,  property  is  a  thing 
of  tears  and  blood.  It  is  an  exhausting  act  of  crea- 
tion. They  know  its  cost  in  aching  muscles  and 
breaking  backs. 

"With    shoulders   back    and    breast   astrain, 
And  bathed  in  sweat  that  falls  like  rain, 
Thru  midday  heat  with  gasping  song, 
He  drags  the  heavy  barge  along." 

goes  the  song  of  the  Volga  boatmen. 

What  men  have  brought  forth  in  pain  and  labor 
they  cannot  wantonly  annihilate,  any  more  than  a 
mother  can  destroy  her  child.  They,  out  of  whose 
thews  and  muscles  the  thing  has  issued,  will  best 
guard  and  cherish  it.  Knowing  its  cost,  they  feel  its 
sacredness.  Even  before  works  of  art  the  rude,  un- 
taught masses  stand  with  reverence.  Only  vaguely 
do  they  glimpse  their  meaning.  But  they  see  in 
them  the  incarnation  of  effort.    And  all  labor  is  holy. 

The  Social  Revolution  is  in  truth  the  apotheosis 
of  the  rights  of  property.  It  invests  it  with  a  new 
sanctity.  By  transferring  property  into  the  hands 
of  the  producers  it  gives  the  keeping  of  wealth  into 
the  hands  of  its  natural  and  zealous  guardians— the 
makers  of  it.    The  creators  are  tlie  best  conservators. 


CHAPTER  rX  ^ 

RED  GUARDS,  WHITE  GUARDS  AND  BLACKGUARDS 

'T^HE  Soviets  declared  themselves  the  governmen't 
-*-  on  November  7.  But  it  was  one  thing  to  take 
power ;  another  thing  to  keep  it.  It  was  one  thing  to 
write  out  decrees;  another  to  back  them  with  bayo- 
nets. 

The  Soviets  soon  found  a  big  fight  on  their  hands. 
They  found,  too,  a  crippled  military-apparatus  to 
fight  with.  It  was  all  out  of  gear,  sabotaged  by 
officers.  The  Revolutionary  General  Staff  could  not 
straighten  out  the  tangle  from  above.  It  appealed 
directly  to  the  workers. 

They  uncovered  stores  of  benzine  and  motors, 
whipping  the  transport  into  shape.  They  assembled 
guns,  gun-carriages,  and  horses,  to  form  artillery- 
units.  They  requisitioned  provisions,  forage,  and 
Red  Cross  supplies,  rushing  them  to  the  front. 
They  seized  10,000  rifles  being  shipped  to  Kaledin 
and  distributed  them  among  the  factories. 

The  stamp  of  hammers  in  the  factories  gives 
way  to  the  tramp  of  marching  feet.  The  fore- 
man's orders  give  way  to  the  commands  of  sailors 
drilling  awkward  squads.  Thru  the  streets  hurry 
the  motor  cars  spreading  this  call  to  arm.s: 

119 


PAROHHblMb 

CoB'bTaM'b  Pa6oH^K'h  A^nyraTOB'b 

<pa6pM"4»io-3aBOACKHMi>  ttOMHTeraM'h 

nPHKASIi. 

KopHM/ioBCKm.  ^QHAbi  KepeHCKQro  yrpo- 

>KaiQTb   nOACiynaMB    K1>  CTO/lMUfc.  OlAQHbl 

Bct>  HeoGxoAMMbm  pQcnopji>KeHm  fl/i«  Toro, 

MTo6bi  6e3noLuaAHO  pajA^BUTb  KOHTpi>-pe- 

Bo;iK>UloHHoe  noKyiueHie  npoTMBi>  HopoAa 

M  ero  5QBoeBQHiM. 

ApMifl  H  KpacHan  TeapAiH  peeojuoum  HyiKAaiOTCfl  bi>  ee- 
sieAJieHHOH  DOMCpiKKt  |ira6oiHXi>. 

.npiSKaSBIBaeM^B     paHOHIBExIM^      Cos 

BSxaJTJS  w  ^a©p>saBrkbMK[ireTaMOb: 

t)  BbiABMnymbHaMdoAbmeekoAHMecmBopa6oMMX-bAAJipbimbfl  oKonoB-b, 
B03ABMreniH  dappMKaA'b  »i  YKptnA'feHifl  npoBOAOMHux-b  aarpa^ACHiii; 

2)  FAt  AAA  amoro  nofnpeCyeincii  npeRpamenie  pa6oT^  Ha 
4)a6pHKaxi>  w  aaBOAaxi),  H^iweAAeHiiO  HCnoji-QHXB; 

3)  coSpamb  bcio  HM^iomyiocsI  B^b  aanact  KOAioHyio  m  npocmyio  npo- 

BOAOKy,  a  P9BHO  BCtopyAia,  Iieo62i:0,AJIivIBIIIAAS!PBlX£»HOROS 

noB^  H  BOSBeAeiidLai:  6appHRaA'3&; 

4)  Bce  HM'BEomeecH  ■  opy^Stie  km'Btb  npH  ce6S; 

§)  CQOnm  CT^aiilOP  IHCillMy  H  Mb  fOIOSMMH  taPMIb 

jlpil^W^BJiii  HgTiorpa^cKsro  UoB^Ta  Fad.M  Coji^JenyTaTOSi) 

Ef8ACtA!%Tfi4S&  Bo&Efio-FdBOJi!dQidMaro  !(0MTeTa 

HiasiioitQBsaiffirioiitfa  DOASOiCHIH. 


120 


TO  THE  DISTRICT 

Soviets  of  Worker's  Deputies  and 

Shop-Factory  Committees 

ORDER 

The  Kornilov  bands  of  Kerensky  are 
threatening  the  outskirts  of  our  cap- 

ITAL.  All  NECESSARY  ORDERS  HAVE  BEEN 
GIVEN  TO  CRUSH  MERCILESSLY  EVERY 
COUNTER-REVOLUTIONARY  ATTEMPT 
AGAINST  THE  PEOPLE  AND  ITS  CONQUESTS. 

THE  ARMY  AND  THE  RED  GUARD  OF  THE^REV- 
OLUTION  ARE  IN  NEED  OF  IMMEDIATE  SUPPORT  OF 
THE  WORKERS. 

THE  DBSTRICT  SOVIETS  AND  SHOP-FACTORY 
COMMDTTEES  ARE  ORDERED: 

1)  To  bring  forward  the  largest  possible  number  of  workers  to  dig  trenches, 
erect  barricades  and  set  up  wire  defenses; 

2)  Wherever  necessary  for  this  purpose  to  SUSPEND  WORK  in  shops 
and  factories,  it  must  be  done  IMMEDIATELY. 

3)  To  collect  all  arailable  plain  and  barbed  wire,  as  well  as  all  tools  FOR 
DIGGING  TRENCHES  AND  ERECTING  BARRICADES; 

4)  ALL  AVAILABLE  ARMS  TO  BE  CARRIED  ON  PERSONS ; 

5)  Strictest  discipline  must  be  preserved  and  all  mnst  be 

ready  to  support  the  Army  of  the  Revolution  to  the  utmost 

President  of  the  Petrograd  Soviet  of  Workers  &  Soldiers  Deputies 
People's  Commissar  LEV  TROTSKY. 

President  ok  the  Military-Revolutionary  Committee 

Chief  Cosnmander  PODVOISKY. 

{Reproduction  in  English  of  the  Russian  text  on  opposite  page.l 

121 


122  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

In  answer,  everywhere  appear  workmen  with  cart- 
ridge belts  outside  of  overcoats,  blankets  strapped 
on  their  backs,  spades,  tea-kettles  and  revolvers 
tied  on  with  strings.  Long,  irregular  lines  of  slant- 
ing bayonets  winding  thru  the  dark. 

Red  Petrograd  rises  in  arms  to  repel  the  Counter- 
Re  volutionary  forces  marching  up  out  of  the  south. 
Over  the  roofs,  now  hoarse,  now  shrill,  comes  the 
sound  of  factory- whistles  blowing  the  tocsin  to  war. 

On  all  roads  leading  out  of  the  city  pours  a  torrent 
of  men,  women  and  boys,  carrying  kit-bags,  picks, 
rifles  and  bombs.  A  drab  and  motley  throng.  No 
banners,  no  drums  to  cheer  them  on.  Plunging 
trucks  splash  them  with  mud,  freezing  slush  oozes 
thru  their  shoes,  winds  from  the  Baltic  chill  to  the 
bone.  But  they  push  on  to  the  front,  unresting,  as 
the  grey  day  turns  to  sullen  night.  Behind  them 
the  city  flings  its  lights  into  the  sky,  and  still  they 
press  forward  into  the  dark.  Fields  and  forests  are 
swarming  now  with  dim  shapes,  pitching  tents,  build- 
ing camp-fires,  cutting  trenches,  stretching  wire.  One 
brief  day,  and  tens  of  thousands  have  moved  out 
twenty  miles  from  Petrograd,  and  stand,  a  bulwark 
of  living  flesh  against  the  forces  of  the  Counter- 
Revolution. 

To  military  experts  it  is  a  rag-tag  army,  a  rabble. 
But  in  this  "rabble"  there  is  a  drive  and  power  not 
reckoned  with  in  the  books  of  strategy.  These  dark 
masses  are  exalted  with  visions  of  a  new  world. 
Their  veins  burn  with  a  crusading  fire.    They  fight 


RED  GUARDS  AND  WHITE  GUARDS  123 

with  reckless  abandon,  often  with  skill.  They  plunge 
forward  into  the  black  copse  against  hidden  foes. 
They  stand  up  to  the  charging  Cossacks  and  tear 
them  from  their  horses.  They  lie  flat  before  the 
machine  gun  fire.  Bursting  shells  send  them  flee- 
ing but  they  rally  again.  They  carry  back  the 
stricken,  binding  their  wounds.  Into  the  ears  of 
their  dying  comrades  they  whisper,  ^'The  Revolu- 
tion! The  People!"  They  die,  gasping  out  "Long 
live  the  Soviet!    Peace  is  coming!'* 

Disorder,  confusion,  panic,  of  course,  in  these 
raw  levies  of  the  shops  and  slums.  But  the  ardor 
of  these  hungry,  work-scarred  men  and  women, 
fighting  for  their  faith,  is  more  effective  than  the 
organized  battalions  of  their  foes.  It  destroys  these 
battalions.  It  shatters  their  morale.  Hardened 
Cossacks  come,  see  and  are  conquered  by  it. 
"Loyal"  divisions,  ordered  to  the  front,  flatly  refuse 
to  shoot  down  these  workmen-soldiers.  The  whole 
opposition  crumples  up  or  melts  away.  Kerensky 
flees  from  the  front  in  disguise.  The  commander  of 
the  grand  armies  that  were  to  crush  the  Bolsheviks 
cannot  find  a  corporal's  guard  to  fly  with  him.  The 
proletarians  are  victors  all  along  the  line. 

While  the  Soviet  masses  are  bat- 
The  Whites  take  tling  on  the  plains  outside  Petro- 

the  Telephone  Station,    grad,     the     Counter-Revolution 

rises  suddenly  in  the  rear.  It 
sets  out  to  paralyze  the  Soviet  power  at  its  base  in 
the  city. 


124  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

The  Yunkers,  who  were  paroled  after  their  cap- 
ture at  the  Winter  Palace,  break  their  parole  to  join 
this  White  Guard  uprising.  They  are  detailed  to 
seize  the  telephone  station. 

The  telephone  station  is  one  of  the  vital  centers 
of  the  city;  from  it  run  a  million  wires,  which  like 
a  million  nerves,  help  make  the  city  a  unit.  In 
Petrograd  the  telephone  station  is  housed  in  a  mas- 
sive stone  citadel  on  the  Morskaya.  Here  some 
Soviet  sentries  are  posted.  Thru  the  tedium  of  the 
day  they  have  one  thing  to  look  forward  to — the 
change  of  sentries  at  night. 

Night  comes  and  with  it  twenty  men  marching 
down  the  street.  The  sentries  think  it  is  the  relief- 
squad  bringing  them  liberty.  But  it  is  not.  It  is  a 
squad  of  officers  and  Yunkers  disguised  as  Reds. 
Their  guns  are  slung  slant-wise  in  orthodox  Red 
Guard  fashion.  They  give  the  Red  Guard  pass- word 
to  the  sentries.  In  good  faith  the  sentries  stack  guns 
and  turn  to  go.  In  a  flash  twenty  revolvers  are 
pointed  at  their  heads. 

"Tovarishe!"  (Comrades!)  exclaim  the  astounded 
Reds. 

"You  damned  swine!"  shout  the  officers.  "Get 
into  that  hall  there,  and  keep  your  mouths  shut  or 
we  will  blow  your  heads  open." 

The  doors  slam  behind  the  bewildered  sentries, 
who  find,  not  release  and  freedom,  but  imprisonment 
at  the  hands  of  the  Whites.  The  telephone  station 
is  in  the  hands  of  the  Counter-Revolution. 


RED  GUARDS  AND  WHITE  GUARDS  125 

In  the  morning  the  new  masters  finished  fortifying 
the  place  under  the  supervision  of  a  French  officer. 
Suddenly  the  officer  turned  on  me  with  a  stern, 
"What  are  you  doing  here?" 

"Correspondent — American,"  I  replied.  "Dropped 
in  to  see  what  was  up." 

"Your  passport,"  he  demanded.  I  produced  it. 
He  was  impressed  and  apologized.  "Of  course,  this 
is  none  of  my  business.  Like  you,  I  just  glanced 
in  to  see  what  was  happening."  But  he  went  on 
directing  the  work. 

On  both  sides  of  the  archway  the  Yunkers  ran  out 
barricades  of  boxes,  automobiles  and  piles  of  logs. 
They  levied  toll  on  passing  autos,  bringing  in  sup- 
plies and  weapons,  and  corralled  all  passers-by  who 
might  possibly  serve  as  soldiers  of  the  Soviet. 

A  great  prize  came  their  way  in  the  person  of 
Antonov,  the  Soviet  Commissar  of  War.  Driving 
by  in  his  auto,  he  was  suddenly  yanked  from  the 
seat;  and  before  he  could  recover  from  the  shock, 
he  was  behind  barred  doors.  With  the  fate  of  the 
Revolution  hanging  in  the  balance,  he  found  himself 
a  prisoner  of  the  Counter-Revolutionists.  His 
anguish  at  being  jailed  was  only  exceeded  by  their 
joy  at  jailing  him.  They  were  jubilant.  For  among 
the  unorganized  masses  of  revolutionary  Petrograd, 
leaders  were  as  yet  desperately  few.  They  knew — 
according  to  all  the  laws  of  military  science — that 
the  masses,  leaderless,  could  not  move  effectively 


126  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

against  their  citadel;  and  the  master  military  brain 
of  the  Reds  was  now  in  their  hands. 


Some  things  these  officers  did  not 
The  Revolution  know.    They  did  not  know  that  the 

Rallies  its  Forces.  Revolution  was  not  dependent 
upon  any  single  brain,  or  set  of 
brains,  but  upon  the  collective  brains  of  the  Russian 
masses.  They  did  not  know  how  deeply  the  Rev- 
olution had  roused  the  brain,  the  initiative,  and  the 
resources  of  these  masses,  and  wrought  them  into 
a  living  unit.  They  did  not  know  that  the  Rev- 
olution was  a  living  organism,  self-sustaining,  self- 
directing,  rallying  at  the  danger-call  all  its  latent 
powers  for  self-preservation. 

When  an  evil  germ  enters  the  blood  of  the  human 
organism  the  whole  body  senses  the  danger,  as  if 
an  alarm  had  been  sent  out.  Along  a  hundred  arter- 
ies the  special  corpuscles  or  phagocytes  come  hurry- 
ing to  attack  the  poison-centre.  Fastening  on  the 
intruder,  they  attempt  to  expel  it.  This  is  not  the 
conscious  act  of  the  brain.  It  is  the  unconscious 
intelligence  inherent  in  the  human  organism. 

Now  into  the  body  of  Red  Petrograd,  threatening 
its  very  life,  enters  the  malignant  poison  of  the 
Counter-Revolution.  The  reaction  is  immediate. 
Spontaneously  along  a  hundred  streets  and  arteries, 
the  corpuscles  (in  this  case  red  ones)  come  hurrying 
to  the  contagion  centre — the  telephone  station. 

Ping!     Crash!     A  bullet  splintering  a  log  an- 


RED  GUARDS  AND  WHITE  GUARDS  127 

nounces  the  arrival  of  the  first  Red  corpuscle  carry- 
ing a  gun.  Ping!  Ping!  Crash!  Crash!  A  gust  of 
lead,  biting  stone-chips  from  the  wall,  heralds  the 
advent  of  more  attacking  units. 

Peering  thru  the  barricades,  the  Counter-Revolu- 
tionists already  see  swarms  of  Red  Guards  at  the 
ends  of  the  street.  The  sight  of  them  arouses  an  old 
Czarist  officer  to  savagery,  "Turn  on  the  guns!" 
he  shouts.  "Kill  the  rabble!"  Up  and  down  the 
streets  they  let  loose  a  storm  of  rifle  and  machine- 
gun  fire.  Like  a  canyon  the  street  is  filled  with 
noise  and  ricochetting  bullets.  But  there  are  no 
Red  corpses.  The  revolutionary  masses  have  no  ap- 
petite for  martyrdom.  Provokingly  they  refuse  to 
be  killed. 

It  is  different  from  former  days.  Then  the  mobs 
obligingly  put  themselves  in  the  way  of  the  guns. 
In  hundreds  they  were  spattered  over  the  Winter 
Palace  Square,  blown  to  pieces  by  the  artillery, 
trampled  under  the  hoofs  of  the  Cossacks,  massacred 
by  machine  guns.  It  was  so  easy!  How  easy  now, 
too,  to  annihilate  them,  if  they  would  but  rush  the 
barricades. 

But  the  Revolution  is  careful  of  its  material.  It 
has  made  these  masses  cautious.  It  has  taught  them 
the  first  lesson  in  strategy:  find  out  what  your  enemy 
wants  you  to  do,  and  then  don't  do  it.  The  bar- 
ricades, the  Reds  see,  are  intended  to  destroy  them; 
they  intend  to  destroy  the  barricades. 

They  inspect  them  and  decide  the  tactics  of  as- 


128  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

sault.  They  pick  out  every  vantage-point.  They 
hide  behind  stone  pillars.  They  scale  walls.  They 
crawl  along  the  copings.  They  lie  flat  upon  the 
roofs.  They  ambuscade  themselves  in  windows  and 
chimney-pots.  From  every  angle  they  train  their 
guns  upon  the  barricades.  Then  suddenly  they  open 
fire,  raking  the  barricades  with  hails  of  lead.  As 
precipitately  as  they  began,  they  stop,  and  steal 
up  into  new  positions.  Another  outburst  and  an- 
other silence.  The  officers  begin  to  feel  like  trapped 
animals,  around  whom  invisible  hunters  are  drawing 
a  circle  of  fire. 

New  units  are  constantly  arriving,  filling  the  gaps 
in  the  circle.  The  ring  draws  tighter  and  tighter 
and  seals  up  the  Counter-Revolution  in  the  centre. 
Then,  having  isolated  its  plague-spot  the  Revolution 
prepares  to  eradicate  it. 

A  gale  of  bullets  forces  the  Whites  to  abandon 
the  barricade  and  find  refuge  under  the  archway. 
Behind  stone  ramparts,  now,  they  pause  for  counsel. 
The  first  plan  is  to  make  a  sortie,  break  thru  the 
Red  cordon  and  escape.  But  this  they  see  is  suicide. 
A  scout  crawls  out  on  the  roof  and  is  driven  back,  a 
ball  thru  his  shoulder.  They  play  for  time,  begging 
a  peace  parley,  but  the  besiegers  reply: 

"Three  days  ago  we  captured  you  in  the  Winter 
Palace;  we  paroled  you  then.  You  broke  your  pa- 
role. You  shot  down  our  comrades.  We  do  not 
trust  you." 

They  sue  for  amnesty,  offering  to  give  up  Antonov. 


RED  GUARDS  AND  WHITE  GUARDS  129 

"Antonov!  We'll  take  him  ourselves,"  the  Reds 
reply.  "Harm  him  and  we'll  kill  you — every  one  of 
you." 

Desperate  situations  induce  des- 
Red  Guards  Tricked         perate  ventures. 
by  the  Red  Cross  Car.         "Oh,  for  a  Red  Cross  car," 

sighed  an  officer.    "The  Reds 
might  let  that  thru  their  lines." 

"Well,  if  we  haven't  the  car,  we've  got  the  crosses," 
said  another  officer,  producing  four  big  Red  Cross 
labels.  He  pasted  them  on  front,  sides  and  back  of 
an  auto.    At  once  it  looked  like  a  Red  Cross  car. 

Two  officers  took  the  front  seat.  One  at  the 
wheel,  the  other  with  his  hand  on  the  auto  pocket 
and  a  revolver  in  his  hand.  A  haggard  man,  half 
crazed  with  fear,  the  father  of  one  of  the  Yunkers 
climbed  into  the  rear. 

"Jump  in  and  come  along,"  said  the  officers  to  me. 
The  Whites  always  took  it  for  granted  that  anyone 
in  bourgeois  dress  was  on  the  bourgeois  side.  Even 
many  who  knew  of  the  revolutionary  activity  of  men 
like  John  Reed,  for  example,  and  myself,  assumed 
it  was  only  a  ruse  to  get  the  confidence  of  the  Bol- 
sheviks. 

I  climbed  into  the  car  and  the  hood  was  pushed 
thru  the  archway.  At  sight  of  the  Red  Cross  the 
firing  of  the  Red  Guard  ceased.  Slowly  and  anx- 
iously we  drove  up  to  the  Red  lines.  The  soldiers, 
sailors  and  workmen  received  us,  guns  in  hand. 


130  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

"Well,  what  do  you  want?"  they  glowered. 

"Many  of  our  men  are  badly  wounded.  No  band- 
ages, no  medicines,"  the  officer  at  the  wheel  ex- 
plained. "We  want  to  go  to  Red  Cross  quarters 
and  get  supplies.    Our  men  are  suffering  terribly." 

"Let  'em  suffer,"  growled  one  of  the  sailors  with 
an  oath.  "Haven't  they  made  our  men  suffer?  And 
we  had  just  paroled  them — the  damned  liars." 

To  this,  one  of  the  other  sailors  cried,  "No, 
tovarish."  To  us  in  the  car  they  said,  "All  right. 
Pass  thru.    Hurry." 

We  swept  on  up  the  street,  while  behind  us  the 
fusillade  against  the  telephone  station  began  again. 

"Not  bad  fellows  after  all,  those  Red  Guards,"  I 
interjected. 

"Fools!  {Doorake).  What  you  call  in  English 
'damn  fools',  eh?"    They  laughed  hysterically  again. 

We  ran  down  the  French  Quay  at  terrific  speed, 
making  a  wide  detour  in  order  to  throw  possible 
pursuers  off  our  track.  A  sharp  turn  brought  us 
up  before  the  Engineers'  Castle.  The  big  gates 
opened  to  let  us  in  and  a  minute  later  we  were  in  a 
salon  filled  with  officers — Russian,  French  and  Brit- 
ish. The  staff  heard  the  report  on  the  crisis  at  the 
telephone  station  and  ordered  the  immediate  dis- 
patch of  an  armored  car  and  reinforcements.  There 
were  a  few  other  details,  some  words  with  a  Czarist 
general,  and  we  turned  to  go. 

"Wait  a  minute,"  interrupted  the  general,  "let 
me  give  you  something  useful  to  take  back  with 


RED  GUARDS  AND  WHITE  GUARDS  131 

you."  He  sat  down  at  a  table  and  laid  out  some 
papers,  in  size  and  shape  like  credentials  of  the 
Soviet.  Picking  up  a  stamp  he  brought  it  down 
sharply  on  the  first  credential.  There  were  the 
magic  words  "War  Revolutionary  Committee"  in 
form  and  letter  just  like  the  seal  of  the  Soviet.  If 
that  was  not  a  stolen  Soviet  stamp  it  was  an  exact 
replica.  No  one  could  detect  the  imitation.  In 
Russia  this  sort  of  forgery  is  a  fine  art. 

"Trotzky  himself  couldn't  give  you  a  better  cre- 
dential than  that,"  the  general  remarked,  handing  it 
over.  "In  uncertain  times  like  these,  one  always 
carries  the  proper  kind  of  papers,"  he  continued 
facetiously,  imprinting  the  Soviet  seal  on  two  more 
credentials.  "There  you  are!  Ready  for  any 
emergency.  Fill  it  out  with  bad  writing  and  mis- 
spelled words  and  you  have  a  first-class  Bolshevik 
pass  for  any  place  you  want  to  go.  And  by  the 
way,"  he  added,  passing  over  some  black  iron 
globes  about  the  size  of  baseballs,  "a  few  of  these 
will  come  in  handy," 

"Hand  grenades?"  I  queried. 

"No,"  the  general  answered.  "They  are  pills. 
Capsules.  Medicine  for  Reds.  Give  a  Red  Guard 
one  of  these  in  the  right  place  and  it's  a  sure  cure 
for  Bolshevism,  Revolution,  Socialism  and  every- 
thing else  that  ails  him.  What,  eh?"  he  cried,  tre- 
mendously pleased  with  his  wit.  "A  Red  Cross  car 
full  of  pills!" 

Again  our  car  was  headed  back  to  the  telephone 


132  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

station.  But  in  the  last  half  hour  the  streets  had 
changed.  Red  sentries  were  posted  on  nearly  every 
corner.  They  were  largely  peasants  whom  fate 
had  torn  from  the  country  quiet  and  thrown  down 
into  this  city,  all  agog  with  Revolutionists  and  Coun- 
ter-Revolutionists and  no  mark  to  tell  the  two  apart. 

They  were  puzzled  as  we  bore  down  on  them 
waving  our  papers,  pointing  to  the  Red  Cross  sign  on 
our  car  and  yelling  out,  "Aid  to  the  wounded 
tovarishe."  While  they  were  trying  to  collect  their 
wits  we  went  sweeping  past.  One  after  another 
was  rushed  off  his  feet,  until  we  came  to  a  big  peas- 
ant standing  guard  in  the  center  of  the  Millionaya. 
With  rifle  raised  he  barred  the  way  and  brought  us 
up  with  a  sudden  halt. 

"Idiot! "  shouted  the  officers.  "Don't  you  see  that 
this  is  a  Red  Cross  car?  Don't  waste  time  while 
the  tovarishe  are  dying." 

"Are  you  tovarishe  too?"  asked  the  peasant,  eye- 
ing the  officers'  uniforms  suspiciously. 

"Of  course  we  are.  Too  long  have  the  bour- 
geoisie drunk  the  people's  blood!  Down  with  the 
traitor  Counter-Revolutionists,"  said  the  officers, 
mouthing  shibboleths  of  the  Revolution, 

"And  do  I  live  to  see  the  day  when  officers  come 
over  to  the  help  of  the  dark  people?"  said  the  old 
peasant  half  to  himself.  It  was  too  much.  He 
couldn't  quite  believe  it  £nd  asked  for  our  papers. 

With  his  finger  tracing  the  lines  he  painfully 
spelled  out  each  word.    As  the  peasant  read  the  offi- 


RED  GUARDS  AND  WHITE  GUARDS  133 

cer's  paper  the  officer,  hand  on  pistol,  read  the 
peasant's  face.  That  peasant  never  knew  how  close 
he  stood  to  death.  If  he  had  said  "No.  You  can- 
not pass,"  the  officer  would  have  blown  out  his 
brains.  His  permit  to  let  us  go  was  his  own  permit 
to  live.  He  didn't  know  the  seal  on  our  paper  was 
forged.  He  only  saw  it  was  Hke  his  own,  so  he  said, 
"Yes!"  and  we  were  off  again. 

Once  more  we  came  to  the  Red  cordon  around  the 
telephone  station.  It  was  a  nervous  moment  for 
the  officers.  Under  pretence  of  bringing  life  and 
succor  to  wounded  Whites  they  were  bringing  death 
and  wounds  to  the  Reds.  These  Reds  did  not  know 
that.  Tho  they  had  had  a  taste  of  the  treachery 
of  the  Counter-Revolution,  they  did  not  suspect  that 
it  would  flout  all  moral  laws  and  violate  its  own 
codes.  So  when  these  officers  begged  quick  passage 
for  their  car  in  the  name  of  humanity,  the  Red 
Guards  answered,  "All  right,  Red  Cross.  Hurry 
thru." 

The  lines  opened  and  a  minute  later  our  car  with 
its  load  of  hand-grenades  slipped  under  the  arch- 
way of  the  station,  hailed  by  shouts  of  joy  from  the 
imprisoned  Whites.  They  were  glad  for  the  hand- 
grenades  and  for  the  latest  military  information. 
But  they  were  gladdest  of  all  to  learn  of  the  armored 
car  coming  to  their  relief. 


CHAPTER  X 

MERCY  OR  DEATH   TO  THE  WHITES? 

TT  was  a  black  outlook  for  the  White  Guards 
•^  hemmed  inside  the  telephone  station.  But  now 
comes  this  jubilant  news  that  an  armored  car  is 
hurrying  to  their  rescue.  They  gaze  intently  down 
the  street  for  the  first  glimpse  of  it. 

As  it  comes  swinging  in  from  the  Nevsky,  they 
hail  it  with  cheers.  Like  a  great  iron  steed  it  lum- 
bers along  and  stops  before  the  barricades.  Cheers 
again  from  the  Whites.  Ill-starred  cheers!  They 
do  not  know  that  they  are  cheering  their  end.  They 
do  not  know  that  this  is  not  their  car ;  it  has  passed 
into  the  hands  of  the  Reds.  It  is  a  Trojan  horse, 
within  whose  armored  belly  are  concealed  the  sol- 
diers of  the  Revolution.  It  slews  about  until  its 
muzzle  is  pointed  thru  the  archway.  Then  sud- 
denly it  spouts  a  stream  of  lead  as  a  garden  hose 
spouts  water.  Screams  now  instead  of  cheers! 
Tumbling  over  boxes  and  one  another,  the  officers, 
in  one  shrieking,  tangled  mass,  go  crashing  thru  the 
hallway  and  up  the  stairs. 

Poetic  justice!  Here  where  a  few  hours  earlier 
these  Counter-Revolutionists  pressed  their  revolvers 

134 


y 


-^s 


K 


MERCY  OR  DEATH  TO  THE  WHITES?  135 

against  the  temples  of  the  Revolution,  the  Revolu- 
tion presses  its  machine  guns  against  their  temples. 

At   the   top   of   the   stairway   the 

The  White  Guards     Whites  disentangle  themselves,  not 

in  a  Funk.  to  make  a  stand,  but  to  run  better. 

Ten  resolute  men  could  have  held 

this  stairway  against  a  thousand.    But  there  are  not 

ten  men  to  do  it.    There  is  not  one.    There  is  only 

a  panic-stricken  pack,  in  the  clutch  of  a  fear  that 

drains  the  blood  from  their  faces,  the  reason  from 

their  brains.    All  courage  gone.    All  prudence  gone. 

Gone  even  the  herd-instinct  of  unity  in  the  face  of 

common  peril. 

"Sauve  qui  peut,"  (let  him  save  himself  who 
can)  becomes  the  cry  of  the  older  officers. 

They  fling  away  caps,  belts  and  swords;  insignia 
of  honor  now  become  badges  of  shame  and  death. 
They  rip  off  shoulder  straps,  gold-braid  and  buttons. 
They  plead  for  a  workman's  costume,  a  cloak,  an 
overcoat — anything  to  disguise  their  rank.  An 
officer  coming  upon  a  greasy  blouse  hanging  on  a  peg 
becomes  a  maniac  with  joy.  A  captain  finding  the 
apron  of  a  cook  puts  it  on,  plunges  his  arms  in 
flour  and  already  white  from  terror  becomes  the 
whitest  White  Guard  in  all  Russia. 

But  for  most  of  them  there  is  no  cover  save  the 
darkness  of  closets,  booths  and  attic  corners.  Into 
these  they  crawl  like  hunted  animals  in  collapse.    To 


136  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

treachery  against  their  enemies  these  officers  now 
add  treason  to  their  allies.  They  had  led  the 
Yunkers  into  this  trap.  Now  the  trap  is  closing, 
and  the  officers  abandon  them. 

First  to  rally  their  wits,  the  Yunkers  begin  to 
cry  out,  "Our  officers!  Where  are  our  officers?" 
No  answer  to  their  cries.  "Damn  the  cowards!" 
they  shout.    "They  have  deserted  us." 

Rage  at  this  betrayal  fuses  the  Yunkers  together. 
Their  best  tactics  would  be  to  hold  the  stairway, 
but  they  shrink  away  from  it.  Red  vengeance 
crouching  at  the  foot  fills  them  with  dread.  It  will 
not  let  them  move  forward.  They  fall  back  into  a 
thick  walled  room  with  a  narrow  entrance.  There, 
like  rats  clustering  in  a  hole,  they  wait  the  onrush 
of  the  Red  tide  that  may  come  rising  up  the  stair- 
way, flooding  the  corridors,  drowning  them  out. 

To  some  of  these  young  fellows,  sprung  from 
the  middle-class,  this  is  a  doubly  tragic  ending. 
Death  at  the  hands  of  peasants  and  workers  with 
whom  they  have  no  quarrel!  But,  caught  in  this 
camp  of  the  Counter-Revolution,  they  must  share 
its  doom.  They  know  how  richly  they  deserve  it. 
This  sense  of  guilt  unnerves  them.  Their  guns 
fall  from  their  hands.  They  slink  down  on  chairs 
and  tables,  moaning,  their  eyes  fixed  on  the  entrance 
thru  which  the  Red  tide  is  to  come  crashing  in. 
They  listen  for  the  swirl  of  the  first  wave  flinging 
itself  on  the  stairway;    hammering  on  the  door. 


MERCY  OR  DEATH  TO  THE  WHITES?  137 

Save  their  own  hammering  pulses  there  is  not  a 
sound. 


There  is  another  chamber  of 
Reds,  Whites  and  Girls  torture  in  this  building.  It 
Petrified  by  Fear.  holds  Antonov,  the  Red  sen- 

tries, and  all  captives  bagged 
by  the  Whites  during  the  day.  They  sit  helpless, 
locked  in  their  prison,  while  outside  rages  the  battle 
sealing  the  fate  of  their  Revolution,  and  their  own 
fate.  No  one  comes  to  tell  them  how  the  battle  goes. 
Only  thru  the  thick  walls  comes  the  muffled  crackle 
of  rifles,  the  crash  of  falling  glass. 

Now  all  these  noises  abruptly  cease.  What  does 
it  mean?  The  triumph  of  the  Counter- Re  volution? 
The  Whites  victorious?  What  next?  The  opening 
of  the  door?  The  firing-squad  lining  them  up  before 
a  wall?  Bandages  tied  round  their  eyes?  The  re- 
port of  rifles?  Their  own  death?  The  death  of  the 
Revolution?  So  they  muse,  heads  sunk  in  hands, 
while  the  clock  above  the  door  pitilessly  tells  off  the 
seconds.  Each  stroke  may  be  the  last.  Awaiting 
that  last,  they  sit  straining  to  hear  the  tread  of  the 
firing-squad,  coming  down  the  corridor.  But  save 
for  the  ticking  clock,  not  a  sound. 

Still  another  torture  chamber,  this  one  filled  with 
women.  It  is  the  top  floor,  with  hundreds  of  tele- 
phone girls  huddled  around  the  switch-boards.  The 
eight-hour  bombardment,  the  stampede  of  the  offi- 
cers, their  frenzied  cries  for  help,  have  shattered  the 


138  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

nerves  of  these  girls  and  their  minds  run  wild.  They 
run  to  wild  stories  of  Bolshevik  atrocities,  the  rape 
of  the  Women's  Battalion,  crimes  imputed  to  these 
Red  hordes  swarming  into  the  court-yard  below. 

In  their  fevered  imagination  they  are  already  vic- 
tims of  a  like  brutality,  writhing  in  the  arms  of  these 
monsters.  They  break  into  tears.  They  write 
frantic  little  last  farewells.  They  cling  together  in 
white-faced  groups,  listening  for  the  first  yells  of 
the  ruffians,  the  thumping  of  their  boots  along  the 
hall.  But  there  are  no  thumping  boots — only  their 
own  thumping  hearts. 

The  building  becomes  quiet  as  a  tomb.  It  is  not 
the  quiet  of  the  dead,  but  tense  and  vibrant,  the 
silence  of  hundreds  of  living  beings  paralyzed  with 
terror.  The  silence  is  contagious.  It  passes  thru 
the  walls  and  lays  hold  of  the  Red  throngs  outside. 
They  in  turn  become  still,  stricken  by  the  same 
paralysis  of  fear.  They  shrink  away  from  the  stair- 
way lest  it  belch  out  clouds  of  gas,  a  fusillade  of 
bombs.  Hundreds  outside  in  terror  of  the  Whites 
within!  Hundreds  inside  in  terror  of  the  Reds 
without!  Thousands  of  human  beings  torturing 
each  other. 

Inside  the  building  this  ordeal  by  silence  becomes 
unendurable.  I,  at  least,  can  endure  it  no  longer. 
For  relief  I  run  forward,  not  knowing  where;  any- 
where to  get  away  from  the  silence.  Opening  a  side- 
door  by  accident  I  catapult  into  the  chamber  filled 


MERCY  OR  DEATH  TO  THE  WHITES?  139 

with  Yunkers.  They  jump  as  tho  it  is  the  crack  of 
doom. 

"American  correspondent,"  they  gasp.  "O!  Help 
us!    Help  us!" 

"How  can  I?"  I  falter.    "What  shall  I  do?" 

"Something — anything!"  they  implore.  "Only 
save  us." 

Some  one  says,  "Antonov."  The  others  catch 
up  the  name,  repeating  it  hke  an  incantation.  "An- 
tonov. Yes,  Antonov.  Go  to  Antonov.  Down- 
stairs— Antonov.  Quick,  before  it  is  too  late — An- 
tonov!"   They  point  the  way. 

In  a  minute  I  make  another  headlong  entrance 
before  another  astounded  audience — the  captive 
Reds  and  Antonov. 

"You  are  all  free.  The  officers  have  fled.  The 
Yunkers  surrender.  They  beg  you  to  save  them. 
Any  terms.  All  they  ask  is  their  lives.  Only  hurry, 
hurry." 

In  a  moment  this  prisoner  Antonov  awaiting  death 
becomes  the  arbiter  of  death.  The  condenmed  is 
asked  to  be  the  jn.dge.  A  startling  change!  But 
the  face  of  this  little,  tired  overworked  Revolution- 
ist did  not  change.  If  the  thought  of  revenge  flashed 
into  his  mind,  it  as  quickly  flashed  out  again.  "So 
I  am  not  to  be  a  corpse  but  a  commander,"  he  said 
wanly.  "Next  thing  is  to  see  the  Yunkers  is  it? 
Very  well."  He  put  on  his  hat  and  walked  upstairs 
to  the  Yunkers. 

"Anton'Dv!    Gospadeen   Antonov!      Commander 


140  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

Antonov!"  they  wailed.  ''Spare  our  lives.  We 
know  we  are  guilty.  But  we  throw  ourselves  on  the 
mercy  of  the  Revolution." 

Sorry  ending  to  a  gay  adventure!  In  the  morning 
sallying  out  to  kill  Bolsheviks  and  in  the  evening 
begging  Bolsheviks  for  their  own  lives.  Saying 
"Tovarish"  as  one  might  say  "swine,"  then  breath- 
ing it  reverently  as  a  term  of  honor. 

"Tovarish  Antonov,"  they  implored,  "give  us  your 
word  as  a  Bolshevik,  a  true  Bolshevik.  Give  us  your 
word  for  our  safety." 

"My  word,"  said  Antonov.    "I  give  it." 

"They  may  not  take  your  word,  Tovarish  An- 
tonov," muttered  one  poor  wretch.  "They  may  kill 
us  anyhow." 

"If  they  kill  you,"  assured  Antonov,  "they  must 
first  kill  me." 

"But  we  don't  want  to  be  killed,"  whimpered  the 
poor  fellow. 

Antonov  could  not  conceal  his 
The  Mob  Decrees  Death  contempt.  Turning  into  the 
to  the  White  Guards.  hall,    he    started    down    the 

stairs.     To  the   taut  nerves 
every  step  sounded  like  the  detonation  of  a  gun. 

The  Red  throng  outside  heard  the  steps  and  raised 
their  rifles  expecting  a  fusillade.  And  then  this  sur- 
prise!    Antonov,  their  own  leader! 

"Nash!  Nash!"  (Ours!  Ours!)  acclaimed  a  hun- 
dred voices.    "Antonov!    Long  live  Antonov!"  rose 


MERCY  OR  DEATH  TO  THE  WHITES?  141 

from  another  hundred  throats.  The  shout  raised  in 
the  courtyard  was  caught  up  in  the  street  and  the 
crowd  surged  forward  crying,  "The  officers,  An- 
tonov?    Where  are  the  officers  and  the  Yunkers?" 

"Done  for,"  announced  Antonov.  "Their  arms 
are  down." 

Like  the  bursting  of  a  dam  came  the  roar  from  a 
thousand  throats.  Yells  of  triumph  and  howls  of 
rage  proclaiming  "Death  to  the  officers!  Death  to 
the  Yunkers!" 

Good  reason  for  the  Whites  to  tremble!  At  the 
mercy  of  those  to  whom  they  had  forfeited  all  claims 
for  mercy.  Not  by  fighting,  but  by  fighting  foully 
they  had  roused  this  volcano  of  wrath.  In  the  eyes 
of  these  soldiers  and  workmen  the  Whites  were  mur- 
derers of  the  Red  comrades,  assassinators  of  the 
Revolution,  miscreants  to  be  exterminated  like  ver- 
min. Fear  only  had  kept  the  Reds  from  plunging  up 
the  stairway.  Now  all  cause  for  caution  was  gone. 
The  infuriated  men  stormed  forward  filling  the 
night  with  their  cries,  "Wipe  out  the  butchers!  Kill 
the  White  Devils!     Kill  every  one  of  them!" 

A  torch  here  and  there  in  the  blackness  lit  up  the 
bearded  faces  of  peasants,  soldier-faces,  the  faces  of 
city  artisans  grimed  and  thin,  and  in  the  front  rank 
the  open,  alert  countenances  of  the  big  sailors  from 
the  Baltic  fleet.  On  all  of  them,  in  flashing  eyes, 
and  clenched  jaws  vengeance  was  written,  the  terrible 
vengeance  of  the  long-suffering.  Pressed  from  the 
rear,  the  mass  lunged  forward  against  the  stairway 


142  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

where  Antonov  stood,  calm  and  impassive,  but  look- 
ing so  frail  and  helpless  before  this  avalanche  of 
men. 

Raising  his  hand  and  voice,  Antonov  cried  out, 
"Tovarishe,  you  cannot  kill  them.  The  Yunkers 
have  surrendered.    They  are  our  prisoners." 

The  throng  was  stunned.  Then  in  a  hoarse  cry 
of  resentment  it  found  its  voice.  "No!  No!  They 
are  not  our  prisoners,"  it  protested.  "They  are 
dead  men." 

"They  have  given  up  their  arms,"  continued  An- 
tonov.   "I  have  given  them  their  lives." 

"You  may  give  them  their  lives.  We  don't.  We 
give  them  the  bayonet!"  bawled  a  big  peasant  turn- 
ing to  the  crowd  for  approval. 

"The  bayonet!  Yes,  we  give  them  the  bayonet!" 
they  howled  in  a  blast  of  approbation. 

Antonov  faced  the  tornado.  Drawing  a  big  re- 
volver, he  waved  it  aloft,  crying  out,  "I  have  given 
the  Yunkers  my  word  for  their  safety.  You  under- 
stand!    I  will  back  my  word  with  this." 

The  crowd  gasped.    This  was  incredible. 

"What's  this?  What  do  you  mean?"  they  de- 
manded. 

Clutching  his  revolver,  finger  on  the  trigger,  An- 
tonov repeated  his  warning:  "I  promised  them  their 
lives.    I  will  back  that  promise  with  this." 

"Traitor!  Renegade!"  a  hundred  voices  thun- 
dered at  him.    "Defender  of  the  White  Guards!"  a 


Antonov,  Commander  of  the  Red  Guards,  who  held  back  the  revolutionary- 
mob  until  it  came  to  its  senses. 


MERCY  OR  DEATH  TO  THE  WHITES?  143 

big  sailor  flung  in  his  face.  "You  want  to  save  the 
rascals.    But  you  can't.    We'll  kill  them." 

"The  first  man  who  lays  his  hands  on  a  prisoner — 
/  will  kill  him  on  the  spot!''  Antonov  spoke  slowly, 
with  emphasis  on  each  word.  "You  understand!  I 
will  shoot  him  dead!" 

"Shoot  us?"  queried  the  affronted  sailors. 

"Shoot  us!  Shoot  us!"  bellowed  the  whole  in- 
dignant mob. 

For  it  was  just  that — a  mob,  with  all  the  vehe- 
ment passions  of  the  mob.  A  mob  with  every  primi- 
tive instinct  inflamed  and  ascendant:  cruel,  brutal, 
lusting  for  blood.  In  it  flamed  the  savagery  of  the 
wolf,  the  ferocity  of  the  tiger.  A  huge  beast  drawn 
out  of  the  jungles  of  the  city,  stirred  up  by  these 
White  hunters,  wounded,  and  bleeding  from  its 
wounds,  all  day  exasperated  and  tormented,  at  last, 
in  a  paroxysm  of  joy  and  rage  it  was  about  to 
pounce  upon  its  tormentors  and  tear  them  to  pieces. 
At  this  moment  this  little  men  stepped  between  it 
and  its  prey!  To  me  the  most  emotional  thing  in 
the  whole  revolution  is  this  little  man  standing  in 
that  stairway,  so  unemotionally  looking  that  mob  in 
the  eye;  rather,  in  its  thousand  glaring  eyes.  There 
was  pallor  in  his  face,  but  no  tremor  in  his  limbs. 
And  no  quaver  in  his  voice,  as  he  said  again  slowly 
and  solemnly,  "The  first  man  who  tries  to  kill  a 
Yunker,  I  will  kill  him." 

The  sheer  audacity,  the  impudence  of  it  took 
their  breath  away. 


144  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

"What  do  you  mean?"  they  yelled.  *'To  save 
these  officers,  Counter-Revolutionists,  you  kill  us 
workmen — Revolutionists  ?  " 

"Revolutionists!"  retorted  Antonov,  derisively. 
"Revolutionists!  Where  do  I  see  Revolutionists 
here?  You  dare  call  yourselves  Revolutionists? 
You,  who  think  of  killing  helpless  men  and  pris- 
oners!" His  taunt  went  home.  The  crowd  winced 
as  tho  struck  by  a  whip. 

"Listen!"  he  went  on.  "Do  you  know  what  you 
are  doing?  Do  you  realize  where  this  madness 
leads?  When  you  kill  a  captive  White  Guard  you 
are  not  killing  the  Counter-Revolution,  you  are  kill- 
ing the  Revolution.  For  this  Revolution  I  gave 
twenty  years  of  my  life  in  exile  and  in  prison.  Do 
you  think  that  I,  a  Revolutionist,  will  stand  by  and 
watch  Revolutionists  crucify  the  Revolution?" 

"But  if  they  had  us  there  would  be  no  quarter," 
bellowed  a  peasant,  "they  would  kill  us." 

"True,  they  would  kill  us,"  answered  Antonov. 
"What  of  that?  They  are  not  Revolutionists.  They 
belong  to  the  old  order,  to  the  Czar  and  the  knout, 
to  murder  and  death.  But  we  belong  to  the  Revolu- 
tion. And  the  Revolution  means  something  better. 
It  means  liberty  and  life  for  all.  That's  why  you 
give  it  your  life  and  blood.  But  you  must  give  it 
more.  You  must  give  it  your  reason.  Above  the 
satisfaction  of  your  passions  you  must  put  service 
to  the  Revolution.    For  the  triumph  of  the  Revolu- 


MERCY  OR  DEATH  TO  THE  WHITES?  145 

tion  you  have  been  brave.    Now,  for  the  honor  of 

the  Revolution  be  merciful.    You  love  the  Revolu- 

,tion.    I  only  ask  you  not  to  kill  the  thing  you  love." 

He  was  aflame,  his  face  incandescent,  his  arms 
and  voice  imploring.  His  whole  being,  focussing 
itself  in  that  last  appeal,  left  him  exhausted. 

"Speak  to  them,  comrade!"  he  entreated. 

Four  weeks  earlier  I  had  spoken  to  these  sailors 
from  the  turret  of  their  battleship  The  Republic. 
As  I  stepped  to  the  front  they  recognized  me. 

"The  American  tovarish,"  they  shouted. 

Loudly  and  fervently  I  spoke  about  the  Revolu- 
tion, about  the  battle  waged  thruout  Russia  for 
land  and  freedom,  about  their  own  betrayal  by  the 
White  Guards  and  the  justice  in  their  wrath.  But 
the  eyes  of  the  world  turned  to  them  as  the  fighting 
vanguard  of  the  Social  Revolution.  Would  they  take 
the  old  bloody  path  of  retaliation  or  blaze  the  way  to 
a  nobler  code?  They  had  shown  themselves  daring 
for  the  preservation  of  the  Revolution.  Would  they 
show  themselves  magnanimous  for  its  glory? 

It  was  an  effective  speech  at  the  outset.  But  not 
because  of  its  content.  The  recitation  of  the  Lord's 
Prayer  or  Webster's  Oration  would  have  been  almost 
as  effective.  Not  one  in  a  hundred  understood  what 
I  was  saying.    For  I  spoke  in  English. 

But  these  words — strange  and  foreign — crackling 
out  in  the  dark  held  them  and  made  them  pause — 
precisely  what  Antonov  was  working  for — that  this 


146  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

hurricane  of  passion  might  subside  a  Httle,  to  gain 
time  for  another  impulse  to  get  the  upper  hand. 

For  while  this  was  a  mob,  it 
The  Mob  Disciplined  was  a  revolutionary  mob.  Deep- 
by  the  Revolution.  rooted  in  the  hearts  of  at  least 

half  this  workman-soldier  crowd 
was  one  powerful  abiding  loyalty — the  Revolution. 
The  word  was  a  fetich.  Their  dreams  and  hopes  and 
longings  were  all  woven  around  "The  Revolution." 
They  were  its  servants.    It  was  their  master. 

True,  at  this  moment  another  master  held  them, 
displacing  every  idea  of  the  Revolution.  Revenge 
was  in  the  saddle,  recklessly  lashing  the  mob  along. 
But  this  was  temporary.  The  permanent  allegiance 
of  their  lives  was  to  the  Revolution.  Given  the 
chance  it  would  rise  up,  expel  the  usurper,  assert  its 
authority,  and  again  control  its  followers.  Antonov 
did  not  stand  alone  against  a  multitude.  In  that 
mob,  there  were  a  thousand  Antonovs,  sharing  with 
him  the  same  high  zeal  for  the  Revolution.  Antonov 
was  just  one  unit  of  that  mob,  flesh  of  its  flesh,  spirit 
of  its  spirit,  sharing  its  antagonism  to  the  Yunkers 
and  officers,  aflame  with  its  same  hot  passions. 

Antonov  happened  to  be  first  of  this  mob  to  rein 
in  his  passions,  the  first  in  whose  consciousness  the 
Revolution  replaced  revenge.  The  change  made  in 
his  heart  by  concept  of  the  Revolution  would  like- 
wise be  wrought  in  the  hearts  of  the  soldiers  and 


MERCY  OR  DEATH  TO  THE  WHITES?  147 

workers.  This  Antonov  knew.  By  repeating  the 
magic  word  "Revolution"  he  sought  to  bring  them  to 
their  revolutionary  selves;  he  sought  to  evoke  revo- 
lutionary order  out  of  chaos.    And  he  did. 

Before  our  eyes  we  saw  again  the  ancient  miracle 
of  the  Word — the  stilling  of  the  tempest.  The  howl- 
ing and  the  raging  died  away,  save  for  here  and  there 
an  angry  voice  still  persisting.  But  as  Woskov  inter- 
preted my  words,  and  Antonov  spoke  again,  these 
centres  of  dissent  subsided.  Chastened  and  in  a 
receptive  mood,  these  soldiers  and  sailors  were  sub- 
stituting for  their  own  will  to  revenge  the  v/ill  of 
the  Revolution.  Only  let  them  understand  that 
will. 

"What  is  it,  Antonov?"  they  cried.  "What  do 
you  want  us  to  do?" 

"To  treat  the  Yunkers  as  prisoners  of  war,"  said 
Antonov.  "To  carry  out  the  terms  of  surrender.  I 
have  pledged  these  Yunkers  their  lives.  I  ask  you 
to  back  my  pledge  with  yours." 

The  mob  became  a  Soviet.  A  sailor  spoke;  then 
two  soldiers  and  a  workingman.  The  vote  was 
taken  by  show  of  hands.  A  hundred  battle-stained 
hands  went  up,  and  another  hundred  until  nearly  a 
thousand  hands  were  lifted.  A  thousand  clenched 
fists  threatening  death  to  the  officers  now  raised  in 
an  open  handed  promise  of  life. 

At  this  juncture  arrived  a  delegation  from  the 
Petrograd  Duma  commissioned  "to  liquidate  the 


148  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

civil  strife  with  the  shedding  of  as  little  blood  as 
possible."  But  the  Revolution  was  liquidating  its 
own  affairs  without  the  shedding  of  any  blood  at  all. 
It  ignored  these  gentlemen,  and  detailed  a  squad  to 
enter  the  building  and  bring  the  White  Guards  down. 
First  came  the  Yunkers,  and  then  the  officers,  fer- 
reted out  of  their  hiding  places,  one  of  them  dragged 
out  by  his  heels.  Hustled  out  upon  the  elevated 
stone  steps,  they  stood  blinking  in  the  torch-light, 
facing  the  muzzles  of  a  thousand  guns,  the  scorn  of  a 
thousand  hearts,  the  grilling  of  a  thousand  pairs  of 
eyes. 

There  were  a  few  jeers,  cries  of  "Assassins  of  the 
Revolution!"  and  then  silence — the  solemn  silence 
of  a  court.  For  this  was  a  court — the  tribunal  of  the 
disinherited.  The  oppressed  sitting  in  judgment  on 
their  oppressors.  The  new  order  passing  sentence 
upon  the  old.  The  grand  assizes  of  the  Revolu- 
tion. 

"Guilty!  All  guilty!"  was  the  verdict.  Guilty  as 
enemies  of  the  Revolution.  Guilty  as  retainers  of 
the  Czar  and  the  exploiting  classes.  Guilty  as  viola- 
tors of  the  Red  Cross  and  the  laws  of  war.  Guilty 
on  all  counts  as  traitors  to  the  workers  of  Russia, 
and  to  the  workers  of  the  world. 

The  wretched  prisoners  in  the  dock  shrank  before 
the  blast  and  bowed  their  heads.  Some  of  them 
would  have  found  it  easier  to  stand  up  to  a  volley 


MERCY  OR  DEATH  TO  THE  WHITES?  149 

from  the  guns.  But  the  guns  were  there  to  guard 
them. 

Five  sailors  shouldering  rifles  took  their  stand  at 
the  foot  of  the  steps.  Antonov  seized  the  hand  of 
an  officer  and  placed  it  in  the  hand  of  a  sailor. 

"Number  one,"  he  said.  "A  helpless,  disarmed 
prisoner.  His  life  is  in  your  hands.  Guard  it  for 
the  honor  of  the  Revolution."  The  squad  encircled 
the  prisoner  and  marched  thru  the  archway. 

With  a  like  formula  the  next  prisoner  was  handed 
over,  and  the  next,  and  the  next;  each  one  entrusted 
to  a  detachment  of  four  or  five.  "The  end  of  the 
rubbish,"  muttered  an  old  peasant  as  the  last  officer 
was  delivered  to  his  escort,  and  the  procession  filed 
out  into  the  Morskaya. 

Near  the  Winter  Palace  infuriated  mobs  fell  upon 
the  Yunkers  and  tore  them  from  the  hands  of  their 
convoys.  But  the  revolutionary  sailors,  charging  the 
mobs,  rescued  the  prisoners  and  brought  them  safely 
to  the  prison  Fortress  of  Peter  and  Paul. 

The  Revolution  was  not  everjrwhere  powerful 
enough  to  check  the  savage  passions  of  the  mobs. 
Not  always  was  it  on  time  to  allay  the  primitive 
blood-lusts.  Unoffending  citizens  were  assaulted  by 
hooligans.  In  out-of-the-way  places  half-savages, 
calling  themselves  Red  Guards,  committed  heinous 
crimes.  At  the  front  General  Dukhonin  was  dragged 
from  his  carriage  and  torn  to  pieces  despite  the  pro- 
testing commissars.    Even  in  Petrograd  some  Yun- 


150  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

kers  were  clubbed  to  death  by  the  storming  crowds; 
others  were  pitched  headlong  into  the  Neva. 

The  attitude  of  the  revolu- 
The  Workers'  Respect  tionary  working-classes  toward 
for  Life.  human  life,  however,  is  not  re- 

flected in  these  mad,  sporadic 
deeds  of  the  hot-blooded  and  the  irresponsible,  but 
in  one  of  the  first  laws  the  Soviet  made  as  it  entered 
into  power. 

As  the  ruling-class  the  workers  were  now  in  a 
position  to  take  vengeance  on  their  former  exploiters 
and  executioners.  When  I  saw  them  rise  up  and 
take  the  government  in  their  own  hands,  and  at  the 
same  time  take  in  their  grasp  those  who  had  lashed 
them,  jailed  them  and  betrayed  them,  I  feared  a 
savage  outburst  of  revenge. 

I  knew  that  thousands  of  the  workmen  now  in 
authority  had  been  sent  with  clanking  chains  across 
the  snov/5  of  Siberia.  I  had  seen  them  pallid  and 
tottering  from  long  years  in  those  cofiins  for  the 
living — the  stone  sacks  of  Schlusselburg.  I  had 
seen  the  deep  scars  cut  in  their  backs  by  tlie  Cos- 
sacks' nagaika  and  I  recalled  the  words  of  Lincoln: 
"If  for  every  drop  of  blood  drawn  by  the  lash 
another  shall  be  drawn  by  the  sword,  the  judgments 
of  the  Lord  are  pure  and  righteous  altogether." 

But  there  was  no  dreadful  blood-bath.  On  the 
contrary,  the  idea  of  reprisals  seemed  to  have  no 
hol'd  on  the  minds  of  the  workers.    On  November 


After  joining  the  Communist  Party  every  member  must  take  regular  military 
exercises.     Also  all — 


Communists  are  expected  to  do  emergency  work  without  pay — called 
'^  Saturday  ings." 


MERCY  OR  DEATH  TO  THE  WHITES?  151 

30  the  Soviet  passed  the  decree  declaring  the  Aboli- 
tion of  Capital  Punishment.  This  was  not  merely 
a  humanitarian  gesture.  The  workers  turned  to 
their  enemies  not  only  to  guarantee  their  lives  but 
in  many  cases  to  grant  them  freedom. 

Many  sinister  figures  of  the  old  regime  had  been 
incarcerated  by  Kerensky  in  the  bastion  of  the 
Peter-Paul  Fortress.  There  we  met  Biletzky,  the 
chief  of  the  Czar's  Secret  Service  who  in  his  day  had 
railroaded  countless  victims  into  these  dungeons. 
Now  the  old  grizzled  rat  was  getting  a  taste  of  his 
own  medicine.  Here  also  v/as  the  ex-War  Minister 
Sukhomlinov,  whose  intrigue  with  the  Germans  had 
sent  tens  of  thousands  of  Russian  soldiers  to  death 
in  the  trenches.  These  two  arch-villains  received  us 
with  the  most  engaging  manners,  proclaiming  their 
innocence  and  protesting  against  their  "inhuman 
persecution." 

*'But  the  Bolsheviks  are  more  human  than  Keren- 
sky,"  they  said.    "They  give  us  the  newspapers." 

We  visited  also  the  ministers  of  the  fallen  Provis- 
ional Government  in  their  cells  and  found  them  tak- 
ing their  misfortunes  with  good  grace.  Tereschenko, 
handsome  as  ever,  received  us  sitting  cross-legged  on 
his  cot,  smoking  a  cigarette. 

"This  is  not  the  life  de  luxe,"  he  said  in  faultless 
English.  "But  the  commandant  is  not  to  blame. 
Suddenly  he  had  to  provide  for  hundreds  of  extra 
prisoners  and  no  extra  rations.    So  we  are  hungry. 


152  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

But  we  get  the  same  as  the  Red  Guards;  tho  they 
scowl  at  us  they  share  their  bread  with  us." 

The  young  Yunkers  we  found  recounting  their 
telephone-station  adventures,  opening  packages  from 
friends  or  stretched  out  on  mattresses  playing  cards. 

A  few  days  later  these  Yunkers  were  released.  A 
second  time  they  were  paroled  and  a  second  time 
they  broke  faith  with  their  liberators — they  went 
South  and  joined  the  White  Guard  armies  mobilizing 
against  the  Bolsheviks. 

With  like  acts  of  treachery  thousands  of  Whites 
repaid  the  Bolsheviks  for  their  clemency.  Over  his 
own  signature  General  Krasnov  solemnly  promised 
not  to  raise  his  hand  against  the  Bolsheviks,  and 
was  released.  Promptly  he  appeared  in  the  Urals  at 
the  head  of  a  Cossack  army  destroying  the  Soviets. 
Burtsev  was  liberated  from  Peter-Paul  prison  by 
order  of  the  Bolsheviks.  Straightway  he  joined  the 
Counter-Revolutionists  in  Paris  and  became  editor 
of  a  scurrilous  anti-Bolshevik  sheet.  Thousands, 
who  thus  went  forth  to  freedom  by  mercy  of  the 
Bolsheviks,  were  to  come  back  later  with  invading 
armies  to  kill  their  liberators  without  ruth  or  mercy. 

Surveying  battalions  of  comrades  slaughtered  by 
the  very  men  whom  the  Bolsheviks  had  freed, 
Trotzky  said:  "The  chief  crime  of  which  we  were 
guilty  in  those  first  days  of  the  Revolution  was  ex- 
cessive kindliness." 

Sardonic  words!  But  the  verdict  of  history  will 
be  that  the  Russian  Revolution — vastly  more  funda- 


MERCY  OR  DEATH  TO  THE  WHITES?  153 

mental  than  the  great  upheaval  in  France  in  1789 — 
was  no  saturnaha  of  revenge.  It  was  to  all  intents  a 
"bloodless  revolution." 

Take  the  most  exaggerated  estimates  of  the  shoot- 
ings in  Petrograd,  the  three  days'  battle  in  Moscow, 
the  street-fighting  in  Kiev  and  Irkutsk,  and  the 
peasants'  outbreaks  in  the  provinces.  Add  up  the 
casualties  and  divide  it  into  Russia's  population — 
not  the  3,000,000  involved  in  the  American  Revolu- 
tion, nor  the  23,000,000  of  the  French  Revolution, 
but  the  160,000,000  of  the  Russian  Revolution.  The 
figures  will  show  that  in  the  four  months  it  took 
the  Soviet  to  establish  and  consolidate  its  power — 
from  the  Atlantic  to  the  Pacific,  from  the  White  Sea 
on  the  north  to  the  Black  Sea  on  the  south — less 
than  one  in  3,000  Russians  were  killed. 

Sanguinary  enough  to  be  sure! 

But  look  at  it  in  the  perspective  of  history. 
Rightly  or  wrongly,  when  the  fulfillment  of  the  na- 
tional destiny  of  America  demanded  that  we  cut  out 
the  cancer  of  slavery,  vast  property  rights  were  con- 
fiscated, and  in  doing  this  we  did  not  stop  until  we 
had  killed  one  in  every  300  people.  Rightly  or 
wrongly,  the  peasants  and  workers  feel  it  essential 
to  cut  out  of  Russia  the  cancer  of  Czarism,  land- 
lordism, and  capitalism.  Such  a  deep-seated  and 
malign  disease  called  for  a  major  surgical  operation. 
Yet  it  was  performed  with  comparatively  little  let- 
ting of  blood.    For,  like  children,  the  nature  of  a 


154  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

great  folk  is  to  forgive  and  forget — not  to  retaliate. 
And  vindictiveness  is  alien  to  the  spirit  of  working- 
people.  In  those  early  days  they  strove  hard  to 
conduct  a  civil  war  in  a  civil  manner. 

In  a  large  measure  they  succeeded.  The  death- 
toll  of  both  Whites  and  Reds  together  was  not  equal 
to  the  casualties  in  a  single  big  battle  of  the  World 
War. 

"But  the  Red  Terror ! "  someone  interjects.  That 
was  to  come  later  when  the  Allied  armies  were  to 
come  to  Russia,  and  under  their  protecting  wing  the 
Czarists  and  Black  Hundreds  were  to  loose  upon 
peasants  and  workers  the  White  Terror  of  the  Coun- 
ter-Revolution — a  hideous  orgy  of  butchery  and  lust 
in  which  helpless  women  and  children  were  to  be 
massacred  in  droves. 

Then  in  defense  the  workers,  goaded  to  despera- 
tion, were  to  strike  back  with  the  Red  Terror  of  the 
Revolution.  Then  capital  punishment  was  to  be 
restored  and  the  White  conspirators  were  to  feel 
the  swift  chastising  hand  of  the  Revolution. 

There  are  furious  charges  and  counter  charges 
about  Red  and  White  Terrors.  Out  of  the  contro- 
versy four  facts  emerge  and  may  be  stated  here. 

The  Red  Terror  was  a  distinctly  later  phase  of  the 
Revolution.  It  was  a  defensive  measure,  a  direct 
reply  to  the  White  Terror  of  the  Counter-Revolu- 
tion.  Both  in  number  and  fiendishness  the  outrages 
of  the  Reds  pale  before  the  atrocities  committed  by 


MERCY  OR  DEATH  TO  THE  WHITES?  155 

the  Whites.*  Had  not  the  Allies  intervened  in  Rus- 
sia and  again  stirred  up  civil  war  against  the  Soviets, 
in  all  probability  there  would  have  been  no  Red 
Terror  and  the  Revolution  would  have  continued  as 
it  began — practically  a  "bloodless  revolution." 

*  Appendix  II.    "The  Train  of  Death"  from  the  American  Red 
Cross  Magazine. 


CHAPTER  XI 

THE  WAR   OF   THE   CLASSES 

UPSTARTS,  adventurers,  impostors!" 
Thus  the  bourgeoisie  stigmatized  the  Bolshe- 
viks, or  sneered  with  Shatsky,  "How  can  such  dogs, 
such  canaille  run  a  government!" 

The  idea  that  the  Red  regime  would  last  longer 
than  a  few  hours  or  a  few  days  was  a  joke.  Again 
and  again  we  were  told,  'The  hangings  will  begin 
tomorrow."  But  many  tomorrows  passed  and  no 
Bolsheviks  dangled  from  the  lamp-posts.  The 
bourgeoisie  became  alarmed  as  the  Soviet  showed 
no  sign  of  falling.  "It  is  necessary  to  do  battle  and 
pull  it  down,"  read  the  appeal  of  the  Council  of  the 
Republic.  "It  is  the  enemy  of  the  people  and  the 
Revolution." 

The  City  Duma  became  the  center  for  all  forces 
mobilizing  against  the  Soviets.  It  was  swarming 
with  generals,  priests,  intelligentsia,  chinovniks,  spec- 
ulators. Knights  of  Saint  George,  Boy  Scouts, 
French  and  British  officers,  White  Guards  and 
Cadets.  Out  of  these  elements  was  organized  the 
"Committee  of  Salvation" — the  General  Staff  of  the 
Counter-Revolution. 

IS6 


tHE  WAR  OF  THE  CLASSES  157 

"All  of  Russia  is  represented  here,"  boasted  the 
old  Mayor  Schreider.  And  so  it  was.  "All  Russia" 
— all  except  her  peasants  and  workers,  her  soldiers 
and  sailors.  Coming  here  from  proletarian  Smolny 
was  like  entering  another  world,  the  world  of  the 
well-fed  and  well-dressed.  From  here  the  ancient 
order  of  privilege  and  power  struck  against  the  new 
order  set  up  by  the  working  class.  From  here  the 
bourgeoisie  engineered  its  campaign  against  the 
Soviet,  using  every  means  to  discredit,  cripple  and 
destroy  it. 

By  one  stroke  the  bourgeoisie 
The  Bourgeois  Strike  sought  to  bring  the  Soviet  to  its 
and  Sabotage.  knees.     It  proclaimed  a  general 

strike  in  all  departments  of  the 
new  government.  In  some  ministries  the  white- 
collared  workers  walked  out  in  a  body.  In  the  For- 
eign Office  600  officials  listened  to  Trotzky's  appeal 
for  translators  of  the  Peace  Decree,  then  resigned. 
A  big  strike-chest  collected  from  the  banks  and  busi- 
ness houses  corrupted  the  minor  officials  and  even 
part  of  the  working-class.  For  a  time  postmen  re- 
fused to  deliver  Soviet  mail,  the  telegraph  would  not 
despatch  Soviet  messages,  railways  would  not  carry 
troops,  the  telephone  girls  left  the  switchboards, 
huge  buildings  were  deserted — no  one  was  left  to 
light  the  fires.* 

The  reply  of  the  Bolsheviks  to  this  general  strike 
was  to  declare  the  positions  and  pension  rights  of  all 

*  Appendix,  p.  304. 


IS8  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

strikers  forfeit  if  they  did  not  return  at  once.  At 
the  same  time  they  set  to  work  recruiting  new  staffs 
out  of  their  own  ranks.  Men  in  smocks  and  over- 
alls occupied  the  vacated  offices.  Soldiers  pored  over 
books  and  figures,  tongues  sticking  out  of  their 
mouths  from  the  unaccustomed  mental  strain.  Big 
sailors  laboriously  picked  out  keys  on  the  type- 
writer with  one  finger.  Workingmen  at  the  switch- 
boards in  the  telephone  station  clumsily  plugged  in 
and  out  while  irate  subscribers  screamed  curses  and 
threats  at  them  over  the  wires.  They  were  pitifully 
heavy-handed  and  slow.  But  they  were  in  dead 
earnest,  and  day  by  day  their  speed  was  increasing. 
Day  by  day  the  old  employes  came  drifting  back, 
and  in  the  end  the  strike  of  the  bourgeoisie  was 
broken. 

Sabotage  was  the  second  weapon  used  against  the 
Soviets.  In  factories  managers  hid  vital  parts  of  ma- 
chinery, falsified  accounts,  destroyed  plans  and 
formulas  and,  under  cover  of  night,  shipped  away 
lead  and  flour  to  Germany.  Officials  misdirected 
freight,  destroyed  good  food  under  the  pretext  of 
its  being  unfit  for  use,  tied  everything  up  in  loops 
of  red  tape. 

The  Bolsheviks  answered  with  a  "Warning  to 
all  Saboteurs  and  Provocateurs,  who  have  wormed 
their  way  into  Soviet  Institutions."  At  the  same 
time  the  walls  of  the  city  were  placarded  with  this 
poster  addressed  To  all  HONEST  CITIZENS: 


B^ttKb  HECTHblMl* 
rPnmilAHAM'b! 

iiii'fiiwilii  mm  iiniimn: 

Xhiipbkh,  Ufmw,  cneKpaHTbi  ofiiaBMiOTiifl  BparaMH  mm 

Sm,  BBHOBBbifl  n  mm  immm  npecijiuieHlm,  6y/pb  He- 
meiiJieHHO  apecTOBweaTbcs  no  cnenJajiLBbm  opAepaMi  BoeHHO-PeBOJiwii 
KoMHTeia  c  OTupaBJiaTtcfl  hi  KpoHinTaj^TCKiaTiopLMBiBDp^bAoiipejiaHia 
m  BoeHHo-PeBOJiionioHHOiaj.cyAy. 

Mm>  o6iiiecTBeHHbiM'b  opranHsaiJaM'b^BteHecTHbiMirpaKAaHaiBt 
BoeeHO-PeBOJiioii,  KoMHierb  npeAJiaraerb:  o6oBctoH3Bi&CTHbiiibCJiyHam 
xameHlfl.  MapoAepcTBa,  cneKjaauija  EeMej^neHHo  aoboahtb  ao  CB^Alfiia 
BoeHHO-PfiBOJiKm.  KoMHTeia. 

Bopb6a  CT)  ami  3Jioiffb-o6inee  /li&Jio  bc!xi  ^mmn  m0.  Bccbho- 
FeBOJiioit  KoMHTeiT)  ^mi  ooAAepiKH  oH)  tIxi,  komj  Aopora  BHTepecbi 
HapoAa. 

Bi  npecjii&AOBaBiB  cneKyjiasTOBi)  b  fflapoAepi  BoeHflo-PeBOJiionloHBbi^ 
KoMBTen  dyAeii  6e3noBiaAeHi. 

^oexHO^PeSoAiotiioHH^Q  XoMumem%. 

Ueiporpar*. 
10  BOflCpa  1917  r. 

[TAm  poster  is  reproduced  in  English  on  following  p^ge.l 

159 


TOIQLLHOnEST 

CITIZEnS! 

min-eEVOLllTIOIIirCQiliinEEDEdES: 

Hooligans,  profiteers  and  specuutors  are  de- 
clared TO  BE  ENEMIES  OF  THE  PEOPLE. 

Persons  guilty  of  these  grave  crimes  will  be 

IMMEDIATELY  ARRESTED  BY  SPECIAL  ORDER  OF  THE  WAR- 
REVOLUTIONARY  COMMIHEE  and  will  be  sent  to  THE 
KRONSTADT  prisons  to  remain  there  UNTIL  BROUGHT 
BEFORE  THE  WAR-REVOLUTIONARY  COURT. 

The  War-Revolutionary  Commihee  urges  all 

PUBLIC  organizations  AND  ALL  HONEST  CITIZENS  IMME- 
DIATELY  to  INFORM  THE  WAR-REVOLUTIONARY  COMMIT- 

tee,  of  all  cases  of  theft  robbery  and  speculation. 
The  fight  against  these  evils  is  the  task  of  all 

HONEST  people.  THE  WAR-REVOLUTIONARY  COMMIHEE 
expects  THE  SUPPORT  OF  ALL  THOSE  WHO  HAVE  THE 
INTERESTS  OF  THE  PEOPLE  AT  HEART. 

In  the  prosecution  of  speculators  and  PRon- 

TEERS  THE  WAR-REVOLUTIONARY  COMMITTEE  WILL  BE 
RELENTLESS. 

War- Revolutionary  Committee. 

PETROGRAD. 
NOVEMBER  23,   1917. 

[This  is  a  reproduction  in  English  of  the  Russian  poster  on  the 

preceding  page.] 

j50 


THE  WAR  OF  THE  CLASSES         i6i 

Under  this  threat,  those  speculating  in  the  hunger 
of  the  masses  took  to  cover.  Later  on,  the  Extraor- 
dinary Commission  (Cheka)  was  created  to  deal 
with  these  offenders,  and  other  enemies  of  the  new 
Soviet  order. 

In  classes  where  there  was  no  enmity  against  the 
Soviet,  the  bourgeoisie  fomented  it.  The  sufferings 
of  millions  of  cripples,  orphans  and  wounded  was 
made  acute  by  closing  down  the  Department  of 
Public  Welfare.  Hospitals  and  asylums  became 
foodless  and  fireless.  Delegations  on  crutches  and 
starving  mothers,  babies  in  arms,  besieged  the  new 
Commissar,  Madame  Kollontai.  But  she  was  help- 
less. The  safes  were  locked,  and  the  officials  had 
made  off  with  the  keys.  The  former  Minister, 
Countess  Panina,  had  made  off  with  the  funds. 

The  Bolshevik  reply  to  this  and  similar  acts  was 
not  the  guillotine  but  the  Revolutionary  Tribunal. 
Behind  a  long  semi-circular  table  in  the  music  room 
of  the  Palace  of  the  Grand  Duke  Nicholas  sat  the 
seven  judges — two  soldiers,  two  workmen,  two 
peasants  and  the  President,  Jukov. 

The  first  prisoner  was  the  Countess  Panina.  The 
defense  recited  at  length  her  golden  deeds  and  char- 
ities. The  young  workman  prosecutor  Naumov  re- 
plied: 

"Comrades:  All  this  is  true.  The  woman  has  a 
good  heart.    But  she  is  all  wrong.    She  has  helped 


1 62  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

the  people  out  of  her  riches.  But  where  did  her 
riches  come  from?  Out  of  the  exploited  people. 
She  tried  to  do  good  with  her  schools,  her  nurses  and 
her  soup-kitchens.  But  if  the  people  had  the  money 
she  received  out  of  their  blood  and  sweat,  we  could 
have  our  own  schools,  our  own  nurses  and  our  own 
soup-kitchens.  And  we  could  have  them  the  way 
we  want  them,  not  the  way  she  thinks  we  ought  to 
have  them.  Her  good  deeds  can  not  excuse  her 
taking  funds  from  the  Ministry." 

The  verdict  was  guilty.  She  was  sent  to  prison 
until  the  money  was  returned,  then  liberated  to 
public  censure!  In  the  beginning  light  sentences 
like  this  were  the  order  of  the  day.  But  as  the 
class  conflict  grew  more  and  more  bitter  the  penal- 
ties imposed  by  the  Revolutionary  Tribunal  grew 
more  severe. 

Money  is  the  life-blood  of  all  governments,  and 
all  financial  institutions  were  in  the  hands  of  the 
bourgeoisie.  To  the  City  Duma  and  the  "Committee 
of  Salvation"  the  banks  privately  paid  over  fifty 
million  rubles — to  the  Soviets  not  a  single  ruble. 
All  their  pleas  and  papers  were  unavailing.  The 
bourgeoisie  found  great  mirth  in  the  spectacle  of  the 
Government  of  All-Russia  going  to  the  banks  cap 
in  hand  begging  for  funds  and  not  getting  any. 

Then  one  morning  the  Bolsheviks  came  to  the 
banks  guns  in  hand.  They  took  the  funds.  Then 
they  took  the  banks.    By  th(3  decree  for  Nationaliza- 


THE  WAR  OF  THE  CLASSES         163 

tion  of  Banks,  these  centres  of  financial  power  passed 
into  the  hands  of  the  working-class. 

In  their  efforts  to  befuddle 
Alcohol,  Press  and  Church  the  brains  of  the  masses  the 
versus  the  Soviets.  bourgeoisie  saw  an  ally  in 

alcohol.  The  city  was  mined 
with  wine  cellars  more  dangerous  than  powder  mag- 
azines. This  alcohol  in  the  veins  of  the  populace 
meant  chaos  in  the  life  of  the  city.  With  this  aim 
the  cellars  were  opened  and  the  mob  invited  in  to 
help  themselves.  Bottles  in  hand  the  drunks  would 
emerge  from  the  cellars  to  fall  sprawling  on  the 
snow,  or  rove  thru  the  streets,  shooting  and  looting. 
To  these  pogroms  the  Bolsheviks  replied  with 
machine-guns,  pouring  lead  into  the  bottles — there 
was  no  time  to  break  them  all  by  hand.  They  de- 
stroyed three  million  rubles'  worth  of  vintage  in  the 
vaults  of  the  Winter  Palace,  some  of  it  there  for  a 
century.  The  liquor  passed  out  of  the  cellars,  not 
thru  the  throats  of  the  Czar  and  his  retainers,  but 
thru  a  hose  attached  to  a  fire-engine  pumping  into 
the  canals.  A  frightful  loss.  The  Bolsheviks  deeply 
regretted  it,  for  they  needed  funds.  But  they  needed 
order  more. 

"Citizens,"  they  declared,  "no  violation  of  revolu- 
tionary order!  No  thefts  nor  brigandage!  Follow- 
ing the  example  of  the  Paris  Commune,  we  will  de- 
stroy any  looter  or  instigator  of  disorder."  To 
meet  this  crisis  this  placard  was  posted: 


0  itsim  ummn  f&bmm  m  mmsb 


2)  Bc^KfJ!  co5paHl^,  MHTMHrw,  cGopHiua  n 
T.n.  Ha  y/iMuaxb  m  nnomQA«xi>  Bocnp^luoeTOi. 

3)  HonbiTKH  pajrpoMOBt)  BMHHbixi>  norpe* 

60Bh,  CKHQAOBlj,  JQBOjaOBT?,  /laBOKT?,  MarQ3M- 
HOBl),  qaCTHblXT?  KBapTMpi)  M  npoM.  M  T.n.  6y« 
Ayrb  npeKpQiuaeMbi  nyneMeTHbiivTb  pmeM'b 
6e3i>  BC^Kgro  npeAynpe>KAeHm. 

4]  HostsQB&mrb  Ronrarcraim,  oraeiKajQainitt  RSOpHBiiaim 
B  imuuBulH  GoafeHReTCfl  B-b  eeayciiOEsaFKi  oiaJiaaRHcrrb  nsAAesi- 
msBaTb  csMb!^  CTsscmaModll  capaAOH'b  B-b  Aomasi*.  cBopax'b 
B  ea  s^neaaiii},  npis<?eE!ibBop9Ta  h  non^taflbmonssBi*  coiiHtHbi 
ssEEpaTbCfl  c^  9  qac  Benepa  b  OTRpbiBarbcsi  bi*  7  qac  yrpa. 
Docnti  0  ^ac.  Eeqepa  BbinycsaTb  TOJibHO  auuibiios'b  noKb  aoih 
vpojzenrb  comoBbiK^  BomBTerovb. 

S)  BHHGBHb!3  iTb  pasflaq^  ts!^6uzm%  Eim  npIoSptTenlB 
^amiKi*  cnapTisbsirb  HaoxTEOB'b*  a  raiirae  bii  HapsfuiSHlH  nvu* 
^TOBii  2-ro  H  4-ro  Gy^aFTb  B£me;si3eHHo  apscrosaaiii  a  ooAseji* 
vBSThi  camomy  THmsoisjr  BaHasaHbc. 

flerporpaAik  6'ro  pfiKzGpsi,  3  nata  homh. 

KoBHTerb  mr^opii6i  ci  norpomm  npn  BcnojuHTejiLaoEi 
fiassreri  Gortn  Pa(kKS7b  h  Cojustchszi  AesyraTOsi. 


164 


DThe  city  of  Petrograd  is  declared  to  be 
in  a  state  of  siege. 

2)  All  assemblies,  meetings  and 
congregations  on  the  streets  and 
squares  are  prohibited. 

3)  Attempts  to  loot  wine-cellars, 
warehouses,  factories,  stores,  business 
premises,  private  dwellings,  etc.,  etc., 
will  be  stopped  by  machine-gun  fire 

without  w^arning. 

4)  House  CoMmiTEES,  doormen,  janitors  and  miutia- 
m£n  are  charged  with  the  duty  of  keeping  strict  order 
in  all  houses,  courtyards  and  in  the  streets;  and  houses, 
doors  and  carriage-entrances  must  be  locked  at  9 
o'clock  in  the  evening,  and  opened  at  7  o'clock  in  the 
morning.  after  9  o'clock  in  the  evening  only  tenants 
may  leave  the  house,  under  strict  control  of  the  house 
committees. 

5)  Those  guilty  of  the  distribution,  sale  or  purchase 
of  any  kind  of  alcoholic  liquor,  and  also  those  guilty  of 
the  violations  of  sections  2  and  4,  will  be  immediately 
arrested  and  subjected  to  the  most  severe  punishment. 

Petrograd,  19th  of  December,  3  o'clock  in  the  night. 

Committee  to  Fight  against  Pogroms,  attached  to  the  Executive 
Committee  of  the  Soviet  of  Workers  and  Soldiers'  Deputies. 

[This  is  a  reproduction  in  English  of  the  Russian  poster  on 
opposite  page.] 

165 


1 66  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

If  liquor  might  not  poison  the  minds  of  the  peo- 
ple, there  was  the  press.  The  lie-factories  ground 
out  their  daily  grist  of  papers  and  posters  telling  of 
the  imminent  fall  of  the  Bolsheviks;  of  Lenin's  flight 
to  Finland  with  thirty  millions  of  gold  and  platinum 
stolen  from  the  State  Bank;  of  the  massacres  of 
women  and  children  by  the  Reds;  of  German  officers 
in  command  at  Smolny. 

The  Bolsheviks  replied  to  this  by  the  suspension 
of  all  organs  "appealing  to  open  revolt  or  inciting  to 
crime." 

"The  wealthy  classes,"  they  declared,  "holding  the 
lion's  share  of  the  public  press  seek  to  befuddle  the 
brains  and  consciences  of  the  people  with  a  stream 
of  slander  and  lies.  ...  If  the  first  Revolution, 
which  overthrew  the  monarchy,  had  the  right  to  sup- 
press the  monarchist  press,  then  this  Revolution, 
which  has  overthrown  the  bourgeoisie,  has  the  right 
to  suppress  the  bourgeois  press." 

The  opposition  press,  however,  was  not  wholly 
suppressed.  Papers  suspended  one  day  came  out 
the  next  under  a  new  name.  Speech  became  Free 
Speech.  The  Day  appeared  as  Night,  then  In  The 
Dark  Night,  Midnight,  Two  A.M.  and  so  on.  In 
picture  and  verse  Satire  went  on  merrily  and  merci- 
lessly lampooning  the  Bolsheviks.  The  American 
Committee  on  Public  Information  carried  on  its 
propaganda  unhindered,  publishing  the  words  of 
Samuel  Gompers  under  the  headline  "Socialists  Sup- 


THE  WAR  OF  THE  CLASSES         167 

port  the  War."  But  the  Bolshevik  measures  were 
effective  enough  to  prevent  wholesale  lying  to  the 
masses. 

The  Czar  had  used  the  priests  of  the  Greek  Ortho- 
dox Church  as  his  spiritual  police  making  "Religion 
the  opiate  of  the  people."  With  threats  of  hell  and 
promises  of  heaven  the  masses  had  been  bludgeoned 
into  submission  to  autocracy.  Now  the  church  was 
called  to  perform  the  same  function  for  the  bour- 
geoisie. By  solemn  proclamation  the  Bolsheviks 
were  excommunicated  from  all  its  rites  and  services. 

The  Bolsheviks  made  no  direct  assault  upon 
rehgion,  but  separated  Church  from  State.  The 
flow  of  government  funds  into  the  ecclesiastical 
coffers  was  stopped.  Marriage  was  declared  a 
civil  institution.  The  monastic  lands  were  confis- 
cated. Parts  of  monasteries  were  turned  into 
hospitals. 

The  Patriarch  thundered  his  protests  against  these 
sacrileges  but  with  little  effect.  The  devotion  of  the 
masses  to  the  Holy  Church  proved  to  be  almost  as 
mythical  as  their  devotion  to  the  Czar.  They  looked 
at  the  Church  Decree  giving  them  hell  if  they  sided 
with  the  Bolsheviks.  Then  they  looked  at  the 
Bolshevik  Decree  giving  them  land  and  factories. 

"If  we  must  choose,"  some  said,  "we  choose  the 
Bolsheviks."  Others  chose  the  Church.  Many 
merely   muttered   "Neechevo"    (it   doesn't   matter 


1 68  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

much),  and  walked  in  the  church  procession  on  one 
day  and  in  the  Bolshevik  parade  on  the  next. 

The  cities  were  the  stronghold 
Peasants,  Anarchists  and  of  the  Bolsheviks.  The  bour- 
Germans  Pitted  against  geoisie  sought  to  play  the 
the  Soviets.  country  against  them, 

"Look!"  they  said  to  the 
peasants,  "The  cities  work  but  eight  hours  a  day, 
why  should  you  work  sixteen?  Why  deliver  your 
grain  to  the  cities  when  you  get  nothing  in  return?"  * 
The  old  Executive  Committee  of  the  Peasants'  So- 
viet flatly  refused  to  recognize  the  new  government 
at  Smolny. 

Over  their  heads,  however,  the  Bolsheviks  called 
a  new  congress  of  peasants.  Here  the  old  guard 
with  Chernov  made  furious  assaults  upon  the  Bol- 
sheviks. But  two  stubborn  facts  could  not  be 
downed.  First:  The  Bolsheviks  had  given  the  peas- 
ants land — not  promises.  Second:  The  Bolsheviks 
were  now  inviting  the  peasants  to  participate  in  the 
new  government. 

After  days  of  stormy  debate  an  agreement  was 
concluded.  The  peasants  streamed  out  into  the 
night  lit  with  torches,  the  band  of  the  Pavlovsky 
Regiment  crashed  into  the  Marseillaise,  workmen 
rushed  in  upon  the  peasants  clasping  them  in  their 
arms  and  kissing  them.  Behind  the  huge  peasant 
Soviet  banner  with  its  inscription:  "Long  Live  the 

♦Appendix,  p.  310.  Soviet  appeal  to  Peasants:  "Dear  Brothers." 


HToBbI  EoAblUE  HMETb- 
HAA<»  BOAbUlE  nPoH3BOAHTb 


HToBbI  EoliUJE 

nPoH3Bo/pTb- 

HAAo  BoAbUJE 

3HATb 


'In  Order  to  Have  More,  it  is  Xecessary  to  Produce  More.     In 
Order  to  Produce  More,  it  is  Necessary  to  Know  More." 


THE  WAR  OF  THE  CLASSES         169 

Union  of  the  Toiling  Masses"  the  procession  passed 
thru  the  snow-covered  streets  to  Smolny.  Here  the 
formal  "wedding"  of  the  peasants  with  the  soldiers 
and  workers  was  consummated.  In  exaltation  an 
old  mujik  cried  out,  *T  came  here  not  walking  on 
the  ground  but  flying  thru  the  air."  The  new  gov- 
ernment became  in  reality  a  Soviet  of  Workmen, 
Soldier  and  Peasant  Deputies. 

In  their  efforts  to  break  the  Soviets  the  bour- 
geoisie struck  out  right  and  left — as  far  left  as  the 
Anarchists.  Hundreds  of  officers  and  monarchists 
filtered  into  the  anarchist  organizations  and  under 
the  black  flag  became  anarchists  of  deed. 

They  entered  hotels  and  at  revolver-point  "re- 
quisitioned" the  pocket-books  of  the  guests.  In  Mos- 
cow they  "nationalized"  thirty-four  palaces  by 
dumping  the  inmates  into  the  streets.  They  found 
the  American  Red  Cross  automobile  of  Colonel  Rob- 
bins  standing  by  a  curb  and  "socialized"  it  by  jump- 
ing in  and  driving  off.  They  justified  everything  by 
saying:  "We  are  the  real  revolutionists — more  radi- 
cal than  the  Bolsheviks." 

The  Bolsheviks  delivered  an  ultimatum  to  the 
genuine  Anarchists  to  clean  house.  At  the  same 
time  they  raided  the  "Anarchist"  centers  and  found 
great  stores  of  provisions,  jewelry  and  machine-guns 
fresh  from  Germany.  They  restored  the  stolen 
property  to  the  owners  and  arrested  all  reactionaries 
masquerading  as  ultra-revolutionists. 


170  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

For  help  the  bourgeoisie  turned  to  their  former 
enemies — the  Germans.  Again  and  again  they  told 
us  that  next  week  we  would  see  the  German  armies 
marching  into  Moscow. 

The  Bolsheviks  had  then  no  Red  Armies  to  op- 
pose the  Germans,  no  batteries  of  guns.  But  they 
had  batteries  of  linotypes  and  printing-presses,  which 
sprayed  the  German  ranks  with  the  deadly  shrapnel 
of  propaganda.  In  the  Torch  and  the  People's 
Peace,  in  all  languages,  flamed  the  appeal  to  the 
German  soldiers  to  use  their  guns — not  to  destroy 
the  workingmen's  republic  in  Russia,  but  to  set  up 
a  workingmen's  republic  in  Germany. 

In  the  Soviet  offices  John  Reed  and  I  made  up  an 
illustrated  sheet.  Picture  No.  i  showed  the  German 
Embassy  in  Petrograd,  a  big  banner  on  its  front. 
Underneath  this  picture  these  sentences: 

See  the  great  banner.  It  is  the  word  of  a  famous  German. 
Was  it  Bismarck?  Was  it  Hindenburg?  No.  It  is  the  call  of 
the  immortal  Karl  Marx  to  international  brotherhood — "Prole- 
tarians of  all  lands,  unite!" 

This  is  not  merely  a  pretty  decoration  of  the  German  Em- 
bassy. In  all  seriousness  the  Russians  have  raised  this  banner, 
and  to  you  Germans  they  hurl  back  the  same  words  that  your 
Karl  Marx  gave  to  the  whole  world  seventy  years  ago. 

At  last  a  real  proletarian  republic  has  been  founded.  But 
this  republic  cannot  be  secure  until  the  workers  of  all  lands 
conquer  the  power  of  government. 

The  Russian  peasants,  workers  and  soldiers  will  soon  send  a 
socialist  as  ambassador  to  Berlin.  When  will  Germany  send  an 
internationalist  Socialist  to  this  building  of  the  German  embassy 
in  Petrograd? 


THE  WAR  OF  THE  CLASSES         171 

Picture  No.  3  showed  a  soldier  prying  the  Rus- 
sian Imperial  eagles  off  a  palace,  the  crowd  below 
burning  them.    Underneath  these  words: 

On  the  roof  of  a  palace,  a  soldier  is  tearing  down  the  hateful 
emblem  of  autocracy.  Below  the  crowd  is  burning  the  eagles. 
The  soldier  in  the  crowd  is  explaining  that  the  overthrow  of  au- 
tocracy is  only  the  first  step  in  the  march  of  social  revolution. 

It  is  easy  to  overthrow  autocracy.  Autocracy  rests  on  nothing 
but  the  blind  submission  of  soldiers.  The  Russian  soldiers  merely 
opened  their  eyes  and  autocracy  disappeared. 

These  pictures,  papers  and  leaflets  were  flung  up 
into  the  air  to  be  blown  by  favorable  winds  into  the 
German  trenches.  They  were  dropped  from  aero- 
planes and  smuggled  across  in  shoes  and  boxes  and 
on  prisoners  returning  to  Germany. 

All  this  disintegrated  the  German  armies  and 
made  for  revolution.  General  Hoffman  said:  "It 
was  Lenin  and  the  Bolsheviks  that  broke  our  morale 
and  gave  us  defeat  and  the  revolution  you  now  see 
ruining  us."  Probably  the  propaganda  was  not  so 
effective  as  this.  But  it  did  prevent  the  German 
troops  from  coming  to  overwhelm  the  Soviet.  The 
Russian  bourgeoisie  began  scheming  for  intervention 
by  the  Allies. 

On  January  18,  1918,  at  the 
The  Debacle  of  the  height  of  the  struggle  between 

Constituent  Assembly.         the    classes    the    Constituent 

Assembly  convened.  It  re- 
flected an  earlier  phase  of  the  Revolution — a  view- 
point now  discarded.    It  was  elected  from  antiquated 


172  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

lists — lists  in  which  one  Soviet  Party — the  Left  So- 
cialist Revolutionists,  did  not  appear  as  a  party  at 
all.  The  masses  were  indifferent  to  this  institution 
coming  like  a  ghost  out  of  the  past.  But  the  bour- 
geoisie loudly  acclaimed  it.  In  reality  the  bourgeoisie 
had  no  zeal  for  the  Constituent  Assembly  and  for 
months  had  done  everything  to  postpone  or  kill  it. 
How  often  had  I  heard  them  say:  "The  Constituent 
Assembly — we  spit  upon  it."  Now  it  was  their  last 
hope,  the  last  screen  behind  which  they  could  oper- 
ate, they  became  its  ardent  champions. 

For  the  opening  day  a  big  demonstration  was  or- 
ganized. About  15,000  officers,  chinovniks  and  in- 
telligentsia paraded  thru  the  streets.  Fur-clad  ladies 
of  leisure  arrayed  in  scarlet  colors,  old  monarchists 
carrying  banners  of  red,  large-bellied  landlords 
lustily  singing  "We  starved  and  bled  in  the  people's 
cause"  all  tried  their  best  to  look  like  a  revolutionary 
procession.  But  only  the  songs  and  banners  were 
red.  The  marchers  were  largely  White  Guards  and 
Black  Hundreds — scarcely  a  peasant  or  worker.  The 
masses  stood  aside  and  greeted  the  paraders  with 
jeers  or  contemptuous  silence. 

The  Constituent  Assembly  came  too  late.  It  was 
still-born.  In  the  swift  pace  of  Revolution  the  al- 
legiance of  the  revolutionary  masses  had  passed 
wholly  to  the  Soviet.  For  the  Soviet  they  had 
marched  500,000  strong  and  they  were  ready,  not 
only  to  march  for  it,  but  to  fight  and  die  for  it.  The 
Soviet  was  precious  to  the  working-classes  because  it 


THE  WAR  OF  THE  CLASSES         173 

was  their  own  institution,  born  in  their  own  class  and 
admirably  fitted  to  realize  their  own  ends. 

Every  dominant  class  fashions  the  kind  of  state- 
apparatus  that  will  best  secure  its  power,  thru  which 
it  can  govern  in  its  own  interests.  When  kings  and 
nobles  were  in  power  the  state-apparatus  thru  which 
they  functioned  was  the  Autocracy,  the  Bureaucracy. 
When  the  bourgeois-capitalist  classes  rose  to  power 
in  the  i8th  century  they  scrapped  this  old  state- 
apparatus  and  created  a  new  one  adapted  to  their 
purposes — the  Parliament,  Congress. 

In  like  manner  the  working-classes  rising  to  power 
in  Russia  brought  with  them  their  own  state-appara- 
tus— the  Soviet.  They  had  tried  and  tested  it  in 
thousands  of  local  Soviets.  They  were  familiar  with 
its  workings.  It  was  part  of  their  daily  experience. 
Thru  it  they  had  achieved  the  desires  of  their  hearts 
— land,  factories,  and  the  proffers  of  peace.  They 
had  marched  to  victory  with  it.  They  had  made  it 
the  government  of  Russia. 

And  now  this  belated  Constituent  Assembly  re- 
fused to  recognize  the  Soviet  as  the  government  of 
Russia.  It  refused  to  accept  the  Soviets'  Declara- 
tion of  the  Rights  of  the  Working  and  Exploited 
Peoples — "the  Magna  Charta  of  the  Russian  Rev- 
olution." *  It  was  as  if  the  French  Revolution  re- 
fused to  accept  the  Declaration  of  the  Rights  of  Man. 

Accordingly  it  was  dissolved.  In  the  morning  of 
January  19,  191 8,  the  sailor  guards  said  they  were 

*  Appendix  VI,  p.  297. 


174  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

sleepy  and  that  the  remaining  delegates  must  stop 
talking  and  go  home.  Thus  after  one  session  the 
Constituent  Assembly  expired,  making  a  great  furor 
in  the  Western  world,  but  in  the  life  of  Russia  hardly 
a  ripple.  It  had  no  hold  on  the  people.  By  the 
manner  of  its  dying  it  showed  that  it  had  no  right  to 
live. 

The  chief  mourners  for  the  Constituent  Assembly 
were  the  bourgeoisie.  It  was  their  last  hope.  Now 
it  was  gone  their  rage  against  the  Revolution  and  all 
its  works  was  implacable.  This  was  quite  natural. 
The  Revolution  was  a  catastrophe  to  them.  It  de- 
clared: "If  a  man  does  not  work,  neither  shall  he 
eat."  "No  one  shall  have  cake  until  everybody  has 
bread."  It  dynamited  the  whole  basis  of  their  lives. 
It  took  the  great  estates  away  from  the  landlords,  the 
gilt-edged  jobs  away  from  the  office-holders,  the  con- 
trol of  banks  and  factories  away  from  the  capitalists. 
Nobody  likes  to  have  things  taken  away  from  him. 
No  leisure  class  gracefully  steps  down  from  the  roof- 
garden  and  goes  to  work.  No  .privileged  class  vol- 
untarily resigns  any  of  its  privileges.  No  class 
steeped  in  tradition  discards  the  old  and  gladly  em- 
braces the  new. 

There  are  of  course  exceptions  to  this  rule — in 
Russia  some  striking  ones.  The  old  Czarist  general, 
Nikolayev,  declared  himself  a  Bolshevik  and  took 
command  in  the  Red  Army.  Later  captured  by  the 
Whites  at  Yamburg  he  was  called  upon  to  deny  his 
faith.    He  refused.    He  was  tortured — a  red  star 


THE  WAR  OF  THE  CLASSES         175 

burned  upon  his  breast.  Still  he  refused  to  recant. 
He  was  led  to  the  scaffold  and  a  noose  placed  around 
his  neck. 

"I  die  a  Bolshevik.  Long  live  the  Soviet,"  he 
cried  as  he  was  swung  out  into  space. 

There  were  others  like  him — men  whose  hearts 
had  been  touched  by  the  teachings  of  Tolstoy  and 
the  long  line  of  Russian  humanitarians,  men  who 
saw  the  iniquity  of  the  old  order  and  the  justice  of 
the  new. 

But  these  were  exceptions.  As  a  class  the  Russian 
bourgeoisie  looked  at  the  Revolution  with  horror 
and  hate.  Their  only  thought  was  to  kill  it.  Blinded 
with  vengeance  they  cast  aside  all  codes  of  honor, 
chivalry  and  patriotism.  They  cried  for  foreign 
bayonets  to  strike  it  down.  Every  weapon  was  sanc- 
tified— even  assassination.  The  civilized  veneer 
dropped  away.  The  primitive  fang  and  claw  ap- 
peared.   Men  of  parts  and  culture  became  savages. 


CHAPTER  XII 

BUILDING   THE    NEW    ORDER 

'T^HE  conduct  of  the  Russian  upper-classes  in  their 
-*-  efforts  to  regain  the  power  of  the  State  shows 
nothing  new  or  unusual  in  history.  The  unprece- 
dented thing  is  the  determination  of  the  Russian 
working-class  to  hold  that  power.  They  clung  to 
their  course  with  dogged  tenacity,  meeting  thrust 
with  counter-thrust,  striking  back  blow  for  blow, 
steel  for  iron.  They  developed  unexampled  disci- 
phne  and  solidarity.* 

It  is  said  that  the  rank  and  file  were  held  in  line 
by  the  iron  v/ill  of  their  leaders,  that  their  resolu- 
tion was  just  the  reflex  of  the  resolution  of  the  men 
above.    The  opposite  is  nearer  the  truth. 

It  was  the  leaders  who  were  irresolute.  Three 
Bolshevik  Commissars  left  their  posts  at  a  critical 
moment.  Five  others  (Zinoviev,  Kamanev,  Milyu- 
tin,  Nogin,  Rykov)  tendered  their  resignation  to  the 
Central  Committee  of  the  Bolshevik  Party.  Lun- 
acharsky,  believing  all  the  tales  of  Moscow's  de- 
struction, cried  out,  "My  cup  is  full.  I  am  unable 
to  endure  this  horror.  It  is  impossible  to  work 
under  the  pressure  of  thoughts  that  drive  me  mad. 
I  can  bear  no  more.    I  resign." 

♦  Appendix,  p.  302 :  "To  All  Workers  of  Petrograd." 
176 


BUILDING  THE  NEW  ORDER        177 

"Shame  upon  these  men  of  little  faith,  who  hesi- 
tate and  doubt,  capitulating  to  the  cries  of  the  bour- 
geoisie," cried  Lenin.  "Look  at  the  masses.  In 
them  there  is  not  a  shadow  of  hesitation."  The 
names  of  the  deserters  were  pilloried  thru  Russia. 
Before  the  blast  of  indignation  from  the  proletarians, 
the  commissars  scurried  back  to  their  posts  never  to 
waver  again. 

But  they  could  never  quite  shake  off  the  haunting 
fear  of  defeat.  Even  Lenin  was  not  immune.  ''Ten 
days  more  and  we  shall  have  lived  seventy  days — 
as  long  as  the  Paris  Commune,"  he  exclaimed,  sur- 
prised at  so  far  escaping  disaster.  At  times  the  lead- 
ers saw  their  venture  ending  in  certain  death. 

"We  did  our  best,"  said  Peters  dolefully  one  day, 
"but  it  is  all  over  for  us  shortly." 

"Perhaps  tomorrow,"  said  Pokrovsky,  "we  shall 
get  a  sleep — a  long  one." 

These  forebodings  never  assailed  the  minds  of 
the  Bolshevik  rank  and  file.  They  drove  ahead  in 
full  confidence  and  assurance,  infusing  their  leaders 
above  with  fresh  courage  and  determination,  and  in- 
spiring the  broad  masses  below  with  the  will  to 
victory. 

To  what  extent  did  these  masses 
How  Many  Bolsheviks  support  the  new  government  set 
in  Russia?  up   by   the   Bolsheviks?     How 

wide  a  following  did  the  Revolu- 
tion find  in  the  people?  The  People's  Business 
{Dielo  Narodo)  said:    "A  revolution  is  a  rising  of 


178  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

all  the  people.  But  what  have  we  here?  A  hand- 
ful of  poor  fools  deceived  by  Lenin  and  Trotzky." 

True,  the  membership  of  the  Bolshevik  Party  was 
a  "handful"  among  the  great  populations  of  Russia 
— not  more  than  one  or  two  per  cent.  If  that  was 
all,  the  new  government  might  well  be  stigmatized  as 
"the  tyranny  of  an  infinitesimal  fraction  over  the 
great  majority."  But  one  fact  must  be  borne  in 
mind,  viz.:  Bolshevik  sentiment  is  not  to  be  gauged 
by  the  Bolshevik  Party.  For  every  Bolshevik  in  the 
official  Bolshevik  Party  there  were  30  to  50  Bolshe- 
viks in  the  general  population. 

The  high  standard  of  admission,  the  hard  duties 
and  drastic  discipline  of  the  Bolshevik  Party,  made 
the  masses  unwilling  to  join  it.  But  they  voted  for 
it.* 

In  the  elections  to  the  Constituent  Assembly  in 
Northern  and  Central  Russia,  Bolsheviks  got  55  per 
cent,  of  the  vote — not  i  or  2  per  cent.  In  Petrograd 
the  Bolsheviks  and  their  allies,  the  Left  Socialist- 
Revolutionists,  received  576,000  votes — more  than 
the  17  other  parties  combined. 

♦Socialist  voters  are  always  10  to  50  times  as  numerous  as 
Socialist  Party  members.  New  York  in  1920  had  12,000  Socialist 
Party  members.  This  election  showed  176,000  Socialist  Party 
voters.  In  Vladivostok  in  1918,  the  Bolshevik  Party  members 
were  300.  In  the  June  election  there  were  12,000  Bolshevik 
Party  voters.  This  election  was  held  under  Allied  auspices  with 
the  Bolshevik  papers  suppressed  and  their  leaders  imprisoned, 
yet  more  citizens  voted  for  the  Bolsheviks  than  for  tlie  other 
16  parties  combined.  Yet  propagandists  for  the  Czarists  Kolchak 
and  Denikin — like  John  Spargo — tried  to  focus  all  attention  on 
the  membership,  which  is  utterly  misleading. 


BUILDING  THE  NEW  ORDER       179 

It  is  said  that  there  are  three  grades  of  lies: 
"Lies,  damned  lies  and  statistics."  Revolutionary 
statistics  are  particularly  unreliable.  For  in  time  of 
revolution  public  opinion  moves  like  a  tidal  wave. 
The  people  vote  one  way  today.  A  few  weeks  hence 
they  will  vote  quite  differently. 

When  the  Constituent  Assembly  was  elected  in 
November,  191 7,  about  one-third  were  for  the  Bol- 
sheviks (including  their  allies,  the  Left  Socialist- 
Revolutionists).  When  the  Constituent  Assembly 
convened  in  January,  1918,  possibly  two-thirds  were 
for  the  Bolsheviks.  In  the  few  weeks'  interim  the 
Bolshevik  ideas  swept  from  the  cities  into  the 
villages,  and  out  into  the  provinces.  The  peasants, 
finding  that  the  Soviet  Land  Decree  had  actually 
given  them  the  land,  rallied  behind  the  Bolshevik 
banners  in  millions. 

A  fair  estimate  of  the  growth  of  Bolshevik  ad- 
herents in  the  adult  population  would  go  like  this: 

March  1917 — at  the  fall  of  the  Czar 1,000,000 

July  1 91 7 — after  the  armed  demonstration 5,000,000 

November  1917 — Constituent  Assembly  election  (official 

returns)   9,000,000 

January  1918 — ^3rd  Congress  of  Soviets  representing. . .  .13,000,000 

The  Bolsheviks  had  not  merely  numbers  but  all 
the  strategic  positions.  The  big  cities  were  Bol- 
shevik— so  were  the  railwaymen,  the  miners,  the 
workers  in  basic  industries.  And  the  bayonets  were 
overwhelmingly  on  their  side.    The  Bolsheviks  had 


i8o  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

the  mandate  of  the  essential  forces  of  Russia  to 
carry  on  the  Revolution  in  the  Bolshevik  way. 

It  is  a  grave  error  to  minimize  the  fol- 
Apathy  of  lowing  the  Bolsheviks  had  in  the  masses. 
the  Masses.  It  is  an  equally  grave  error  to  say  that 
these  masses  were  all  zealots  of  the  Revo- 
lution, all  filled  with  a  high  and  holy  enthusiasm. 
On  the  contrary  great  numbers  were  quite  indifferent. 
The  Revolution  was  only  "skin-deep." 

One  winter  morning  I  set  out  in  a  sleigh  with 
Charles  Kuntz,  a  New  Jersey  farmer  and  philos- 
opher, who  had  come  to  Russia  for  a  scientific  study 
of  the  Revolution.  On  finding  that  we  were  Ameri- 
cans, our  driver,  a  lad  of  fifteen,  was  all  excitement. 

"Oh,  Americans!"  he  exclaimed.  "Tell  me  did 
Buffalobill  and  Jessejams  really  live?" 

We  said,  "Yes"  and  at  once  leaped  to  glory  in 
the  eyes  of  our  driver.  The  exploits  of  these  West- 
ern daredevils  he  knew  by  heart.  Now  this  great 
joy — he  was  driving  two  countrymen  of  his  heroes. 
He  gazed  long  at  us  in  big  blue-eyed  admiration 
while  we  tried  hard  to  look  like  Buffalo  Bill  and 
Jesse  James  themselves. 

"Oh!  Ho!"  he  shouted.  "I'll  show  you  how 
to  drive."  He  loosed  the  reins,  cried  "B-r-r"  to 
his  horse  and  with  a  jerk  struck  out  into  a  break-neck 
gallop,  the  sleigh  bounding  over  the  ice-hummocks 
like  a  stage-coach  on  a  Rocky  Mountain  road. 
Shouting  with  delight,  he  stood  up  in  his  box,  crack- 


BUILDING  THE  NEW  ORDER        i8i 

ing  his  whip,  the  sleigh  slewing  fearfully  from  side 
to  side  while  Kuntz  and  I  clung  desperately  to  our 
seats  and  begged  him  to  stop. 

We  told  him  that  Buffalo  Bill  at  his  best  never 
did  better — but  not  to  do  it  again.  He  plied  us 
with  incessant  questions  about  the  West  while  we 
tried  to  get  him  to  talk  about  Russia.  But  in  vain. 
The  Russian  Revolution  was  in  eclipse.  The  deeds 
done  in  his  books  with  glaring  paper  covers  were  so 
much  more  blood-stirring  and  important  than  those 
done  in  the  streets  of  Petrograd. 

Not  all  indifference  to  the  Revolution  was  so 
picturesque.  The  energies  of  multitudes  were  ab- 
sorbed by  routine,  and  the  sheer  details  of  finding 
food  and  clothes.  Others  sordidly  saw  in  the  Revo- 
lution their  chance  for  loot  and  laziness.  They  had 
toiled  like  slaves,  now  they  would  loaf  like  lords. 
The  Revolution  meant  to  them  not  freedom  for  work 
but  freedom  from  work.  They  lounged  all  day  on 
the  corners,  their  sole  contribution  to  the  new  order 
being  to  spit  the  husks  of  sun-flower  seeds  on  the 
pavement.  Soldiers  became  "State  boarders,"  doing 
nothing  in  return  for  the  food,  clothes  and  lodging 
they  got  from  the  government.  The  nights  they 
spent  in  card  playing,  their  days  in  sleeping.  Instead 
of  drilling  they  became  hawkers  peddling  rubbers, 
cigarettes  and  gew-gaws  in  the  streets. 

There  was  venal  criminal  indifference,  too,  to  the 
interests  of  the  Revolution.  In  positions  deserted 
by  the  intelligentsia,  adventurers  and  careerists  saw 


i82  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

their  chance  for  plunder  and  glory.  When  John 
Reed  and  I  visited  the  Petrograd  Prefect  of  Police 
he  flung  his  arms  around  us,  crying:  "Welcome,  dear 
comrades.  I  will  commandeer  for  you  the  best 
apartments  in  the  city.  We  must  sing  the  Marseil- 
laise together.  Ah!  Our  Magnificent  Revolution," 
he  exclaimed  ecstatically.  There  was  no  doubt  about 
his  inspiration.  The  sources  of  it  stood  in  a  dozen 
bottles  on  the  table.  Under  their  influence  he  grew 
eloquent: 

"Danton  and  Marat  ruled  Paris  in  the  French 
Revolution.  Their  names  have  gone  down  in  his- 
tory. I  rule  Petrograd  today.  My  name  shall  go 
down  in  history."  Short-lived  glory!  Next  day  he 
was  jailed  for  accepting  a  bribe. 

Another  romantic  buccaneer  in  some  way  received 
an  appointment  as  military  commissar.  His  self- 
importance  mounted  with  every  verst  that  took  him 
away  from  Moscow.  He  sent  word  to  a  local  Soviet 
that  his  coming  would  be  announced  by  the  booming 
of  a  cannon  and  the  delegates  were  forthwith  to 
assemble.  Revolver  in  hand  he  strode  upon  the 
platform  and  in  stentorian  voice  read  his  commission 
to  the  astounded  auditors,  punctuating  each  sentence 
by  firing  a  bullet  into  the  ceiling.  There  was  short 
shrift  for  such  adventurers. 

But  for  the  broad  masses  the  Bolsheviks  had 
infinite  tolerance.  They  knew  that  the  state  had 
stupefied  their  brains,  the  church  had  deformed  their 
consciences,  famine  had  racked  their  bodies,  alcohol 


BUILDING  THE  NEW  ORDER        183 

had  soddened  their  spirits.  They  had  been  ex- 
hausted by  years  of  war  and  perverted  by  cen- 
turies of  cruelty  and  deceit.  For  these  masses  the 
Bolsheviks  had  patience — and  education. 

"Whatever  other  expenses  are  cut 
A  New  Creative  down,"  the  Bolsheviks  declared,  "the 
Spirit.  expenditures    on    public    instruction 

must  stay  high.  A  generous  budget 
for  education  is  the  honor  and  glory  of  every  peo- 
ple. Our  first  aim  must  be  the  struggle  against 
ignorance." 

Everywhere  schools  were  opened — even  in  palaces, 
barracks  and  factories.  Over  them  was  blazoned 
the  legend  "Children  are  the  hope  of  the  world" 
(Detye  nadezhde  meera).  Into  them  marched  mil- 
lions of  children,  some  of  them  forty  and  sixty  years 
of  age — old  babas  and  grey-bearded  peasants.  A 
whole  nation  was  learning  to  read  and  write. 

Alongside  the  revolutionary  proclamations  and 
bills  for  the  opera,  appeared  on  the  boardings  biog- 
raphies of  great  men,  screeds  on  health  and  art  and 
science.  Workmen's  theatres,  libraries  and  lec- 
ture-courses sprang  up  on  all  sides.  Doors  to  cul- 
ture hitherto  tight-closed  to  the  masses  were  un- 
locked. Peasants  and  workers  fiocked  into  the 
museums  and  galleries. 

The  Bolsheviks  aimed  not  only  at  better  brains 
but  better  bodies.  To  this  end  many  decrees  were 
issued,  such  as  the  eight-hour  law.    The  right  of 


i84  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION" 

every  child  to  be  well-born  was  proclaimed.  The 
stigma  of  illegitimacy  was  removed.  Each  industry 
was  to  provide  one  maternity  bed  for  each  two  hun- 
dred workwomen.  For  eight  weeks  before  and  eight 
weeks  after  childbirth  the  mother  was  exempted 
from  work.  A  Palace  of  Motherhood  was  estab- 
lished in  different  centers.  The  children  instead  of 
the  wealthy  were  given  the  first  claim  upon  such 
"luxuries"  as  milk  and  fruit.  By  the  housing  law 
the  rich  man  lost  his  right  to  ten  or  twenty  rooms  or 
as  many  dwellings.  On  the  other  hand  a  dozen 
families  gained  for  the  first  time  the  right  to  fresh 
air,  light  and  decent  dwellings.  Not  only  was  their 
health  better,  but  they  gained  in  self-respect  and 
dignity.  The  Dictatorship  of  the  Proletariat,  bas- 
ing itself  on  the  multitudes,  sought  to  nourish  multi- 
tudes of  sound,  clean  bodies,  brains  and  consciences. 
The  Bolsheviks  were  working  for  the  future. 

Having  destroyed  the  main  foundations  of  the  old 
bourgeois  order,  they  now  faced  the  infinitely  more 
trying  task — the  construction  of  a  new  order.  They 
had  to  build  it  anew  in  every  department,  to  build  it 
from  the  bottom  up,  to  build  it  out  of  the  ruins  of 
the  past,  to  build  it  while  beset  and  bedevilled  on 
every  side. 

No  one  can  exaggerate  the  magnitude  of  the  task 
of  reorganizing  a  new  society.  Some  of  the  obstacles 
I  glimpsed  in  one  department — the  military. 
Trotzky  had  just  flung  into  the  face  of  General  von 
Hoffman  his:  "You  are  writing  with  the  sword  on 


—*} 


Under  the  Czar  this  Royal  Palace  was  for  a  few-nobles  and  their  lackeys; 

now  under  the  Soviet  it  shelters  hundreds  of  crippled  and  orphaned  children. 

The  former  name,  Czar's  Village  {Tsarskoye  Selo)  is  changed  to  Children's 

Village  {Dyetskoye  Selo).    {See  next  page.) 


Play  and  exercise  in  the  former  Palace  Park,  now  the  Children's  Colony. 


Girls  at  work  learning  how  a  Bolshe\ak  cow  gives  milk. 


Boys  modelling  in  cla\'.     Heads  arc  shaved  to  t,u^i._;  ^^^ainst  the  typhus  louse. 


The  Moscow  Children's  Theatre.     Child-actors  and  audience  enjoying  Barrie's 

Peter  Pan. 


BUILDING  THE  NEW  ORDER        185 

the  bodies  of  living  nations"  and  had  refused  to 
sign  the  First  Treaty  of  Brest-Litovsk.  The  Ger- 
mans then  started  a  sudden  drive  on  Petrograd.  I 
joined  the  Red  Guards  for  the  defense  of  the  city. 
Hearing  this,  Lenin  suggested  that  I  form  a  foreign 
detachment.  Pravda  printed  our  "call"  in  such 
English  type  as  they  could  muster.  (See  repro- 
duction of  this  on  next  page.) 

About  sixty  men  joined  the  detachment. 
Amongst  them  was  Charles  Kuntz,  heretofore  a  Tol- 
stoy an  with  scruples  against  killing  even  a  chicken. 
Now  that  the  Revolution  was  in  peril,  he  threw  over 
his  pacifism  and  took  up  a  gun.  A  tremendous 
change,  to  convert  a  fifty  year  old  philosopher  into 
a  soldier.  In  target  practise  his  rifle  would  get 
tangled  in  his  beard,  but  once  his  bullet  hit  the 
bull's-eye  and  his  eyes  glistened  with  joy. 

We  were  a  motley  crowd  and  our  fighting-strength 
really  amounted  to  little.  But  the  spirit  of  it  had  a 
good  moral  effect  upon  the  Russians.  It  gave  them 
the  feeling  that  they  were  not  utterly  alone.  And 
on  a  tiny  scale  it  gave  us  an  insight  into  the  diffi- 
culties the  Bolsheviks  must  struggle  with  on  a  colos- 
sal scale.  We  saw  the  thousand  obstacles  that  must 
be  overcome  before  any  organization  could  function. 

British  and  French  agents  on  the  one  hand,  and 
German  agents  on  the  other,  tried  to  worm  their  way 
into  our  detachment.  The  Whites  tried  to  get  hold 
of  it  for  counter-revolutionary  purposes.  Provo- 
cators  stirred  up  jealousy  and  dissent.    After  we  got 


24:  (11)  (|)eBpaj3lD13  p. 


IlalKf  Mwim  MrMM 
oi  \h  M  firinj. 

The  Section  for  the  forinati'^it  Sftd- 
drilling  f  troopi  nf  th?  AlNRusS',  li 
Coll.ge  f  I"  tiie  Organization  nd  Ad- 
minisiraion  ol  iho  R  d  Armv  iiJt  fies 
herewith  that-  au  horiz  ition  h;is  been 
obta  n  d  by  i:  foiMhe  fo;-nitit;on  of  a 
FiTsi  Inter  national  Dot  chment  of  the 
Red  Arrny  to  be  •■  tt  chcd  to  one  of 
the  nil  f  ry  units  tj  PetioTid.  This 
detachmen'  wi  I  cons  si  of  t  relfrnrr-^ 
the  g  nenl  lanj;jage  to  be  tn;?ilsb 
ri>e  member-s  are  to  be  enrolled  ^s 
voltnte.  rs  The  conditi<  ns  of  hlq  of 
he  volunteers  tJ  b  th  same  as  ih  se 
if  the  mem'iers  of  the  Red  Ar  y  The 
|/ersons  wish.ug  la  enroll  are  to  pr>-- 
sent  themselves  ..t  ih*  M  ri'ns' y  Pi- 
lacc*  3rd  ftutr  entrance  V  znesensky. 
preside,  where  a  Burem  for  the  en- 
rUment  of  f  rcj^ners  of  .ill  ndtion.li- 
tes  has  been  or.ansei.  It  is  propo- 
sfrJ  to  ttwcri  the  detachment  to  the 
Gr<*H-  dier  Guard  Regi:nent  (Petro- 
gr.'idsk  ia  Sioroni,  Bj.shoi  WuiovJ 
sir-,  t)      ' 

Th;  Section  geves  herewith  ^  trans- 
fation  of  hi  Cal  of  ih.-  nit  ators  of 
tli«  ijfmatan  of  ih^  d;  tachment  Com- 
riots  A  i.er.c  ;n  Socah  tc  Albtrn  wil 
K  ms  and  Sam  ;<.!  Agurs  y,  who  are 
at  th  '  head  .of  t.  e  .  Bureau  for  the 
enr^  Hi  g  of  vol  ntepti 

Memb  rs  of  Co  lege  ♦■{  the  Section 
f^  the  Fwrm-ttioii.an  DriUing. 


CTPS/H. 


CALL. 
In  this  terxJble  wor'd  w^r  deraocra 
cy  has  beejlt  threatened;  the  in  i^ina- 
lo  i.l  force  -h.ye  teeit  spirt  a^UL.der. 
■id  he  working" classeiS' Jiave'"^een 
rtden  into  the  sham  )i^s  ty  the  imp  ;- 
r  list  ot  aft.couil  riesi  laf  ilie  d  VJcae^i^ 
ihcf  rose  thC;.  Russ^^i  l<e^>ktpn. 
Kyotine  the-  migjkt^  feOj^ ^^  .of  .^.tiO^a^v 


BcapocdSosoS  Kojjeria  opmsjB-'aiia  a  jr^a^^ 
Bawaa  Kpftc^  fjpvl^^  cfitaff'-rn.;  tw  ©ai 
posptojeiw'  ^)*npJH5iMiQ  'i^   an^ti   r^ 

irarrasaxT,.  ycjoian  a?33rrH  BOinom!pcfB<  o6uiia 

HBBooaao-  ^iqw  on  oanaoa  ffi30CT<p3Hq«rt'  paa- 
jir^Htm.  nankmajvn-^crre.a.  -Oip^a* .■nps.uio- 
■KOTero-ij^ofic^Kiraan.  npa  I^eaipjia  Fpeaiaiaep- 

(])Qsa  yjsnta)'. 

i?KSOTi — AibSajwa  Ban-iurcT,  q  Cajcyif ja  A/fp* 


Hnewii:  KoiBtsrifl  OrA^Aa  Oopsoii^Bat'M  il 


B0?»3RA!TIE! 
Bi  9Ty  CTpamnyio  Ki?<myi(>  BoSny,  bmB 
ffCiioKpaTiH  yrponsjua  ,cnS5ni"«u.  _KUTopiiai{lo- 
lajbiaw  CMu  fe>MJi,.|>aap3^a6fTu  ,s,  pa6"^ia 
rjKJWTi  DOjBciDay  ^  cKcsam.  -lainopiajrHCTaMa 
Efflixi\Tp3in..  .Ha*  tee.o6iaiefin.HH  EUi>a,i?=Tio 


l86 


Citizens T    Comrades  T    f ntemdtionalists ! 

Snssls  U  Id  prison-  BTca  so,  «T>oTe  flio  dtngnr  of  fti«  WOlW  —  War  hsr  wlM  ctImobI  toTldestVor  Jiufico  miil  tiufflfr 
mr  —  fcf  ftp  poor  and  the  opprowd.  i_  ^  .^ 

Bnfjlt  bBS  fjcmlf!  Inner  anJ  nntcr,  ifronu  end  fimnlna  And  Boasla  iteii  nol  tmit  trorJs  fflJ  pious  wl>h«s.  Sn* 
M*d>  fporlii  dlselpllnei  orgintoatton  and 

guns  In  the  hands  of  fearleto  fighters. 

Vo  in  WlfTC  tir  flig  BeTOlnfJon,  Is  %  lolenration*},  In  (lie  Sorlol  power?  Than  J«1n  th«Jnlernatianal  Le^ron  of  UfeRed 
AlWyk   It  ii  (oroed  for  those  <pesklng  foreign  tankages  and  to  tt  «ro  coming  tb«  fighting  reTolotlonleti  from  aromi  On  wetii. 

Are  jon  a  free  man?   Tien  enlifl  irt  once. 

Jlro  Ton  Vorking  In  Bhop  or  office?  Then  giTo  four  tiwro  time  to  drill,  rUlo  practice  and-  the  mlllfarr  conBWfc 

HMd^uarier*:   2  Nljnl  Le««noy  Peraooluk^   Beat  the  Temple  of  the  Sarlanr. 
t»trm  11  mil  I  iiiinTtiTiini-r-it-T-rT-r-"T " ..—  ....... r^^ii.. « i  nt ■ 

"larger!  ©ertorfenl  gitfewafionafilien! 

9llfttoO  fl  Im  (Betingnme.  ^tloi)  fibtr  on  Un  RlSngcn  b««  JBtlfftitoes  ftT^atrt  ft'ie  fc5nn«fn1«  Sjimmc  urn  (Strt^tlgfctt 
m»  Jumannai  jot  6I«  ?Irm(n  utit  Unterttudten.  R116I0116  Ift  oon  maijllacn  Ofttnlun  Ulaetii,  Inntren  iijib  aufetten.  %i6IoiH)  bMU(^l  1(1/^ 
pttt  Cotf'e  UTiO  ftcimrK  ?I!On((i«i  et  tirnurfit  arot,  li6ji)i(iii,  Crsotitditton,  fltcMOd  ht  tot  ijitiboi  unrrtiljroilenet  flombft^-  8e(lt  t^a; 
(ttlen  Clouten  on  Me  9<eooIuti9n,  an  bit  Jhtcniatlonolt  unb  ble  Sooid-IRaiit?  Xmnn' Ii^licljl  <u4)  be< 

§nfmtaiioitafeu  4(%m  *«r  "gtofen  <|lrmee 

IK.  Weletti  oltb  -ffii  bujentgen  jeWIbet,  tfit  ft«mb«  Spto^tn  Ipte<5«it,  urt  4ti  lU  «1^  fi^  Ke  renotallo'tatHi  JhoRe  ba  Mnjn  SBefl.' 
«(1  bu  tin  frtUt  OTonn  <  Eonn  f^Htfee  bU)  fojlel*  <ui,  Sijaffll  bii  In  JOtrtlWHen  nbn  Ronlof?  tiann  olbmc  bttoe  frtit  SluiUxu  ben  rriSm, 
bet  <ii)it^imi  tmb  bem  SiilijItuWiim. 

tiat^ttiatttitt:    iXF4nli£i£l»l  IftnuXtl  Mr.  Z  —  tuV  >en>  Zempcl  b<f  SinnKte^ 
nai»innmiM«iimi>»Mnniiinn»i»mi»»miwnn»«»i>»>irnnTmiim»»t>"e«»mw»»«a«imMi«»i«i»«»»«»»»«<WJ» 

CRoyetisi    Camerades!    Intematloi^afistes! 

l»-8paie  «rt  en  eaptirits.  JIaie  rnfme  rjpRve  tile  (".oiniJlP  In  jrondeincnt  de1»  guerre  nrailiale  ct  on  esteti  s»  vrts 
«}bKl  le  pIiiB  hant-ifoiir  la  Juallce  et  rhumanH6  pour  tos  pauures  et  fes^opprimte.  La  Roj^ie  n'a  pas  Feulenepl  ia 
«oioiiils  txWrieurs,  elle  fil  niffisl  au  itStci  7w  ly*  !•,;;»  (;r.r  4.jal  f»i  la-^l  rfc^s.  l-i  Siurfc  i'a  yrf  it?Su  *>  vos  jnrnli-ji  nl  do- 
ne acnhalls,  elJn  a  beaoia  da  IravaH,  de  I'organlsirtloB  »l  des  combatianfj  tans^car.  81  Toiis  Rvez.dci-Ia  conCinco  dans  la  Bct> 
latiia,  ITntuTiational  et  dans  U  pttwice  do  Sotirt  enroUez  vouz'ilans  la  Legion  Internationale  d«  rArm6e  Roirge. 

C«lIo-d  est  forrafe  po»T  ceirt  qui  pailuit  id  lengoes  (tiangfrcs,  et  de  loites  perls  dn  mondo  aiTivent  doa  eoiatotlaat^__ 
«i>»bh;H«Bnali»  tiocr  U  ren/orcer.  pcs-vois  litre  ?  EaroUez-Tonv  alors  tout  dc  raite.  8i  tods  fraTojllcj  daas  rnsino  oa  9is»  ••'  tarewif 
»CtlSw."fr»  t<nr«  Ilbto  ans  exerciccs  militairs,  an  (jr,  a  la.diicl^Hnc  mllitaijo^- 

Adr«^sf»VoiK  |iu  O'uartier:    nU"'  Lesnoy  Ptreutbh  S '—  anpris  dn  -temple  do  X£iib  Chria 

^anHwMamnwrmm'iiMntint »mnm»m»>  •«*<»**•«*•«  >%»<«M«jM»»»«m««MM»Mm»»j««t»rt«<nnnmii««i» 

fpaHCAaHel    TosapHEUHl    HHTepHailiOHairiHCTial 

To«4«  et  ■aaa',  no  es  moe,'  eanjTnjs  evb  hJiokiJ  eoltnij  upmtqdcr  "wjat^Bno  i  nf«xi»  »  cnpaewraccu  in  CTwIiaiA 
jiviuiiu.  H  Focdi  xioro  ,Bp8tti«  iipi-cazcx  i  BEtman,  oui-xin  0  >o>aj>iiin.  <im  K  ayakyieica  a  uojn  ■  n;aKn  n^xcjtmiv  EA  'H^HI| 
b<Boi«>  aHcmnuuina,  opraHwaiibi  s  GaacrpauiRue  Somuu. 

BspcTf  (■  ell  •  |>(i«axii;i3>,  D  Darepaamoatj,  1  Coilncfn  MacTb?  Ecin  v.  To  RUCU^in  ti;ireoflin*lll»*t  B  HHT8pil3Ul(nid9fc> 
my  flartoHT  Kpacaaft  ApnlH  Sio?  Serlos'  (^ojsapyerca  n:  ivvronel.  rowpimn  o  ooci^aiiEia  otsai;  b  aei  co6^yTc'  Socbb  («>*' 
ainlfia^  00  ecj*)  CBtra.  .^ 

Eora  a  a>nnTi3S  wniU,  n^icooEHdn  (Se^oTnraTemBo.  EM  ts  paSmuin.  aa  aaoO  KU  a  tosropt;  o  ooea^  aue  /n(>j*B 
Qm-aociBQC  tpeaa^azt  a  ciplJ^DV  ^ 

'liKtWVi^  JDi  tamo  a  d  eSKon:  ilassil  Jundl  tfj.,  i.'St  i,  a  i~6hi  Xvst  XpssD  Cnacnen. 

ibeoti  r«^(3)  uria  lU^t 

j>WW[lfa>Wi«ifiiiMii.«iiiiiMi»««i<iin«<iao»t«Mi'iiiiiuii''i"''"Miim"'«""'«"'*"""""'l'"""""**'*«— — 1»* 

Clttadinn     Compagnil     Internazidnalistit 

BBBila  ?  ia  prigiow,  JinlliJiileno  sopii  U  damore  dclU  gucvra  universale-  b  sna  v(k«  proclania  U  pin  alto  f  liirtU*^ 
UBMlli  pelpoveri  e  eoppioasL  La-Bnfsla  b»  nemlef,  <nierlori  ed  ceterlori,  fottt  e  canU.  E  la  EniSa  son  ha  bisogno  delR  wlia 
pwoU  O'del  voetr)  frnonl  angnrt  Eesa  ha  tiaogno  dcUe  vostra  azionc  dijciptinata.  della  Tortr*  organizzszione^  dl  foTl)l"5elle  inul 
dl  litlnerjdlbiH  bttanU.  trejete  vol  n?Ua  rlToIozlone,  ncll'Internizionals,  nellaforza  del'SovleU?  AUora unltevl  &)]a'Xeg(6lit 
InternMlonal  d-il'Eierolto  Bosso.  Eb«o  «  foiinoto  per  qnellj  che  psrlani  le  Ungne  esteie  e  vengono'  c«li  lal  1  ilvolitsi^azit 
lottwU  di  tatto  il  mondo  Baeto  Ubeii?  Allora  nniteTl  all'istantS  Isvorate  uelle  fabbrlche  «ppiir«  negU  ttffiecj?  Itlota  dedlnM  Q 
fygj^Vojo  liber^'ill'eserelat,  alia  pratlea  del  tnvile  ed  al  torsi  nlUtarll' 

9tx»ri*«s  Oeaerale,'  JSis^  t^njol  Per«^w  jj  ^«m«9  "ft  I^nji' «» fiJlut* 

[r/jis  is  the  Moscow  appeal  of  the  International  Legion  as  U 
appeared  in  five  languages.} 

■      187 


1 88  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

the  men,  it  was  almost  impossible  to  get  the  equip- 
ment. Military  stores  were  in  a  hopeless  tangle. 
Rifles  in  one  place,  bullets  in  another;  telephones, 
barbed- wire  and  sappers'  tools  in  one  vast  jumble; 
and  officers  trying  their  best  to  make  it  more 
jumbled.  When  the  sabotagers  were  removed,  raw 
incompetent  men  took  their  places.  We  entrained 
two  miles  below  Petrograd  and,  after  a  horrible 
ordeal  in  a  box-car,  we  got  up  to  find  ourselves  four 
miles  on  the  other  side  of  the  city.  We  had  lost 
six  miles  during  the  night  and  were  stalled  in  a  yard 
full  of  cursing  troops,  trains,  broken-down  engines. 
Exasperated  commissars  were  shoving  papers  and 
fists  into  the  faces  of  railway  officers,  who  were 
frantically  protesting  they  could  do  nothing. 

This  was  a  reflex  of  the  chaos  that  prevailed  all 
over  Russia.  To  bring  order  out  of  it  seemed  a  sheer 
impossibility.  Yet  the  impossibility  was  being  ac- 
complished. In  the  welter  of  confusion  was  rising 
the  great  Red  Army  destined  to  amaze  the  world  by 
its  organization,  discipline  and  effectiveness.  And 
not  only  in  the  realm  of  war  but  in  the  cultural  and 
economic  fields  were  appearing  the  results  of  the 
powerful  directing  spirit  begotten  of  the  Revolution. 

Always  there  were  tremendous  latent  energies  in 
the  Russian  masses.  But  they  had  never  found  ex- 
pression. They  had  been  locked  up  by  the  grim 
jailer — Autocracy.  The  Revolution  came  as  their 
releaser,  and  with  the  pent-up  fury  of  centuries  they 


BUILDING  THE  NEW  ORDER        189 

burst  forth  and  smashed  the  old  bourgeois  order  to 
pieces. 

We  had  seen  the  Revolution  unloose  the  tre- 
mendous powers  of  the  people  for  destructive  ends. 
Now  we  were  seeing  the  Revolution  evoke  their 
creative  powers  and  direct  them  to  constructive  ends. 
*' Order.  Work.  Discipline."  are  the  new  watch- 
words of  the  Revolution. 

But  is  this  new  spirit  being  born  only  in  these 
great  centres?  Or  is  a  like  process  at  work  out  in 
the  provinces  and  the  vast  populations  of  Russia. 
Presently  we  are  to  find  out  for  ourselves.  After 
nearly  a  year  in  the  midst  of  the  Revolution  Kuntz 
and  I  are  going  home.  Our  eyes  are  turned  to  the 
East — toward  America.  Our  journey  is  to  take  us 
thru  the  two  continents  over  which  Russia  spreads 
herself,  across  6,000  miles  of  Trans-Siberian  Rail- 
way to  the  Pacific. 


PART  III 

THE  OUTREACH  OF  THE  REVOLU- 
TION 


ACROSS  SIBERIA  ON  THE  EXPRESS 


CHAPTER  XIII 

THE  STEPPES  RISE  UP 

TT  is  the  end  of  April,  191 8.  Kuntz  and  I  are  say- 
ing  good-bye  to  the  Red  Commune  of  Petrograd. 
The  snow-flakes  are  falling,  the  night  descending. 
Stormy,  hungry  old  city,  but  dear  to  us,  with  its 
thousand  lights  and  shadows  of  the  Revolution,  for 
nearly  every  street  and  prospekt  has  staged  some 
act  in  the  colossal  revolutionary  drama. 

The  square  we  gaze  upon  from  the  steps  of  the 
Nicholas  Station,  has  been  sprinkled  red  by  the  first 
sacrifices  of  the  Revolution,  and  we  have  helped  to 
sprinkle  it  white  with  a  shower  of  Soviet  posters, 
flung  from  a  plunging  truck  at  midnight.  It  has 
rumbled  beneath  the  tread  of  marching  columns 
chanting  their  funeral  hymn,  bearing  away  their 
dead;  and  we  have  heard  it  ring  with  trhimphant 
shouts  proclaiming:  "All  Power  to  the  Soviets."  It 
has  witnessed  the  rush  of  Cossack  horses  thru  the 
ranks  of  workingmen,  felling  them  to  the  cobbles. 
And  it  has  seen  the  return  of  these  workers,  welded 
together  in  the  iron  battalions  of  the  proletariat — 
the  invincible  Red  Army  of  Russia. 
A  multitude  of  memories  bind  us  to  the  city.  But 
193 


194  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

steam  is  up  in  the  engine  of  the  Trans-Siberian  Ex- 
press, and  it  does  not  wait  on  sentiment.  Every 
week  it  starts  on  its  6,000  mile  journey  to  the  Pacific, 
heeding  only  the  clanging  signal-bell,  whether  rung 
by  order  of  the  Czar  or  by  order  of  the  Bolsheviks. 
On  the  third  stroke  we  climb  aboard  and  are  off  on 
our  long  journey  to  the  distant  East. 

What  will  this  East  unfold  to  us?  Shall  we  find 
that  the  spirit  of  the  revolutionary  centres  carries 
out  far  toward  the  circumference  or  not? 

Already  our  fellow  passengers  are 
The  Emigris'  View      stretched  out  in   their;  compart- 
0/  the  Revolution.        ments,  sipping  tea  and  smoking 
cigarettes.     In  our  car  are  about 
twenty  landowners,  speculators,  war-profiteers,  ex- 
officers  in  mufti,  evicted  officials,  and  three  over- 
painted  ladies — all  members  or  retainers  of  the  old 
privileged  class. 

Their  ancient  privileges  are  gone.  But  life  still 
has  its  glamor.  Even  now,  are  they  not  engaged 
in  the  thrilling  adventure  known  amongst  their  fel- 
low-emigres as  "Escaping  out  of  the  bloody  clutches 
of  the  Bolsheviks"?  And  before  them,  a  few  weeks 
hence,  lies  another  thrilling  adventure  in  the  salons 
of  Paris,  London  and  Washington,  recounting  the 
terrors  and  perils  of  their  escape. 

That  it  was  an  escape  de  luxe  in  an  International 
sleeper,  with  excellent  beds,  dining-car  and  porter 
inclusive,  will  be  omitted  from  their  tales.    Other 


THE  STEPPES  RISE  UP  195 

details  will  be  inserted  however — little  figments 
about  Bolshevik  murders,  rapes  and  robberies. 
Every  emigre  must  have  his  atrocity.  At  all  costs 
his  escape  must  be  harrowing  and  dramatic.  Other- 
wise no  thrill  for  the  jaded  palates  of  the  western 
democracies. 

Supplied  with  Bolshevik  passports,  stamped  with 
a  Bolshevik  seal,  these  emigres  were  driven  to  the 
station  by  Bolshevik  cabmen;  aided  by  Bolshevik 
porters  they  boarded  this  train,  whose  conductor, 
brakeman  and  engineer  belonged  to  the  Bolshevik 
faith.  Riding  now  over  a  track  tended  by  Bolshevik 
laborers,  guarded  by  Bolshevik  soldiers,  guided  by 
Bolshevik  switchmen,  and  fed  by  Bolshevik  waiters, 
they  while  away  their  hours  in  cursing  these  self- 
same Bolsheviks  as  bandits  and  cutthroats.  A  curi- 
ous spectacle!  Damning,  reviling,  execrating  the 
very  ones  upon  whom  they  depend  for  food,  shelter, 
travel — for  the  very  breath  they  draw.  For  every 
member  of  this  train-crew  is  a  Bolshevik — all  except 
the  porter  (provodnik) , 

He  had  the  soul  of  a  flunkey,  and  the  creed  of  a 
monarchist.  Tho  of  peasant  origin,  he  was  more 
Czaristic  than  the  Czar  himself.  All  the  emigres  he 
still  addressed  as  "my  lords!"  (barin). 

"You  see,  my  lords! "  he  said,  "we  dark  people  are 
a  lazy,  shiftless  lot.  Give  us  a  bottle  of  vodka  and 
we  are  happy.  We  don't  need  more  freedom.  We 
need  a  club  over  us  to  keep  us  at  work.  We  need 
a  Czar." 


196  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

The  emigres  were  delighted  with  him.  He  was  to 
them  a  perpetual  source  of  comfort — a  flaming  light 
in  the  Bolshevik  darkness. 

"In  this  honest  mujik,"  they  declared,  "you  see 
the  soul  of  the  millions  of  Russian  peasants,  content 
to  serve  their  master,  to  obey  the  church  and  love 
the  Czar.  True,  a  few  have  been  misled  by  Bolshe- 
vik fantasies,  but  only  a  few.  What  have  these  mil- 
lions of  patient,  plodding  folks  to  do  with  that  mad- 
ness festering  back  there  in  Moscow  and  Petrograd?" 

This  seemed  plausible.  For  out  here  it  is  hard 
even  for  us  to  sustain  our  interest  in  the  Revolution 
at  high  pitch.  Great  concerns,  political  and  per- 
sonal, are  dwarfed  by  the  vastness  of  the  panorama 
unfolding  before  our  eyes  on  this,  the  longest  rail- 
way journey  in  the  world. 

We  pass  over  the  wide  stretching  grain-fields  of 
Central  Russia,  across  the  vast  bridges  spanning 
the  broad  rivers  flowing  north  to  the  Arctic,  thru 
the  winding  passes  of  the  Urals,  into  the  shadows  of 
the  giant  virgin  forest  {taiga),  almost  unblazed  by 
man,  then  out  again  upon  the  steppelands  of  Si- 
beria. 

Thru  the  day  we  watch  on  the  horizon  the  peasant 
huts,  huddled  together  for  protection  against  wolves, 
and  winds  blowing  from  the  frozen  tundras;  or  take 
our  places  in  the  long  lines  that  obtain  hot  water  for 
tea  from  the  tanks,  buying  bread  and  eggs  and  fish 
from  the  peasant  women.  At  evening  we  watch  the 
wood-burning   locomotive   flinging   spark   showers 


THE  STEPPES  RISE  UP  197 

from  its  stack  like  a  comet.  Night  after  night  we 
go  to  sleep  with  the  wheels  grinding  beneath  our 
car,  and  every  morning  we  wake  to  see  the  track  in 
two  glistening  ribbons  of  steel,  still  unroUing  itself 
before  the  eastward  plunging  engine. 

Slowly  these  immensities  steal  over  us  with  mes- 
meric influence,  creating  the  feeling  the  Russians  call 
prostor,  a  sense  of  space  and  vastness.  Under  its  spell 
things  once  mighty  and  imperative,  become  trivial 
and  unimportant.  Even  the  Revolution  relaxes  its 
grip  upon  us.  May  it  not  after  all  be  a  ferment 
confined  to  railwaymen  and  the  industrial  workers 
of  the  cities? 

Back  there  the  Revolution  was  an  insistent  fact, 
assailing  us  in  eye  and  ear  with  banners  and  battle- 
cries,  parades  and  assemblages.  Out  here  on  the 
Siberian  steppes  we  see  no  evidence  of  it.  We  see 
woodsmen  with  axes,  drivers  witji  horses,  women 
with  baskets,  a  few  soldiers  with  guns;  but  beyond 
a  few  tattered  remnants  of  red  flags  flapping  on 
poles  there  are  no  marks  of  the  Revolution. 

"Is  the  revolutionary  spirit  as  frayed  out  as  those 
faded  flags?"  we  ask.  "Are  the  emigres  right  in 
summing  up  the  aspirations  of  the  Russian  peasant 
as  love  and  service  to  his  master,  his  church  and  the 
Little  Father?    Is  this  after  all  'Holy  Russia'?" 

In  the  midst  of  our  ruminations — Crash!  Bang! 
The  brakes  clutch  the  wheels,  grinding  and  grating, 
sending  a  shiver  thru  the  car  and  hurling  us  out  of 
our  seats.    The  train  comes  abruptly  to  a  standstill. 


198  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

Everybody  stares  out  of  the  window,  asking  ex- 
citedly: "Washout?  Cave-in?  Bridge  gone?" 
But  nothing  appears  save  the  same  sere,  level  steppe- 
land   with   drifts   of   snow,   relics  of   the   winter. 

A  Bol  he  nk       Suddenly  from  behind  a  snow-bank  a  fig- 

Hnld    -h  f  ^^^  shoots  up,  waves  a  signal  behind  him, 

and  comes  running  violently  towards  the 

train.  From  behind  a  copse  another  form 

darts  out  and  follows  after.   From  other  snow-piles 

and  bushes  and  from  the  far  horizon,  more  and  more 

figures  keep  emerging,  until  the  whole  plain  is  dotted 

with  men  racing  headlong  toward  the  train.    Like 

the  ground  sown  with  dragon-teeth,  in  a  trice  these 

dead  waste-lands  spring  to  life,  and  teem  with  men 

in  arms. 

"My  God!  Look!  Look !"  exclaimed  one  of  the 
painted  ladies.  "Guns!  They  carry  guns!"  The 
phantasies  of  her  imagination  have  materialized. 
Here  in  flesh  and  blood  are  the  Bolsheviks  of  her 
tales.  They  have  become  realities,  carrying  in  their 
hands  guns  and  grenades,  and  on  their  faces  a  most 
unpleasant  look.  The  foremost  runner  checks  his 
steps,  cups  his  hands  to  his  mouth  and  bellows  out 
to  us,  "Windows  down." 

No  one  argues  the  point.  Along  the  whole  train 
the  windows  go  banging  down.  So  do  the  spirits  of 
the  emigres,  finding  little  cheer  in  the  faces  of  these 
oncoming  men.  They  are  a  harsh,  determined  lot. 
Many  of  them  are  grimy,  nearly  black.    All  of  them 


THE  STEPPES  RISE  UP  199 

have  black  looks  for  the  train.  By  mien  and  gesture 
they  dearly  indicate  that  their  weapons  have  a  dis- 
tinct bearing  upon  our  case. 

We  have  no  inkling  of  our  offense.  We  only 
know  that  some  thunderbolt  has  stopped  our  train, 
and  on  all  sides  we  face  a  cordon  of  violent-talking 
men.  We  catch  wild  words  about  "killing  the  bloody 
tyrant"  and,  as  the  face  of  the  florid  lady  appears 
at  the  window,  jeering  crys  of  "Hey!  Mrs.  Ras- 
putin ! "  She  is  certain  that  the  ruffians  are  debating 
whether  to  take  us  out  and  murder  us  one  by  one, 
or  destroy  us  en  masse  by  burning  or  blowing  up 
the  train. 

The  suspense  is  racking.  I  volunteer  to  investi- 
gate the  situation,  and  start  to  raise  a  window. 
When  half  way  open,  I  gaze  into  the  muzzle  of  a 
gun  thrust  up  into  my  face.  A  big  peasant  at  the 
other  end  of  the  gun  growls,  "Put  the  window  down 
quick  or  I'll  shoot."  He  looks  as  tho  he  would 
shoot,  but  my  year  in  Russia  has  taught  me  that  he 
won't;  that  the  peasant  is  uncivilized  enough  to 
retain  an  aversion  to  killing  a  human  being.  So  I 
do  not  shut  my  window,  but  thrust  my  head  out  and 
address  the  big  peasant  as  '^Tovarish." 

"Don't  you  tovarish  me,  you  Counter-Revolution- 
ist!" he  snorted  back.  "You  drinker  of  the  people's 
blood!    You  monarchist,  you  Czarist!" 

Such  were  the  usual  epithets  bestowed  upon  the 
enemies  of  the  Revolution.  But  I  had  never  heard 
them  rolled  into  one  broadside  and  shot  forth  with 


200  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

such  malice.  Hastily  I  produced  a  Soviet  credential 
vouching  for  me  and  bearing  the  signature  of  Chi- 
cherin.  But  reading  was  not  this  peasant's  forte. 
The  next  man,  a  heavy  set,  scowling  fellow,  took  it 
and  scanned  it  critically. 

"Forged!"  was  his  instant  verdict. 

I  passed  out  a  credential  signed  by  Trotzky. 
"Forged!"  he  repeated.  I  followed  up  with  a  docu- 
ment issued  by  the  Bolshevik  Railway  Commissar. 
The  same  laconic  comment  "Forged!"  Still  obdu- 
rate, was  he?  As  a  climax  I  would  play  my  trump 
card.  I  produced  a  letter  signed  by  Nikolai  Lenin. 
Not  only  his  signature,  but  all  the  letter  was  written 
out  in  full  by  Lenin's  own  hand.  My  inquisitor 
scrutinized  it  intently,  while  I  watched  to  see  the 
magic  name  of  Lenin  transform  the  thunder-cloud 
on  his  face  into  a  smile.  I  was  certain  that  this 
would  settle  the  matter.  And  it  did.  Not  in  my 
favor,  however,  but  against  me,  as  I  discerned  by 
the  set  of  his  jaw.  I  had  overplayed  myself  in  this 
matter  of  credentials. 

In  his  mind  my  case  was  clear.  Here  is  a  plotter 
up  to  some  deviltry  against  the  Revolution.  To  in- 
gratiate himself  with  the  Bolsheviks,  he  displays  a 
grand  array  of  Soviet  documents  pretending  to  come 
from  even  Lenin  himself.  This  marks  him  as  no 
ordinary  spy.    We  must  act  at  once! 

He  carried  my  sheaf  of  papers  over  to  a  tall  man 
dismounting  from  his  horse.  "That's  Andrey  Petro- 
vich.   He  will  know  all  about  these  papers,"  declared 


THE  STEPPES  RISE  UP  201 

the  big  peasant  who  had  run  the  muzzle  of  his  gun 
into  my  face.  "He  just  got  back  from  Moscow. 
He  knows  all  the  Bolsheviks  and  how  they  write 
their  names.  He  knows  the  Counter-Revolutionists, 
and  all  their  tricks.  Those  devils  can't  fool  Audrey 
Petrovich." 

Kuntz  and  I  sincerely  prayed  that  Audrey  Petro- 
vich would  prove  as  wise  as  his  reputation.  And 
happily  for  us  he  did.  He  did  know  the  leaders  of 
the  Bolsheviks.  He  knew  their  signatures.  In  a 
few  questions  he  tested  our  knowledge.  Satisfied, 
he  shook  hands  with  us  heartily,  greeted  us  as  tovar- 
ishe,  invited  us  to  come  outside  where  he  would 
ask  us  a  hundred  questions. 

"But  we  have  a  hundred  questions  to  ask  you" 
we  rejoined,  opening  up  on  him  forthwith.  "WTiere 
did  all  these  men  suddenly  spring  from?  Why  is 
this  train  held  up?  What  do  you  mean  by  this  dis- 
play of  arms?" 

"One  question  at  a  time,"  he  replied,  laughing. 
"First:  These  men  are  miners  from  the  great  coal 
mines  less  than  half  a  mile  away,  and  peasants  from 
the  villages.  Thousands  more  will  be  along  directly. 
Second:  We  grabbed  up  these  guns  and  grenades 
fifteen  minutes  ago,  not  for  display  but  for  immedi- 
ate use.  Third:  We  held  up  this  Trans-Siberian 
Express  to  take  off  of  it  the  Czar  and  the  Royal 
Family." 

"Czar  and  Royal  Family!  On  this  train?  Here?" 
we  shouted. 


202  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

"We  don't  know  that  for  sure,"  replied  Andrey 
Petrovich,  "all  we  know  is  that  about  twenty  minutes 
ago  came  a  telegram  from  Omsk  saying:  Release 
of  Nicholas  just  effected  by  clique  of  officers.  Prob- 
ably escaping  with  staff  on  Express.  Plan  to  set  up 
Czardom  at  Irkutsk.    Stop  him  dead  or  alive." 

(So  it  was  the  Czar  whom  the  crowd  meant  by 
"bloody  tyrant"  and  the  Czarina  whom  they  were 
calling  "Mrs.  Rasputin!") 

"We  sent  two  men  running  to  the 
The  Czar's  Surprise-  villages  and  two  to  the  mines, 
Party  Disappointed.       shouting  the  telegram,"  continued 

Andrey  Petrovich.  "Every  man 
dropped  his  tools,  snatched  up  his  gun,  and  rushed 
for  the  train.  A  thousand  here  now,  and  they  won't 
stop  coming  till  night.  You  see  how  deeply  we  feel 
for  our  Czar!  Only  twenty  minutes  advance 
notice  and  we  got  this  nice  big  reception  party  ready 
for  him.  He  likes  military  displays.  Well,  here  it 
js.  Not  in  regulation  style,  but  quite  impressive,  is 
it  not?" 

It  was!  Never  have  I  seen  such  a  beweaponed 
set  of  men.  They  v/ere  like  moving  arsenals.  In 
their  hands  were  missiles  enough  to  blow  a  thousand 
Czars  into  eternity,  and  in  their  hearts  and  eyes 
vengeance  enough  to  annihilate  ten  thousand. 

But  there  seemed  to  be  no  Czar  to  annihilate. 

"Just  as  I  thought,"  Andrey  Petrovich  went  on, 
"another  ruse  of  the  Counter-Revolution.    That  tele- 


THE  STEPPES  RISE  UP  203 

gram  is  an  act  of  provocators  against  the  Soviet. 
They  want  it  to  demoralize  the  workings  of  the 
mines.  And  it  will.  Our  men  are  too  excited  now 
to  do  anything  more  today.  There  will  be  other 
telegrams  like  this  in  the  days  to  come.  By  crying 
out:  'The  Czar  is  escaping,  the  Czar  is  escaping/ 
they  think  the  men  will  get  disgusted  with  false 
alarms.  Then,  when  we  have  become  careless  they 
will  try  to  shp  the  Czar  through.  But  they  don't 
know  our  men  here.  For  a  chance  to  get  a  pot-shot 
at  the  Czar  they  will  turn  out  every  day  in  the  year." 

The  zest  with  which  the  searching  party  went  thru 
the  cars  left  no  doubt  as  to  their  attitude  towards 
the  Little  Father.  They  combed  the  train  from  end 
to  end,  opening  trunks,  ransacking  beds,  even  shift- 
ing the  logs  on  the  engine  tender  to  see  if  by  chance 
Hit  Imperial  Majesty  might  be  hidden  in  the  wood- 
pile. 

There  were  two  white-bearded  old  peasants  who 
did  a  little  investigating  on  their  own  account.  They 
would  run  their  guns  up  under  a  sleeper,  ram  their 
bayonets  around  and  then  withdraw  them,  shaking 
their  heads  sadly.  The  Czar  of  all  the  Russias  they 
hoped  to  find  riding  the  bumpers.  Each  time  disap- 
pointed, they  would  hope  for  better  luck  at  the  next 
car  and  repeat  the  prodding.  But  there  was  no  Czar, 
and  so  their  bayonets  did  not  puncture  him. 

But  something  else  they  did  puncture — the  hoary 
old  tradition  about  the  deep  love  and  devotion  of 


204  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

the  Russian  mujik  to  the  Little  Father.  That  pleas- 
ant myth  could  not  survive  the  spectacle  of  these  two 
devout,  benign  old  peasants,  plunging  their  bayonets 
into  dark  corners,  and  drawing  them  out  again, 
aggrieved  that  on  them  were  no  fatal  signs  of  the 
Little  Father. 

Audrey   Petrovich  was   a   man   of   re- 
We  Substitute     sources.     Having  no  Czar  for  his  men, 
jor  the  Czar.       he  used  Kuntz  and  me  as  substitutes. 
"It  is  a  strange  world,  tovarishe,  full 
of  strange  surprises,"  he  said,  addressing  his  com- 
rades.    "We  came  down  here  to  get  the  greatest 
criminal  in  history.    Not  a  man  here  but  has  known 
pain  or  misery  thru  the  Czar.    But  instead  of  finding 
our  worst  enemy,  we  find  here  our  best   friends. 
This  train,  instead  of  carrying  the  ideas  of  our  au- 
tocracy, is  carrying  the  ideas  of  our  Revolution — 
and  carrying  them  to  America.    Long  live  the  Revo- 
lution!   Long  live  our  American  comrades!" 

There  was  a  riot  of  cheer-giving,  hand-shaking 
and  picture-taking  and  we  were  off  again.  But  not 
for  long.  Again  we  were  halted  by  a  storming  mass. 
And  again  and  again.  It  was  in  vain  to  protest  that 
the  Czar  was  not  aboard.  Even  the  documents 
attesting  this,  they  waved  aside  as  counter-revolu- 
tionary forgeries.  Each  crowd  must  reassure  itself 
thru  its  own  search.  Thus  the  fastest  express  upon 
the  Trans-Siberian,  became  the  slowest. 


THE  STEPPES  RISE  UP  205 

At  Marinsk,  the  Commissar  of  Transport  gave  a 
new  turn  to  events,  by  despatching  this  telegram: 

"To  all  Soviets: 

Kuntz  and  Williams,  General  Organizers  of  th& 
Red  Army,  are  on  Train  Two.  I  ask  that  represent 
tatives  oj  the  Soviets  meet  with  them  for  consulta- 
tion. Sadovnikov." 

The  telegram  was  read  to  the  crowds  assembling 
at  every  station  to  meet  the  express.  With  their  ap- 
petites  and  implements  whetted  for  a  Czar,  suddenly 
two  comrades  were  handed  them.  It  called  for  a 
swift  reversal  of  their  emotions,  but  they  did  nobly. 
We  rode  into  each  station  in  a  storm  of  greetings. 
The  new  detachments  of  the  Red  Army  saluted,  the 
commissars  solemnly  laid  before  us  their  problems, 
the  throngs  pushed  forward  to  gaze  upon  us  as 
military  geniuses. 

It  was  embarrassing,  but  illuminating.  We  got  a 
glimpse  of  a  new  civilization  in  the  making,  the  fu- 
ture in  the  act  of  being  born.  In  one  town  the  foun- 
dations had  just  been  laid — the  peasants  marching 
over  had  joined  the  workers  in  one  central  Soviet.  In 
another  they  had  scarcely  got  to  the  foundations — 
the  intelligentsia  were  all  on  strike.  In  manj^  centres 
the  new  structure  was  well  along,  the  Soviet  schools 
were  filled,  the  peasants  were  bringing  the  grain  to 
market,  the  factories  were  turning  out  goods,  as  well 
as  oratory.    The  exhibits,  tho  often  crude  and  in- 


2o6  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

complete,  testified  to  the  release  of  real  creative 
forces  in  the  masses. 

We  pointed  this  out  to  the  emigres,  but  they  were 
busy  weaving  fictions  for  the  western  democracies, 
and  the  facts  irritated  them.  Some  became  sullen 
and  suspicious,  treating  us  as  apostates  and  traitors 
to  our  class.  Others  fatuously  returned  to  their  usual 
themes:  The  golden  days  of  Czardom,  the  "dark- 
ness" of  the  Russian  masses,  the  sheer  idiocy  of  the 
Bolsheviks. 


CHAPTER  XIV 

THE  RED  CONVICTS  OF  CHERM 

nr^HE  emigres  on  our  train  had  many  points  of  con- 
-*■  flict.  But  on  one  point  they  agreed:  the  grave 
danger  lying  ahead  of  us  in  Cherm,  the  great  penal 
colony  of  Siberia. 

"Fifteen  thousand  convicts  in  Cherm,"  they  said. 
"Criminals  of  the  worst  stripe — thugs,  thieves  and 
murderers.  The  only  way  to  deal  with  them  is  to 
put  them  in  the  mines  and  keep  them  there  at  the 
point  of  the  gun.  Even  so,  it  is  too  much  liberty 
for  them.  Every  week  there  are  scores  of  thefts  and 
stabbings.  Now  most  of  these  devils  have  been 
turned  loose,  and  they  have  turned  Bolshevik.  It 
always  was  a  hell-hole.  What  it  is  now  God  only 
knows." 

It  was  a  raw  bleak  morning  on  the  first  of  May, 
when  we  rode  into  Cherm  (Chermkhovo).  A  curtain 
of  dust,  blown  up  by  a  wind  from  the  north,  hung 
over  the  place.  Curled  up  in  our  compartment 
half  asleep,  we  woke  to  the  cry,  "They're  coming! 
They're  coming!"  We  peered  thru  the  window. 
Far  as  we  could  see  nothing  was  coming  but  a 
whirling  cloud  of  dust.    Then  thru  the  dust  we  made 

207 


2o8  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

out  a  glint  of  red,  the  gray  of  glittering  steel,  and 
vague,  black  masses  moving  forward. 

Behind  drawn  curtains,  the  emigres  went  franti- 
cally hiding  jewels  and  money,  or  sat  paralyzed  with 
terror.  Outside,  the  cinders  crunched  under  the 
tread  of  the  hob-nailed  boots.  In  what  mood  "they" 
were  coming,  with  what  lust  in  their  blood,  what 
weapons  in  their  hands,  no  one  knew.  We  knew  only 
that  these  were  the  dread  convicts  of  Cherm,  "mur- 
derers, thugs  and  thieves" — and  they  were  heading 
for  the  parlor-cars. 

Slowly  they  lurched  along,  the  wind  filling  their 
eyes  with  dust  and  soot,  and  wrestling  with  a  huge 
blood-red  banner  they  carried.  Then  came  a  lull 
in  the  wind,  dropping  the  dust  screen  and  bringing 
to  view  a  motley  crew. 

Their  clothes  were  black  from  the  mines  and  tied 
up  with  strings,  their  faces  grim  and  grimy.  Some 
were  ox-like  hulks  of  men.  Some  were  gnarled  and 
knotted,  warped  by  a  thousand  gales.  Here  were 
the  cannibal-convicts  of  Tolstoy,  slant-browed  and 
brutal-jawed.  Here  was  Dostoievsky's  "House  of 
the  Dead."  With  limping  steps,  cheeks  slashed  and 
eyes  gouged  out  they  came,  marked  by  bullet,  knife 
and  mine  disaster,  some  cursed  by  an  evil  birth. 
But  few,  if  any,  were  weaklings. 

By  a  long,  gruelling  process  the  weak  had  been 
killed  off.  These  thousands  were  the  survivors  of 
tens  of  thousands,  driven  out  on  the  gray  highroad 
to  Cherm.    Thru  sleet  and  snow,  winter  blast  and 


THE  RED  CONVICTS  OF  CHERM    209 

summer  blaze  they  had  staggered  along.  Torture- 
chambers  had  racked  their  limbs.  Gendarmes' 
sabers  had  cracked  their  skulls.  Iron  fetters  had  cut 
their  flesh.  Cossacks'  whips  had  gashed  their  backs, 
and  Cossacks'  hoofs  had  pounded  them  to  earth. 

Like  their  bodies  their  souls,  too,  had  been 
knouted.  Like  a  blood-hound  the  law  had  hung 
on  their  trail,  driving  them  into  dungeons,  driving 
them  to  this  dismal  outpost  of  Siberia,  driving  them 
off  the  face  of  the  earth  into  its  caverns,  to  strain 
like  beasts,  digging  the  coal  in  the  dark,  and  handing 
it  up  to  those  who  live  in  the  light. 

Now  out  of  the  mines  they  come  marching  up  into 
the  light.  Guns  in  hand,  flying  red  flags  of  revolt, 
they  are  loose  in  the  highways,  moving  forward  like 
a  great  herd,  the  incarnation  of  brute  strength.  In 
their  path  lie  the  warm,  luxurious  parlor-cars — 
another  universe,  a  million  miles  removed.  Now  it 
is  just  a  few  inches  away,  within  their  grasp.  Three 
minutes,  and  they  could  leave  this  train  sacked 
from  end  to  end  as  tho  gutted  by  a  cyclone.  How 
sweet  for  once  to  glut  themselves!  And  how  easy! 
One  swift  lunge  forward.    One  furious  onset. 

But  their  actions  show  neither  haste  nor  frenzy. 
Stretching  their  banners  on  the  ground  they  range 
themselves  in  a  crescent,  massed  in  the  center,  facing 
the  train.  Now  we  can  scan  those  faces.  Sullen, 
defiant,  lined  deep  with  hate,  brutalized  by  toil.  On 
all  of  them  the  ravages  of  vice  and  terror.    In  all 


210  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

of  them  an  infinitude  of  pain  and  torment,  the 
poignant  sorrow  of  the  world. 

But  in  their  eyes  is  a  strange  light — a  look  of 
exaltation.  Or  is  it  the  ghtter  of  revenge?  A  blow 
for  a  blow.  The  law  has  given  them  a  thousand 
blows.  Is  it  their  turn  now?  Will  they  avenge 
the  long  years  of  bitterness? 

A  hand  touches  our  shoulder.  We  turn 
The  Comrade  to  look  into  the  faces  of  two  burly 
Convicts.  miners.    They  tell  us  that  they  are  the 

Commissars  of  Cherm.  At  the  same  time 
they  signal  the  banner-bearers,  and  the  red  stand- 
ards rise  up  before  our  eyes.  On  one  in  large  letters 
is  the  old  familiar  slogan :  Proletarians,  arise!  You 
have  nothing  to  lose  but  your  chains.  On  another: 
We  stretch  out  our  hands  to  the  miners  in  all  lands. 
Greetings  to  our  comrades  throughout  the  world. 

"Hats  off!"  shouts  the  commissar.  Awkwardly 
they  bare  their  heads  and  stand,  caps  in  hand.  Then 
slowly  begins  the  hymn  of  the  International: 

"Arise,  ye  prisoners  of  starvation! 
Arise,  ye  wretched  of  the  earth! 
For  justice  thunders  condemnation, 
A  better  world's  in  birth. 
No  more  tradition's  chains  shall  bind  you; 
Arise,  ye  slaves!     No  more  in  thrall. 
The  world  shall  rise  on  new  foundations. 
You  have  been  naught:  you  shall  be  all." 

I  have  heard  the  streets  of  cities  around  the  world, 
ringing  to  the  "International,"  rising  from  massed 


THE  RED  CONVICTS  OF  CHERM    211 

columns  of  the  marchers.  I  have  heard  rebel  stu- 
dents send  it  floating  thru  college  halls.  I  have 
heard  the  "International"  on  the  voices  of  2,000 
Soviet  delegates,  blending  with  four  military  bands, 
go  rolling  thru  the  pillars  of  the  Tauride  Palace. 
But  none  of  these  singers  looked  the  ^'wretched  of 
the  earth."  They  were  the  sympathizers  or  repre- 
sentatives of  the  wretched.  These  miner-convicts  of 
Cherm  were  the  wretched  themselves,  most  wretched 
of  all.  Wretched  in  garments  and  looks,  and  even 
in  voice. 

With  broken  voices,  and  out  of  tune  they  sang, 
but  in  their  singing  one  felt  the  pain  and  protest 
of  the  broken  of  all  ages:  the  sigh  of  the  captive, 
the  moan  of  the  galley-slave  lashed  to  the  oar,  the 
groan  of  the  serf  stretched  on  the  wheel,  the  cries 
from  the  cross,  the  stake  and  the  gibbet,  the  anguish 
of  myriads  of  the  condemned,  welling  up  out  of  the 
long  reaches  of  the  past. 

These  convicts  were  in  apostolic  succession  to 
the  suffering  of  the  centuries.  They  were  the  ex- 
communicate of  society,  mangled,  crushed  by  its 
heavy  hand,  and  hurled  down  into  the  darkness  of 
this  pit. 

Now  out  of  the  pit  rises  this  victory-hymn  of  the 
vanquished.  Long  bludgeoned  into  silence,  they 
break  into  song — a  song  not  of  complaint,  but  of 
conquest.  No  longer  are  they  social  outcasts,  but 
citizens.  More  than  that — Makers  of  a  New 
Society! 


212  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

Their  limbs  are  numb  with  cold.  But  their  hearts 
are  on  fire.  Harsh  and  rugged  faces  are  touched 
with  a  sunrise  glow.  Dull  eyes  grow  bright.  De- 
fiant ones  grow  soft.  In  them  lies  the  transfiguring 
vision  of  the  toilers  of  all  nations  bound  together  in 
one  big  fraternity — The  International. 

"Long  live  the  International!  Long  live  the 
American  workers!"  they  shout.  Then  opening 
their  ranks,  they  thrust  forward  one  of  their  number. 
He  is  of  giant  stature,  a  veritable  Jean  Valjean  of  a 
man,  with  a  Jean  Valjean  of  a  heart. 

"In  the  name  of  the  miners  of  Cherm,"  he  says, 
"we  greet  the  comrades  on  this  train!  In  the  old 
days  how  different  it  was!  Day  after  day,  trains 
rolled  thru  here,  but  we  dared  not  come  near  them. 
Some  of  us  did  wrong,  we  know.  But  many  of  us 
were  brutally  wronged.  Had  there  been  justice, 
some  of  us  would  be  on  this  train  and  some  on  this 
train  would  be  in  the  mines. 

"But  most  of  the  passengers  didn't  know  there 
were  any  mines.  In  their  warm  beds,  they  didn't 
know  that  way  down  below  were  thousands  of  moles, 
digging  coal  to  put  heat  in  the  cars  and  steam  in 
the  engine.  They  didn't  know  that  hundreds  of  us 
were  starved  to  death,  flogged  to  death  or  killed  by 
falling  rock.  If  they  did  know,  they  didn't  care. 
To  them  we  were  dregs  and  outcasts.  To  them 
we  were  nothing  at  all. 

"Now  we  are  everything!  We  have  joined  the  In- 
ternational.    We  fall  in  today  with  the  armies  of 


THE  RED  CONVICTS  OF  CHERM     213 

labor  in  all  lands.  We  are  in  the  vanguard  of  them 
all.  We,  who  were  slaves,  have  been  made  freest 
of  all. 

"Not  our  freedom  alone  we  want,  comrades,  but 
freedom  for  the  workers  thruout  the  world.  Unless 
they,  too,  are  free,  we  cannot  keep  the  freedom 
we  have  to  own  the  mines  and  run  them  ourselves. 

"Already  the  greedy  hands  of  the  ImperiaHsts  of 
the  world  are  reaching  out  across  the  seas.  Only 
the  hands  of  the  workers  of  the  world  can  tear  those 
clutches  from  our  throats." 

The  range  and  insight  of  the  man's  mind  was 
amazing.  So  amazed  was  Kuntz  that  his  own  speech 
in  reply  faltered.  My  hold  on  Russian  quite  col- 
lapsed. Our  part  in  this  affair,  we  felt,  was  wan 
and  pallid.  But  these  miners  did  not  feel  so.  They 
came  into  the  breach  with  a  cheer  for  the  Interna- 
tional, and  another  for  the  International  Orchestra. 

The  "Orchestra"  comprised  four  vioHns  played  by 
four  prisoners  of  war;  a  Czech,  a  Hungarian,  a 
German  and  an  Austrian.  Captured  on  the  eastern 
front,  from  camp  to  camp  they  had  been  relayed 
along  to  these  convict-mines  in  Siberia.  Thousands 
of  miles  from  home!  Still  farther  in  race  and  breed- 
ing from  these  Russian  masses  drawn  from  the  soil. 
But  caste  and  creed  and  race  had  fallen  before 
the  Revolution.  To  their  convict  miner  comrades 
here  in  this  dark  hole  they  played,  as  in  happier 
days  they  might  have  played  at  a  music  festival 
under  the  garden  lights  of  Berlin  or  Budapest.    The 


214  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

flaming  passion  in  their  veins  crept  into  the  strings 
of  their  violins  and  out  into  the  heart-strings  of  their 
hearers. 

The  whole  conclave — miners,  musicians  and 
visitors,  Teutons,  Slavs  and  Americans — became  one. 
All  barriers  were  down  as  the  commissars  came 
pressing  up  to  greet  us.  One  huge  hulking  fellow, 
with  fists  like  pile-drivers,  took  our  hands  into  his. 
Twice  he  tried  to  speak  and  twice  he  choked.  Un- 
able to  put  his  sentiments  of  brotherhood  into  words 
he  put  it  into  a  sudden  terrific  grip  of  his  hands.  I 
can  feel  that  grip  yet. 

For  the  honor  of  Cherm  he  was  anxious  that  its 
first  public  function  should  be  conducted  in  proper 
fashion.  Out  of  the  past  must  have  flashed  the 
memory  of  some  occasion  where  the  program  of  the 
day  included  gifts  as  well  as  speeches.  Disappear- 
ing for  a  time,  he  came  running  back  with  two  sticks 
of  dynamite — the  gifts  of  Cherm  to  the  two  Ameri- 
cans. We  demurred.  He  insisted.  We  pointed  out 
that  a  chance  collision  and  delegates  might  disappear 
together  with  dynamite — a  total  loss  to  the  Inter- 
nationale. The  crowd  laughed.  Like  a  giant  child 
he  was  hurt  and  puzzled.    Then  he  laughed,  too. 

The  second  violinst,  a  blue-eyed  lad  from  Vienna, 
was  always  laughing.  Exile  had  not  quenched  his 
love  of  fun.  In  honor  of  the  American  visitors  he 
insisted  upon  a  Jazze-Americane.  So  he  called  it, 
but  never  before  or  since  have  I  heard  so  weird  a 
melody.    He  played  with  legs  and  arms  as  well  as 


THE  RED  CONVICTS  OF  CHERM    215 

bow,  dancing  round,  up  and  down  to  the  great  de- 
light of  the  crowd. 

Our  love- feast  at  last  was  broken  in  upon  by  the 
clanging  signal-bell.  One  more  round  of  hand- 
clasps and  we  climbed  aboard  the  train  as  the  orches- 
tra caught  up  the  refrain: 

It  is  the  final  conflict, 
Let  each  stand  in  his  place; 
The  Internationale — 
Shall  be  the  human  race. 

There  was  no  grace  or  outward  splendor  in  this 
meeting.  It  was  ugliness  unrelieved — except  for 
one  thing:  the  presence  of  a  tremendous  vitality. 
It  was  a  revelation  of  the  drive  of  the  Revolution. 
Even  into  this  sub-cellar  of  civilization  it  had  pene- 
trated— into  these  regions  of  the  damned  it  had  come 
like  a  trumpet-blast,  bringing  down  the  walls  of  their 
charnel-house.  Out  of  it  they  had  rushed,  not  with 
bloodshot  eyes,  slavering  mouths  and  daggers 
drawn,  but  crying  for  truth  and  justice,  with  songs 
of  solidarity  upon  their  lips,  and  on  their  banners 
the  watchwords  of  a  new  world. 

All  this  was  lost  upon  the  emigres.  Not 
The  Emigres  one  ray  of  wonder  did  they  let  penetrate 
Unmoved.  the  armor  of  their  class-interest.     Their 

former  fears  gave  way  to  sneers: 
"There  is  Bolshevism  for  you!     It  makes  states- 
men out  of  jail-birds.    Great  sight,  isn't  it?    Con- 


2i6  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

victs  parading  the  streets  instead  of  digging  in  the 
mines.    That's  what  we  get  out  of  Revolution." 

We  pointed  to  other  things  that  came  out  of  Revo- 
lution— order,  restraint  and  good-will.  But  the 
emigres  could  not  see.    They  would  not  see. 

"That  is  for  the  moment,"  they  laughed.  "When 
the  excitement  is  over  they'll  go  back  to  stealing, 
drinking  and  killing."  To  these  emigres  it  was  at 
best  a  passing  ecstasy  that  would  disappear  with 
our  disappearing  train. 

Leaning  out  from  the  car  steps  we  waved  farewell 
to  the  hundreds  of  huge  grimy  hands  waving  fare- 
well to  us.  Our  eyes  long  clung  to  the  scene.  In 
the  last  glimpse  we  saw  the  men  of  Cherm  with 
heads  still  bared  to  the  cutting  wind,  the  rhythmic 
rise  and  fall  of  the  arms  of  "Jean  Valjean,"  the  red 
banner  with  "Greetings  to  our  Comrades  thruout 
the  World,"  and  a  score  of  hands  still  stretched  out 
towards  the  train.  Then  the  scene  faded  away  in 
the  dust  and  distance. 

•  ••••• 

Two  years  later  Jo  Redding  came  back  to  Detroit 
after  working  in  Cherm  and  watching  the  Revolu- 
tion working  there.  He  reports  its  permanent  effects. 
Thefts  and  murders  were  reduced  almost  to  zero. 
Snarling  animals  became  men.  Tho  just  released 
from  irons,  they  put  themselves  under  the  iron  disci- 
pline of  the  Soviet  armies.  Lawless  under  the  old 
law,  they  became  the  writers  and  defenders  of  a  new 
law.    Men  who  had  so  many  wrongs  of  their  own 


THE  RED  CONVICTS  OF  CHERM    217 

to  brood  over,  now  assumed  the  wrongs  of  the  world. 
They  had  vast  programs  to  release  their  energies 
upon,  vast  visions  to  light  their  minds. 

To  the  rich  and  the  privileged,  to  those  who  sit 
on  roof-gardens  or  ride  in  parlor-cars,  the  Revolu- 
tion is  a  thing  of  terror  and  horror.  It  is  the  Anti- 
Christ.  But  to  the  despised  and  disinherited,  the 
Revolution  is  like  the  Messiah  coming  to  "preach 
good  tidings  to  the  poor;  to  proclaim  release  of  the 
captives  and  to  set  at  liberty  them  that  are  bruised." 
No  longer  can  Dostoievsky's  convict  mutter,  "We 
are  not  alive,  though  we  are  living.  We  are  not  in 
our  graves,  though  we  are  dead."  In  the  House  of 
the  Dcv^d,  Revolution  is  Resurrection. 


CHAPTER  XV 

THE   VLADIVOSTOK   SOVIET   AND   ITS    LEADERS 

'T^HE  limits  of  the  Revolution — what  were  they? 
-*■  We  had  seenUhis  Revolution,  loosed  by  the 
city- workers,  drive  deeper  and  deeper  down,  taking 
ever  lower  and  lower  strata  of  the  people  within  its 
grip.  When  it  laid  hold  of  the  convicts  of  Cherm  it 
reached  bottom.  It  could  go  no  further  vertically. 
How  far  could  it  reach  horizontally?  Would  it  prove 
the  same  power  here  in  these  far-flung  outposts  on 
the  Pacific  that  it  was  back  there  upon  the  Atlantic? 
Would  the  Revolution  show  the  same  strong  pulse- 
beat  in  these  extremities  as  it  did  in  the  heart  of 
Russia? 

In  a  world  of  Soviets  we  had  moved  across  the 
great,  slow,  north-flowing  rivers,  the  Urals,  the 
taiga  forests,  and  the  steppes.  Trainmen  and  miners 
had  spoken  of  their  Soviets,  peasants  and  fishermen 
had  greeted  us  with  red  banners  in  the  name  of 
theirs.  We  had  conferred  with  the  Soviet  of  Central 
Siberia  and  the  Far  East  Soviet.  This  whole  Amur 
district  was  dotted  with  Soviets.  Now,  as  we  stepped 

218 


Ivan  was  idling,  reading  no  books,  t.king  to  no   occupation.      Life  was  a  bore  to  him  :  the  days  drag   ed  on 

i^oy  and \'.u  vWini  a  new  man  •   a  whole  day  will  pass  with  the  swiftness  of  a  single  minute."        Introduce  me 
to  him."  said  Ivan.     "Good!  come  to  see  me  on  Sunday. 


On  Sunday   Ivan    weiit  to  see    Paul.     "Here   is  my    friend."    said    Paul,  "a  book.      It  will  acquaint    you  wi 
verythmg;    .t  wd    tell  you  what  people  are  living  on  the  earth,  as  well  as   what  people  l.ved   here   millions 

skv  TnL  \ZZ^l^"T  iT'^V,.".  ""i"^  ■'"t"  °"  '^*  ^"'^'■^  "'  "^^  ^»"*''  ^'  *="  ^»  "°d^'  *e  surface  and  in  the 
sky.  Your  Iriend  the  book  will  teach  you  how  you  may  live  fully  and  be  helpful  to  others.  You  will  never  be 
bored  again.     It  will  change  you  so  that  you  will   no  longer  know  yourself.  "■  never  oe 

the  strength  of  a  giant,  the  wisdom  of  a  sage  I    And  you  will  never  find  ^ 
critical  times  of  your  life." 


It  will  give  you  a  hundred  eyes, 
friend  better  able  to  advise  you  in  the 


A  True  Friend!  — Soviet  Propaganda  Poster  for  Education 


THE  VLADIVOSTOK  SOVIET  219 

from  the  train  at  Vladivostok,  we  were  to  find  a  re- 
plica of  the  Soviet  we  had  left  at  Petrograd,  seven 
thousand  miles  away. 

In  six  months  the  Soviet  had  struck  its  roots  deep 
into  the  Russian  soil,  crowded  out  all  rivals,  resisted 
the  shock  of  every  attack,  and  now  held  undisputed 
sway  from  the  Arctic  Ocean  on  the  north  to  the 
Black  Sea  on  the  south,  from  Narva  looking  upon 
the  Atlantic  all  the  way  to  Vladivostok  here  on  its 
promontory  looking  into  the  Pacific. 

Vladivostok  is  a  city  built  on  hills,  with  streets  as 
steep  as  Alpine  paths.  But  with  an  extra  horse 
attached  to  the  droshky's  shafts,  we  rattled  over  the 
cobbles  as  swiftly  as  we  did  along  the  level  wood- 
paved  prospekts  of  Petrograd.  The  main  highway, 
Svetlanskaya,  lies  folded  up  and  down  across  the 
hills,  flanked  by  the  commercial  houses  of  the  French 
and  English,  the  International  Harvester,  and  the 
buildings  of  the  nev/  rulers  of  Russia — the  Red  Fleet, 
and  the  Soviet  of  Workmen's  Deputies. 

Massive  fortresses  frowned  from  all  the  hills 
around,  but  they  were  harmless  as  dove-cotes.  In 
the  first  days  of  the  war  they  had  been  dismantled, 
and  the  great  guns  shipped  to  the  Eastern  front.  A 
defenseless  city,  into  which  extends  a  peculiar  tongue 
of  water  called  the  Golden  Horn.  Here  the  Allied 
battleships,  uninvited,  rode  at  anchor.  Their  flags 
were  a  welcome  sight  to  the  fleeing  emigres  at  the 
end  of  the  long  Siberian  journey.  With  a  sigh  of 
relief  here  they  settled  down.    Soon,  they  believed, 


2  20  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

the  Revolution  would  be  over.     Then  they  would 
return  and  take  up  their  old  life  again  in  Russia. 

The  city  was  thronged  with  evicted 
A  City  of  Refuge    landowners,  dreaming  of  their  estates, 
for  the  Emigres,     their  retinue  of  servants  and  the  idle 
feasting  of  bygone  days;  officers  tell- 
ing of  the  former  discipline,  when  soldiers  jumped 
into  the  gutter  at  their  presence  and  stood  rigid  in 
salute  while  beaten  in  the  face;  speculators  longing 
for    the   return   of    the    good   old   times   of   war 
profiteering  and  patrioteering,  to  the  tune  of  50,  100 
and  500  per  cent.    Gone  are  all  those  gilded  fabu- 
lous fortunes.    The  Revolution  wrecked  them  along 
with  the  arbitrary  power  of  the  officers  and  the 
dreams  of  the  landowners. 

As  a  port  of  exit,  Vladivostok  was  full  of  Rus- 
sian emigres  coming  out.  As  a  port  of  entry,  it 
was  full  of  Allied  capitalists  going  in.  It  was  a 
key  to  the  El  Dorado  beyond.  With  its  vast  unex- 
ploited  natural  riches  and  labor  power,  Siberia  was 
a  loadstone  drawing  the  agents  of  capital  from 
around  the  world.  From  London  and  Tokio,  from 
the  Paris  Bourse  and  Wall  Street,  they  came  flock- 
ing hither,  lured  by  dazzling  prospects. 

But  between  them  and  the  fisheries,  gold-mines, 
and  forests  they  found  a  big  barrier.    They  found  ^ 
the  Soviet.    The  Russian  workingman  refused  to  be 
exploited  by  the  Russian  capitalist.     At  the  same 
time  he  refused  to  allow  his  blood  and  sweat  to  be 


THE  VLADIVOSTOK  SOVIET  221 

minted  into  bonanza  dividends  for  the  benefit  of 
foreign  bankers.  The  Soviet  was  the  instrument  of 
this  refusal  to  all  exploiters. 

Meeting  the  same  obstacles  as  the  Russian  bour- 
geoisie, the  Allied  exploiters  had  the  same  reaction. 
They  lent  a  ready  ear  to  the  cursings  and  ravings 
of  their  Russian  brethren,  who  saw  the  Soviet  and 
its  members  as  the  very  spawn  of  hell. 

It  was  in  this  circle  that  the  Allied  consuls,  offi- 
cers, Y.  M.  C.  A.  and  Intelligence  men  largely  lived, 
moved  and  had  their  being.  They  rarely  got  outside 
of  it.  They  were  in  revolutionary  Russia,  but  out 
of  touch  with  the  Revolution.  And  quite  naturally. 
Peasants  and  workers  knew  little  French  or  English 
or  how  to  dress  well  or  order  dinner. 

Not  that  Allied  society  was  without  "information." 
Their  Russian  bourgeois  friends  and  their  own  preju- 
dices gave  it  to  them.  Very  direct  and  dogmatic,  it 
passed  current  in  phrases  like: 

"The  Soviet  is  made  up  mainly  of  ex-criminals." 

"Four-fifths  of  the  Bolsheviks  are  Jews." 

"These  Revolutionists  are  just  ordinary  robbers." 

"The  Red  Armies  are  mercenary  and  will  run  at 
the  first  shot  of  a  gun." 

"The  dark,  ignorant  masses  are  swayed  by  their 
leaders,  and  their  leaders  are  corrupt." 

"The  Czar  may  have  had  his  faults,  but  Russia 
needs  an  iron  hand," 

"The  Soviet  is  tottering,  and  will  not  last  longer 
than  two  weeks  at  the  outside." 


22  2  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

The  most  cursory  investigation  would  reveal  the 
falsehood  of  these  phrases.  One  needed  but  to  par- 
rot them,  however,  to  be  acclaimed  a  man  of  deep 
insight. 

The  man  who  could  add,  "I  don't  give  a  damn 
what  others  say  about  Lenin  and  Trotzky,  I  know 
they  are  German  agents,"  was  hailed  as  a  fellow  of 
spirit,  a  true  soldier  of  democracy. 

There  were  some  honest  seekers  after  light.  The 
genial  commander  of  the  Asiatic  Squadron  was  in- 
discreet enough  to  invite  me  to  dinner  on  his  flag- 
ship the  Brooklyn.  The  American  Consul  also  tried 
hard  to  break  thru  the  circle  of  lies.  Awaiting  word 
from  Washington,  however,  he  withheld  vise  to  my 
passport.  So  I  was  marooned  for  seven  weeks  in 
Vladivostok. 

As  I  grew  more  and  more  outspoken  in  my  sympa- 
thies with  the  workers  and  peasants,  the  bourgeoisie 
grew  ever  more  hostile  towards  me.  Thrown  now 
into  close  contact  with  the  Soviet  I  had  opportunity 
to  observe  and  share  its  work,  and  to  count  many  of 
its  members  as  my  friends. 

First   among    these    was   Constantin 

A  Few  Students     Sukhanov.    When  the  March  Revolu- 

Aid  the  Soviets.       tion  broke  out,  he  was  a  student  of 

Natural  History  in  the  University  of 

Petrograd.  He  hastened  back  to  Vladivostok,  a  Men- 

shevik.     After  the  Kornilov  adventure  he  became 

a  Bolshevik,  and  an  ardent  one.     He  was  small 


THE  VLADIVOSTOK  SOVIET  223 

in  stature,  but  great  in  energy.  Night  and  day  he 
toiled,  snatching  an  occasional  wink  of  sleep  in  a 
small  room  above  the  Soviet,  ready  at  a  moment's 
notice  to  spring  to  the  saddle  or  the  t3^ewriter. 
W'Tiile  his  face  was  habitually  drawn  tight  in  lines 
of  thought,  he  would  often  explode  in  a  contagious 
burst  of  laughter.  His  speech  was  terse,  on  occa- 
sion flaming.  But  a  bare  fire-brand  would  never 
have  done  in  such  a  powder-magazine  as  Vladi- 
vostok. By  skill  and  tact  he  pulled  the  Soviet  out 
of  many  ugly  positions,  into  which  its  enemies  had 
jockeyed  it. 

Respected  by  everybody,  even  by  his  bitter  politi- 
cal opponents,  Sukhanov  was  chosen  President  of 
the  Soviet.  He  was  thus  the  tip  of  the  spearhead 
that  the  Bolshevik  movement  thrust  out  into  the 
Pacific  and  the  eastern  world.  He  found  himself, 
at  24,  facing  tasks  that  would  have  taxed  the  re- 
sources of  a  veteran  diplomat. 

But  statecraft  was  in  his  blood.  His  father  was 
a  functionary  of  the  old  regime,  charged  with  the 
arrest  of  Revolutionists.  Among  those  he  had  found 
plotting  against  the  Czar  were  his  own  daughter, 
and  this  son  Constantin.  Constantin  was  arrested. 
Bitter  and  cynical,  the  father  had  faced  his  son 
across  the  table  of  the  tribunal. 

It  was  by  grace  of  his  Im^perial  Majesty,  Czar 
Nicholas  II,  that  the  elder  Sukhanov  had  sat  in  the 
magistrate's  place,  with  the  white,  blue  and  red 
flag  of  the  autocracy  behind  the  dais.     When  we 


2  24  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

arrived  in  Vladivostok  the  red  flag  of  the  Revolu- 
tion had  replaced  it.  Yet  we  found  a  Sukhanov  sit- 
ting in  the  judgment  seat.  This  time  it  was  the 
son,  Constantin,  now  President  of  the  Vladivostok 
Soviet  by  grace  of  their  Republican  Majesties,  the 
worker,  peasant,  and  sailor  citizens  of  the  Russian 
Soviet  Republic. 

Curious  reversal  of  the  Revolution!  Just  as 
the  younger  Sukhanov  had  been  caught  conspiring 
against  the  rule  of  the  Czar,  now  Sukhanov,  the 
elder,  was  found  plotting  against  the  rule  of  the 
Soviet.  Once  more  across  the  tribunal  the  two 
men  faced  each  other:  father  against  son,  Counter- 
Revolutionist  against  Revolutionist,  Monarchist 
against  Socialist.  But  this  time  the  son  was  the 
judge,  the  father  the  culprit.  Once  only  was  Con- 
stantin Sukhanov  derelict  in  his  revolutionary  duties. 
He  refused  to  imprison  his  father! 

Sukhanov's  constant  aide  was  the  student  Sebert- 
sev.  There  were  also  three  girl-students  (kursists), 
Zoya,  Tanya  and  Zoya,  respectively,  secretaries  of 
the  Bolshevik  Party,  the  Finance  Department,  and 
the  Soviet  organ,  "The  Peasant  and  Worker";  and 
respectively  daughters  of  an  officer,  a  priest  and  a 
merchant.  Their  bourgeois  life  they  entirely  re- 
nounced. They  became  one  with  the  proletarians. 
With  proletarian  incomes  they  thought  in  prole- 
tarian terms.  They  lived  like  proletarians.  Their 
home  now  was  two  bare  rooms  which  they  called 


THE  VLADIVOSTOK  SOVIET         225 

"the  Commune."     For  beds  they  had  soldier-cots, 
straw-pallets  laid  on  planks  instead  of  springs. 

These  students  fitted  the  picture  of  the  Russian 
student  of  tradition.  One  night,  when  the  strain  of 
tr3dng  to  talk  in  the  Russian  language  was  tying 
my  tongue  and  brain  into  knots,  Sebertsev  said: 
"We  have  all  been  to  the  university,  we  can  talk  in 
Latin!"  But  how  many  American  college  graduates 
can  read  even  the  Latin  on  their  diplomas?  These 
Russian  students  not  only  talked  Latin,  but  sub- 
mitted Latin  verses  for  my  approval.  I  made  a 
strategic  retreat  upon  Russian! 

Outside  of  these  students  the  mem- 
Leaders  Out  of  bers  of  the  Vladivostok  Soviet  were 

the  Rank  and  File,  workingmen — mechanics,  longshore- 
men, railwaymen,  etc.  But  they 
were  Russian  workingmen;  while  using  the  hammer, 
the  sickle  and  axe,  they  had  used  their  brains.  For 
this  the  heavy  hand  of  the  Czar  had  fallen  on  them. 
Some  had  been  jailed,  others  driven  out  as  wanderers 
over  the  earth. 

From  exile  they  returned  at  the  call  of  the  Revo- 
lution. Utkin  and  Jordan  came  back  from  Aus- 
tralia, speaking  English;  Antonov  from  Naples, 
speaking  Italian. 

Melnikov,  Nikeferov  and  Preminsky  emerged 
from  their  prison-cells  speaking  French.  This  trio 
had  turned  their  jail  into  a  university.  They  had 
specialized  in  mathematics,  and  now  were  experts 


226  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

in  calculus,  plotting  graphs  as  well  as  they  had 
plotted  revolution. 

Seven  years  they  were  bound  together  in  jail. 
Now  they  were  free,  each  to  go  his  own  way.  But 
the  long  hard  years  had  forged  around  their  hearts 
ties  more  binding  than  the  iron  chains  around  their 
limbs.  They  were  together  in  death,  and  now  in 
life  they  could  not  be  divided.  In  mind,  however, 
they  were  much  divided,  expounding  their  rival 
creeds  to  each  other  with  terrific  energy.  Yet,  how- 
ever wide  afield  they  went  in  theory,  in  action  they 
were  a  unit.  _  Melnikov's  party  did  not  then  support 
the  Soviet,  but  his  two  comrades  did.  So  he  followed 
them  into  the  service  of  the  Soviet,  as  Commissar  of 
Post  and  Telegraph. 

In  the  soul  of  Melnikov  had  been  waged  some 
big  battle,  which  put  furrows  deep  in  his  face,  and 
left  deep  in  his  eyes  the  marks  of  pain.  But  in  that 
face  victory  and  a  great  serenity  were  written.  His 
eyes  sparkled,  and  a  smile  always  flickered  on  his 
lips.    When  things  grew  blacker  he  smiled  the  more. 

Little  help  the  Soviet  got  from  the  intelligentsia. 
They  declared  a  boycott  against  the  Soviet  until  th0 
workingmen  should  completely  change  their  pro- 
gram. In  open  meeting  they  proclaimed  a  policy  of 
sabotage. 

Bitter  and  sarcastic  was  the  retort  shot  back  by 
a  miner:  "You  pride  yourselves  on  your  knowledge 
and  skill!  But  where  did  you  get  it?  From  us. 
At  the  price  of  our  sweat  and  blood.    In  school  and 


THE  VLADIVOSTOK  SOVIET         227 

university  you  sat  at  your  desks  while  we  slaved  in 
the  dark  of  the  mines  and  the  smoke  of  the  mills. 
Now  we  ask  you  to  help  us.  And  you  say  to  us: 
'Give  up  your  program  and  take  our  program:  then 
we  will  help  you.'  And  we  say  to  you:  'We  will 
not  give  up  our  program.  We  shall  get  along  with- 
out you.'  " 

Supreme  audacity  in  these  workingmen,  tyros  in 
government,  taking  over  the  administration  of  a  ter- 
ritory large  as  France  and  rich  as  India,  beset  by 
hordes  of  scheming  imperialists,  challenged  by  a 
thousand  tasks! 


CHAPTER  XVI 

THE  LOCAL  SOVIET  AT  WORK 

npHE  Vladivostok  Soviet  had  taken  power  without 
-^  shedding  a  drop  of  blood.  That  was  easy.  But 
the  task  now  facing  it  was  hard — terribly  hard  and 
complex. 

The  first  problem  to  grapple  with  was  the  eco- 
nomic. The  dislocation  of  industry  thru  war  and 
Revolution,  the  homecoming  of  the  soldiers,  and 
the  employers'  lockouts,  filled  the  streets  with  the 
workless.  The  Soviet  saw  the  menace  of  these  idle 
hands  and  started  to  open  the  factories.  The  man- 
agement was  placed  in  the  hands  of  the  working- 
men  themselves,  and  credit  was  furnished  by  the 
Soviet. 

The  leaders  voluntarily  limited  their  own  wages. 
By  decree  of  the  Central  Russian  Soviet  the  maxi- 
mum salary  of  any  Soviet  official  was  fixed  at  500 
rubles  a  month.  The  Vladivostok  commissars,  point- 
ing out  the  lower  cost  of  living  in  the  Far  East, 
scaled  theirs  down  to  300  rubles  a  month.  After  this, 
when  anyone  felt  the  itching  desire  for  a  fatter  pay- 
envelope,  he  was  liable  to  be  asked:  "Do  you  want 

228 


THE  LOCAL  SOVIET  AT  WORK      229 

more  pay  than  Lenin  or  Sukhanov?"    This  was  un- 
answerable. 


As  soon  as  the  workmen  found  the 

Soviet  Organizes     factories  in  their  hands  there  came  a 

Industry.  change  in  their  morale.     Under  Ke- 

rensky    the    tendency   was    to    elect 

lenient  foremen.    Under  their  own  government,  the 

Soviet,  they  elected  foremen  who  put  discipline  into 

the  shop  and  raised  production.     The  first  time  I 

met    Krasnoschekov^    the   head   of   the   Far    East 

Soviet,  he  was  pessimistic. 

"For  every  word  I  say  to  the  bourgeoisie  against 
their  sabotage,"  he  said,  "I  say  ten  to  the  working- 
men  against  their  slackness.  But  I  believe  a  change 
is  coming." 

WTien  I  saw  him  the  end  of  June,  1 918,  he  was  in 
happy  mood.  The  change  had  come.  Six  factories, 
he  said,  were  producing  more  than  ever  before. 

In  the  so-called  "American  Works,"  the  wheels, 
frames  and  brakes  of  cars,  shipped  from  the  United 
States,  were  assembled,  and  the  cars  sent  out  over 
the  Trans-Siberian  Railway.  These  shops  had  been 
hotbeds  of  trouble,  one  disturbance  following  on 
the  heels  of  another.  The  6,000  workmen  on  the 
payroll  had  been  turning  out  but  18  cars  a  day. 
The  Soviet  Committee  closed  the  plant  and  reor- 
ganized the  shops,  reducing  the  force  to  1,800  men. 
In  the  underframe  section,  instead  of  1,400  there 
were  now  350;  but  by  means  of  short-cuts  intro- 


230  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

duced  by  the  workers  themselves,  the  output  of 
that  department  was  increased.  Altogether,  the 
1, 800  men  on  the  new  payroll  were  now  turning 
out  12  cars  a  day — an  efficiency  increase  of  more 
than  100  per  cent  per  man. 

One  day  I  was  standing  with  Sukhanov  on  the 
hills  overlooking  the  shops.  He  was  listening  to  the 
clank  of  cranes,  and  the  stamp  of  trip-hammers  ring- 
ing up  from  the  valley. 

"That  seems  to  be  sweet  music  to  your  ears," 
I  said. 

"Yes,"  he  replied,  "the  old  Revolutionists  used  to 
make  a  noise  with  bombs.  This  is  the  noise  of  the 
new  Revolutionists,  hammering  out  the  new  social 
order." 

The  strongest  ally  of  the  Soviet  was  the  Union 
of  Miners.  It  organized  the  unemployed  into  little 
Soviets  of  50  and  100,  equipped  them,  and  sent  them 
out  to  the  mines  along  the  great  Amur,  These  enter- 
prises were  highly  successful.  Each  man  was  pan- 
ning out  from  50  to  100  rubles  of  gold  a  day.  The 
question  of  pay  arose.  One  of  the  miners  unearthed 
the  slogan:  "To  every  man  the  full  product  of  his 
labors."  It  at  once  achieved  tremendous  popularity 
with  the  miners,  who  declared  their  loyalty  to  this 
basic  Socialist  principle.  Nothing,  they  said,  could 
induce  them  to  depart  from  it. 

The  Soviet  held  a  different  view.  There  was  a 
deadlock.    Instead  of  using  the  historic  method  of 


THE  LOCAL  SOVIET  AT  WORK       231 

settling  the  dispute  by  bombs  and  troops,  the  work- 
ingmen  fought  it  out  on  the  floor  of  the  Soviet.  The 
miners  capitulated  to  the  logic  of  the  Soviet.  Their 
wages  were  fixed  at  1 5  rubles  per  day,  with  a  bonus 
for  extra  production.  In  a  short  time  twenty-six 
poods  (there  are  36  pounds  in  a  pood)  of  gold  were 
accumulated  at  headquarters.  Against  this  reserve 
the  Soviet  issued  paper  money.  The  seal  was  a  sickle 
and  a  hammer,  and  the  design  showed  a  peasant  and 
a  worker  clasping  hands,  with  the  riches  of  the  Far 
East  streaming  out  over  the  world. 

The  Soviet  fell  heir  to  a  white  elephant  in  the 
shape  of  the  ^'Military  Port."  This  was  a  huge  plant 
built  for  military  and  naval  purposes — a  monu- 
ment to  the  inefficiency  of  the  old  regime.  It  had 
carried  on  its  payroll  as  fine  a  line  of  grafting  offi- 
cials and  favorites  as  ever  decorated  an  establish- 
ment of  the  Czar.  The  barnacles  on  the  ships  of 
the  Volunteer  Fleet  were  a  consequence  of  those  on 
the  payroll.  The  Soviet  immediately  scraped  off 
these  eminent  barnacles,  but  retained  the  old  man- 
ager as  chief  technician.  The  proletarians  recog- 
nized the  necessity  of  experts  and  not  finding  them 
in  their  own  ranks,  they  were  ready  to  pay  big  sal- 
aries for  them.  The  working-class  set  out  to  buy 
brains  just  as  the  capitalists  had  always  done. 

The  Committee  shifted  the  production  of  the 
Military  Port  to  implements  of  peace.  They  intro- 
duced a  system  of  strict  accounting.    This  showed 


232  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

that  the  new  plows  and  rakes  were  being  produced  at 
higher  cost  than  the  same  articles  could  be  imported 
from  abroad.  They  then  set  to  work  to  change  the 
machinery  and  speed  it  up.  Machines  and  ships 
were  brought  in  for  repairs.  When  a  contract  was 
not  completed  at  the  end  of  the  eight-hour  day,  the 
foreman  would  state  the  condition  of  the  work  and 
the  extra  hours  required.  The  men,  taking  new 
pride  in  fast  work,  often  voted  to  stick  by  the  job, 
even  if  it  took  all  night.  With  this  went  a  vote  of 
increase  of  pay  to  the  foreman. 

Under  the  old  administration  most  of  the  workers 
lived  from  one  to  three  hours'  journey  from  the  fac- 
tory. The  Committee  started  the  building  of  new 
workers'  quarters.  Numerous  devices  were  intro- 
duced to  save  time  and  energy.  The  long  line  of 
employes,  waiting  in  turn  to  receive  their  pay  envel- 
opes, was  abolished  by  appointing  one  man  to  receive 
the  pay  for  every  two  hundred. 

Unfortunately  among  the  men  elected  was  one 
who  could  resist  everything  but  temptation.  Having 
received  the  two  hundred  pay  envelopes,  he  starte(j 
out  to  distribute  them.  Then  he  thought  better  of  it. 
No  one  knows  how  it  happened.  Some  of  the  men 
said  that  some  bourgeois  devil  must  have  whispered 
into  the  ears  of  this  weak  comrade,  and  driven  from 
his  mind  all  thought  of  his  family,  his  shop,  and  the 
Revolution.  At  any  rate  he  was  found  later  beside 
some  empty  vodka  bottles  with  his  pockets  empty. 


THE  LOCAL  SOVIET  AT  WORK      233 

too.  When  he  recovered  from  his  happiness  he  was 
brought  before  the  Shop  Committee  and  charged 
with  breach  of  revolutionary  honor  and  treason  to 
the  Military  Port. 

The  Grand  Session  of  the  Revolutionary  Tribunal 
was  held  in  the  main  shop,  with  1 50  men  on  the  jury. 
The  verdict  was  "Guilty!"  The  jury  was  asked  to 
vote  on  one  of  the  three  following  sentences:  (i) 
Summary  dismissal.  (2)  Dismissal,  with  wages  to 
his  wife  and  children  continued.  (3)  Pardon  and 
reinstatement. 

Proposition  number  two  was  carried,  thus  attach- 
ing a  definite  stigma  to  the  culprit's  dereliction,  but 
at  the  same  time  saving  his  family  from  hardship. 
This  did  not  bring  back  the  money  to  the  unfortu- 
nate two  hundred,  so  the  fifteen  hundred  voted  to 
divide  among  themselves  the  loss  of  the  two 
hundred. 

In  their  new  experiments  the  workingmen  made 
many  costly  blunders.  But  their  verdict  upon  the 
Soviet  as  a  whole  was  that  it  had  made  good. 
Toward  the  mistakes  of  the  Soviet  they  took  the 
same  attitude  a  man  takes  toward  his  own  mis- 
takes— a  very  lenient  one. 

Out  of  their  experience  the  workers  gained  confi- 
dence. They  found  that  they  could  organize  in- 
dustry; they  found  they  could  increase  production, 
and  with  the  Soviet  daily  entrenching  itself  in  the 
economic  field  they  began  to  fell  a  sense  of  elation. 
They  would  have  been  still  more  elated  had  it  not 


234  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

been  for  their  enemies,  constantly  launching  fresh 
attacks  against  the  Soviet. 

As  soon  as  the  shops  were  running 
Soviet  Organizes  well,  the  men  would  have  to  drop  tools 
an  Army.  and  take  up  rifles;  the  railroads,  in- 

stead of  carrying  food  and  imple- 
ments, had  to  carry  ammunition  and  troops.  The 
workmen,  instead  of  strengthening  the  new  institu- 
tions, had  to  rally  to  defend  the  ground  on  which 
they  stood. 

Raids  were  continually  directed  against  the  fron- 
tiers of  the  workingmen's  republic.  As  soon  as  the' 
enemy  broke  thru  the  cry  went  up  "The  Socialist 
Fatherland  is  in  danger!"  Into  every  village  and 
factory  hurried  the  call  to  arms.  Each  formed  its 
little  detachment,  and  along  the  roads  and  trails 
they  marched  up  into  the  Manchurian  Mountains, 
singing  revolutionary  hymns,  and  folk  songs  of  the 
village.  Poorly  equipped  and  poorly  fed,  they 
advanced  to  pit  themselves  against  a  merciless,  well- 
equipped  foe.  Just  as  Americans  today  cherish  the 
memory  of  the  tattered  barefoot  troops  of  Washing- 
ton, who  left  their  blood-stained  prints  on  the  snows 
of  Valley  Forge,  so  in  the  future  Russians  will 
thrill  to  the  story  of  those  first  ragged  groups  of 
Red  Guards  who,  at  the  call  of  danger,  grasped  their 
guns  and  went  forth  to  the  defense  of  the  Soviet 
Republic. 

Beside  the  Red  Guards  were  rising  the  units  of  the 


^3 
C 

a 

O 


•  -  .2 


rr 

w 

«) 

f^ 

CJ 

1 

M 

o 

i- 

rrt 

1- 

rt 

\r. 

& 

P    rt 


One  of  the  terrible  Red  Guards.       I  spent  several  days  with  this  band  of  700 
peasants  fighting  against  the  Whites  "  For  Land  and  Freedom." 


THE  LOCAL  SOVIET  AT  WORK      235 

new  Red  Army.  It  was  an  International  Army.  All 
peoples  were  represented,  including  platoons  of 
Czechs  and  Koreans.  Around  the  camp-fire  the 
Koreans  would  say:  "We  will  fight  for  you  now, 
for  your  liberty:  some  day  you  will  fight  with  us 
against  Japan  for  our  liberty."  Among  the  officers 
were  the  Czech  Captain  Murovsky,  Lenin's  nephew 
Popov,  and  Abramov,  who  had  served  two  years  with 
the  British. 

In  discipHne  the  Red  troops  were  inferior  to  the 
regular  national  armies.  But  they  had  an  elan  which 
the  others  lacked.  I  talked  much  with  these  peasants 
and  workers,  who  for  weeks  had  been  lying  out  on 
the  rain-drenched  hillsides. 

"Who  made  you  come,  and  what  keeps  you  here?" 
I  asked. 

"Well — millions  of  us  dark  people  had  to  go  out 
and  die  for  the  government  of  the  Czar  in  the  old 
days,"  they  replied.  "Surely  we  should  be  cowards 
if  we  didn't  go  out  and  fight  for  a  government  that 
is  all  our  own!" 

There  were  certain  gentlemen  who  didn't  have 
this  view  of  the  Soviet.  Quite  the  opposite.  They 
wanted  the  Russian  peasants  and  workers  to  have 
a  very  different  sort  of  government.  In  fact  they 
themselves  claimed  to  be  the  one  true  and  only 
government  of  Russia. 

In  grandiose  phraseology  they  laid  claim  to  sov- 
ereignty over  the  territory  extending  from  the  Golden 
Horn  of  the  Far  East  to  the  Finnish  Bay  in  the 


236  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

West,  and  from  the  White  Sea  in  the  north  to  the 
Black  Sea  on  the  south.  While  these  gentlemen  were 
not  very  modest,  they  were  most  discreet.  They 
did  not  set  foot  upon  any  of  their  vast  domains. 
Had  they  ventured  to  do  so  they  would  have  been 
locked  up  as  common  criminals,  by  the  government 
really  functioning — the  Soviet. 

From  the  safe  confines  of  Manchuria  they  issued 
their  glowing  manifestos.  There  all  the  conspiracies 
against  the  Soviet  were  hatched.  After  the  defeat  of 
Kaledin,  the  Counter-Revolutionists,  egged  on  by 
foreign  capital,  put  their  hopes  in  the  Cossack 
Semyonov.  Under  him  were  organized  regiments 
of  Hun-Huz  bandits,  Japanese  mercenaries,  and 
monarchists  rounded  up  from  ports  down  along  the 
Chinese  coast. 

Semyonov  declared  that  with  an  iron  fist  he  was 
going  to  drive  decency  and  common  sense  into  the 
Bolsheviks.  He  announced  his  objective  as  the 
Urals,  4,000  miles  away,  then  a  descent  upon  the 
Muscovite  plain,  with  Petrograd  opening  its  gates, 
and  the  whole  countryside  rising  up  to  welcome  him. 

Raising  his  standards  amid  great  plaudits  from 
the  bourgeoisie,  he  crossed  over  into  the  Siberian 
border  twice,  and  twice  came  hurtling  back  again. 
The  people  did  rise  up  to  meet  him.  Not  with 
flowers,  however,  but  with  guns  and  axes  and  pitch- 
forks. 

The  Vladivostok  workers  helped  in  this  defeat  of 
Semyonov.      After    five    weeks    they    came    back 


THE  LOCAL  SOVIET  AT  WORK      237 

bronzed,  tattered  and  foot-sore.  But  they  came  back 
victors.  The  working-class  turned  out  to  acclaim 
their  fellow-proletarians  in  arms.  There  were  flow- 
ers, speeches  and  a  triumphal  march  thru  the  city. 
This  victory  put  great  elation  in  their  hearts.  But 
not  in  the  hearts  of  the  bourgeois  and  Allied  on- 
lookers. It  was  evident  that  in  the  military  field 
the  Soviet  was  growing  stronger. 

In  the  realm  of  culture  the  creative 
Soviet  Educates  force  of  the  Revolution  succeeded  in 
the  People.  establishing    a    People's    University, 

three  workmen's  theatres  and  two 
daily  papers.  The  Peasant  and  Worker  was  the  offi- 
cial Soviet  organ.  It  featured  an  English  depart- 
ment edited  by  Jerome  Lifschiz,  a  young  Russian- 
American.  The  Red  Banner,  the  Communist  Party 
organ,  carried  long  academic  articles.  Neither  was 
a  masterpiece  of  journaHsm,  but  both  were  voices  of 
the  inarticulate  masses,  reaching  out  for  the  things 
of  the  mind  and  spirit. 

While  the  Revolution  was  primarily  a  drive  for 
land,  and  bread,  and  peace,  it  was  more  than  that. 
I  remember  a  session  of  the  Vladivostok  Soviet, 
when  one  of  the  Right  was  making  a  furious  attack 
upon  the  Soviet,  scoring  the  cutting  down  of  food 
rations: 

"The  Bolsheviks  promised  you  lots  of  things,  but 
they  didn't  give  them  to  you,  did  they?  They  prom- 
ised you  bread,  but  where  is  it?    Where  is  the  bread 


238  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

that  .  .  .  ?"  The  words  of  the  speaker  were 
drowned  in  a  storm  of  whistles  and  hisses. 

Man  does  not  live  by  bread  alone.  Neither  does 
the  Soviet  live  by  satisfying  merely  the  hunger  of  the 
stomach,  but  the  hunger  of  the  spirit. 

All  men  crave  fellowship.  "For  fellowship  is 
heaven,  and  lack  of  it  is  hell,"  said  John  Ball  to  the 
English  peasants  in  the  fourteenth  century.  The 
Soviet  was  like  a  great  family  in  which  the  lowest 
man  was  made  to  feel  his  human  worth. 

All  men  crave  power.  In  the  Soviet,  workingmen 
felt  the  joy  of  being  arbiters  of  their  own  destiny, 
masters  over  a  vast  domain.  A  workingman  is  like 
any  other  human  being.  Having  tasted  power  he  is 
loth  to  let  it  go. 

All  men  crave  adventure.  In  the  Soviet  men  em- 
barked upon  a  supreme  adventure — the  quest  for  a 
new  society  based  on  justice,  the  building  of  the 
world  anew. 

All  men  have  a  spiritual  passion.  It  needs  only  to 
be  aroused.  The  Revolution  stirred  up  even  the  dull, 
complacent  peasant.  It  gave  him  the  impulse  to  read 
and  write.  One  day  an  old  mujik  appeared  in  the 
Children's  School. 

"Children,  these  hands  cannot  write,"  he  said, 
holding  them  up,  toilworn  and  calloused,  "they  can- 
not write  because  the  only  thing  the  Czar  wanted 
them  for  was  to  plough."  As  the  tears  flowed  down 
his  cheeks  he  said,  "But  you,  the  children  of  a  new 


THE  LOCAL  SOVIET  AT  WORK      239 

Russia,  you  can  learn  to  write.    Oh,  that  I  might 
begin  again  as  a  child  in  our  new  Russia!" 

The  workingmen  had  captured  the  ship 
Workingnien  as  of  state.  Now  they  had  to  steer  it 
Diplomats.  along  a  labyrinthine  channel,  thru  un- 

charted waters,  the  Allies  constantly 
striving  to  sink  it  on  the  rocks. 

Rebuffed  by  the  Allied  consuls,  the  Soviet  turned 
to  China  with  overtures  of  friendship.  The  Chinese 
had  been  so  atrociously  treated  by  the  Czar  that 
they  could  not  understand  any  Russian  government 
addressing  them  in  a  kindly  manner.  They  thought 
it  was  a  new  species  of  trickery.  But  the  Soviet 
backed  its  fair  words  with  fair  deeds.  Chinese  citi- 
zens were  placed  upon  the  same  footing  as 
other  foreigners.  Chinese  boats  were  allowed  to 
ply  upon  the  rivers.  The  Chinese  began  to  feel 
that  a  Russian  government  looked  upon  them  not 
as  an  inferior  race,  to  be  cursed  and  bled,  but  as 
human  beings.  They  sent  their  emissaries  to  the 
Red  Army,  saying; 

"We  know  that  we  have  no  right  to  allow  the 
cut- throats  and  adventurers  of  Semyonov  to  mobilize 
upon  our  territory.  We  know  that  the  Allies  have 
no  right  to  make  us  put  an  embargo  against  you. 
We  want  our  foodstuffs  to  go  to  Russian  workmen 
and  peasants." 

A  general  conference  was  held  in  June  at  the 
frontier  in  Grodekovo.    The  Chinese  were  greeted 


240  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

in  their  own  language  by  Tunganogi,  a  daring  bril- 
liant lad  of  2 1,  the  incarnation  of  the  spirit  of  young, 
revolutionary  Russia.  The  delegates  of  these  two 
races,  representing  one-third  of  the  population  of 
the  globe,  sat  down  together  to  work  out  the  prob- 
lem of  living  together  in  peace  and  co-operation. 

It  was  not  a  Versailles  Conference  of  old  men 
cooped  up  in  a  gilded  chamber:  crafty,  suspicious, 
duelling  with  words  and  phrases.  These  were  young 
men,  open-minded  and  open-hearted,  meeting  under 
the  open  sky  in  brotherhood.  Yet  it  was  not  a  welter 
of  emotion  in  which  reality  was  lost.  They  faced 
the  issues  squarely:  the  danger  of  swamping  Russia 
with  a  yellow  tide,  the  lower  standard  of  coolie  labor, 
etc.  But  it  was  all  done  frankly,  generously,  fra- 
ternally. As  Krasnoschekov,  chairman  of  the  Rus- 
sian delegation,  said: 

"The  Chinese  and  Russian  masses  are  true  chil- 
dren of  Nature,  uncorrupted  by  the  vices  of  West- 
ern civilization,  unversed  in  diplomatic  deceit  and 
intrigue." 

Yet,  on  this  very  day,  while  delegates  from  these 
two  great  child  races  were  reaching  out  to  one 
another  in  an  effort  for  mutual  understanding,  the 
foreign  diplomats — behind  their  backs — in  Harbin 
and  Vladivostok,  were  plotting  to  hurl  these  two 
peoples  at  each  other's  throats.  They  were  plan- 
ning to  use  Chinese  troops  in  a  raid  upon  Siberia, 
and  to  smash  the  Soviets. 


PART  IV 

THE  TRIUMPH  OF  THE 
REVOLUTION 


THE   SOVIETS   AGAINST   THE   CAPITALIST 
WORLD 


CHAPTER  XVII 

THE  ALLIES  CRUSH  THE  SOVIET 

TX7"HY  this  animus  of  the  Allies  against  the  So- 
"  ^  viets?  Why  not  regard  Russia  as  a  vast  lab- 
oratory experiment?"  someone  once  asked  an  Ameri- 
can banker.  ''Why  not  let  these  visionaries  try  out 
their  socialistic  schemes?  When  their  dream  be- 
comes a  nightmare,  when  their  Utopia  collapses,  you 
can  point  to  it  always  as  an  example  of  the  horrible 
failure  of  Socialism." 

"Very  good,"  was  the  reply,  "but  supposing  it  isn't 
a  failure?    Then  where  are  we?" 

Failure  is  what  the  Allies  prayed  for,  and  eager- 
eyed,  they  watched  for  Soviet  collapse.  But  it  did 
not  come.  It  was  precisely  this  that  enraged  the 
Allies.  The  Soviet  was  showing  signs  of  success. 
It  was  creating  not  disorder,  but  order — not  chaos, 
but  organization.  It  was  entrenching  itself  in  the 
economic  and  military  fields.  In  the  cultural  and 
diplomatic  fields  it  was  pressing  forward.  Every- 
where it  was  consolidating  its  gains. 

The  Soviet  stood  straight  across  the  pathway  of 
the  Imperialists.  If  it  continued  to  grow  in  power 
their  plans  would  be  completely  shattered.     They 

243 


244  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

could  no  longer  hope  for  a  free  hand  in  the  exploita- 
tion of  the  immense  resources  of  Russia.* 

So  the  crushing  of  the  Soviet  was  decreed.  Now, 
before  it  should  become  too  strong  and  lusty,  it  must 
be  smashed. 

The  Czecho-Slovaks  were  the  in- 

Counter-Revolution      strument  chosen  to  administer  the 

Uses  the  Czechs.  death-blow.       Unwittingly     they 

were    being    groomed    by    their 

French  officers  for  this  job.     Regiments  of  these 

seasoned  troops  were  strategically  strung  out  along 

the  Trans-Siberian  line.    Vladivostok  held  1 7,000  of 

them  armed,  fed,  and  transported  hither  by  grace 

of  the  Soviets. 

The  French  said  that  transports  were  coming  to 
take  them  to  the  Western  battle-front.  Week  after 
week  it  was  announced  that  the  boats  were  on  the 
way.  But  no  ships  came.  The  French  had  never 
intended  to  ship  the  Czechs  away.  They  intended  to 
use  them  here  in  Siberia  to  smash  the  Soviet. 

The  Czechs  were  already  restless,  fretting  with 
inaction.  They  had  a  deep  hereditary  hatred  of  the 
Austro-Germans.    The  French  told  them  that  there 

*  "What  we  are  witnessing  now  in  Russia  is  the  opening  of  a 
great  struggle  for  her  immeasurable  raw  materials." — Russia,  the 
magazine  of  Anglo-Russian  finance,  May,  1918. 

"In  the  city  events  are  shaping  more  and  more  towards  an 
international  suzerainty  over  Russia  modelled  on  the  British  plan 
in  Egypt.  Such  an  event  would  transform  Russian  bonds  into 
the  cream  of  the  international  market." — London  Financial  News, 
November,  19 18. 


THE  ALLIES  CRUSH  THE  SOVIET   245 

were  tens  of  thousands  of  Austro- Germans  in  the 
Red  Army.  Adroitly  playing  upon  their  patriotism, 
the  French  pictured  the  Soviets  as  friends  of  the 
Austro-Germans,  and  enemies  of  the  Czechs.  So 
they  engineered  friction,  and  got  them  ready  for 
the  assault  upon  the  Soviets.  The  methods  of  attack 
were  adapted  to  the  place. 

Here  in  Vladivostok  surprise  was  deemed  essential. 
The  plan  was  to  get  the  Soviet  off  guard,  and  then 
spring  a  sudden  coup.  To  do  this  the  Soviets  must 
be  hoodwinked  with  a  show  of  friendship.  This 
business  was  delegated  to  the  British.  Dropping 
their  hostile  front,  they  assumed  toward  the  Bol- 
sheviks an  attitude  of  amiabihty. 

With  frank,  engaging  air  the  Consul  confessed 
to  a  former  antagonism  to  the  Soviets,  and  the  back- 
ing of  Semyonov.  Now  that  the  Soviet  had  proved 
its  right  to  live,  the  British  would  lend  their  aid. 
To  begin  with,  they  would  cooperate  in  the  importa- 
tion of  machinery.  Following  this,  on  Friday  after- 
noon, June  28th,  1 91 8,  two  genial  officials  called 
to  present  their  respects  to  Sukhanov,  bringing  the 
information  that  wireless  messages  received  on 
H.  M.  S.  Suffolk  would  be  daily  handed  to  the  So- 
viet for  publication  in  its  papers. 

The  editors,  particularly  Jerome,  were  jubilant. 
They  came  down  to  Russian  Island,  urging  me  to 
come  up  and  celebrate  the  capitulation  of  the  Allies. 
Good  reason  for  their  rapture !  It  had  been  a  hard- 
up-hill  pull,  plodding  thru  the  murk  and  the  night. 


246  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

Now  suddenly  the  clouds  break,  and  the  sky  shines 
blue. 

Next  morning  at  eight-thirty  a  thunderbolt  comes 
out  of  the  blue!  It  strikes  Sukhanov,  sitting  in  his 
Soviet  office.  It  is  an  ultimatum  in  the  name  of  the 
Czechs.  It  calls  for  the  unconditional  surrender  of 
the  Soviet.  All  offices  are  to  be  evacuated.  All  sol- 
diers are  to  proceed  to  the  High  School  field,  and 
lay  down  their  arms.  The  time  limit  is  thirty 
minutes. 

Sukhanov,  rushing  to  Czech  headquarters,  begs 
for  permission  to  call  the  Soviet  together. 

"Certainly,  if  you  can  do  it  in  half  an  hour," 
coolly  replies  the  Czech  commander. 

As  Sukhanov  turns  to  leave,  he  is  placed  under 
arrest. 

All  this  goes  on  behind  the  scenes.  The  city  re- 
mains in  the  dark.  One  or  two  commissars  only 
have  a  hint  of  the  tragedy  now  so  imminent.  On 
Svetlanskaya,  near  the  Red  Fleet  Building,  I  meet 
Preminsky  having  his  shoes  blacked. 

"Getting  all  shined  up  early  in  the  morning,"  I 
say. 

"Yes,"  he  replies  casually,  lighting  a  cigarette. 
"In  a  few  minutes  I  may  be  dangling  from  a  lamp- 
post, and  I  want  to  be  as  nice  looking  a  corpse  as 
possible."    I  stare  at  him  wondering,  quizzical. 

"Our  days  are  done  for,"  he  explained,  still  non- 
chalant and  smiling,  "The  Czechs  are  taking  over 
the  city." 


THE  ALLIES  CRUSH  THE  SOVIET   247 

Even  as  he  speaks  the  end  of  the  street  is  filling 
with  troops.  So  are  the  side-streets.  In  all  quar- 
ters soldiers  are  moving,  in  boats  from  across  the 
bay,  in  launches  from  the  battleships.  Down  from 
the  hill  above  and  up  from  the  piers  below,  like  a 
dense  fog  the  army  of  Interventionists  rolls  in  upon 
the  city.  The  open  spaces  are  seething  with  sol- 
diery, heavily  armed,  loaded  with  grenades,  huge 
ominous-looking  things.  Enough  explosives  to  pul- 
verize the  whole  city! 

The  occupation  proceeds  swiftly,  like  clock-work, 
according  to  plan. 

The  Japanese  seize  the  powder-magazine,  the 
British  the  railroad  station.  The  Americans  throw 
a  cordon  around  the  consulate.  The  Chinese  and 
others  take  up  lesser  points.  The  Czechs  converge 
upon  the  Soviet  building.  They  encircle  it  from  all 
sides.  With  a  loud  "Hurrah," — they  rush  forward, 
and  go  crashing  thru  the  doors.  The  Red  Flag  of 
the  Socialist  Republic  is  pulled  down,  and  the  red, 
white  and  blue  flag  of  autocracy  is  run  up.  Vladi- 
vostok passes  into  the  hands  of  the  Imperialists. 

"The  Soviet  has  fallen,"  a  hoarse  shout  goes  up 
in  the  street,  and  runs  like  wildfire  thru  the  city. 
The  patrons  of  the  Olympia  Cafe,  rushing  out  into 
the  street,  burst  into  yells,  flinging  up  their  hats, 
cheering  the  Czechs.  The  Soviet  and  all  its  works 
is  a  cursed  thing  to  them.  It  is  fallen.  But  that 
is  not  enough.  They  would  obliterate  every  trace 
of  it. 


248  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

Before  them,  wrought  out  in  flower-beds  edged 
with  stone,  is  the  design  which  spells  soviet  of 
workmen's  deputies.  Vaulting  the  iron  fence,  they 
kick  away  the  stones,  stamp  thru  the  flowers,  plung- 
ing their  hands  deep  into  the  soil  in  order  to  ex- 
tirpate the  last  root  and  vestige  of  the  odious  symbol. 

Their  blood  is  up  now.  Their  appetites  are 
whetted.  They  want  something  animate  to  vent 
their  rage  upon. 

Spying  me  in  the  throng,  they 
The  Bourgeois  Cry       raise  a  great  hue  and  cry: 
j or  Reprisals.  "Immigrant!  Swine!"  (Ameri- 

kanskaya  Svoloch)  they  yell. 
"Kill  him!  Choke  him!  Hang  him!"  The  mob 
of  speculators  converges  on  me,  brandishing  fists 
and  cursing. 

But  the  ring  of  men  forming  next  to  me  makes  no 
attempt  to  lay  hands  on  me.  Why,  I  wonder?  They 
are  partisans  of  the  Soviet.  Seeing  my  peril,  they 
have  wormed  their  way  in  between  me  and  these 
would-be  lynchers,  forming  a  kind  of  protective 
pocket. 

A  low  voice  whispers,  "Head  for  the  Red  Fleet 
Building.  Walk,  don't  run."  Pushed  and  jostled 
by  the  crowd  behind,  I  steer  my  course  toward  the 
Red  Fleet  Building.  Opposite  its  portal  I  hear 
the  word  "Run!"  I  slip  thru  the  door,  and  escape 
in  its  labyrinths,  leaving  my  pursuers  disputing  with 
the  Czechs  below. 


THE  ALLIES  CRUSH  THE  SOVIET  249 

In  the  front  of  the  building  I  find  a  third  story 
window  that  overlooks  the  city.  From  this  vantage- 
point  I  can  see  and  still  be  unseen.  Up  and  down  be- 
low me  stretches  Svetlanskaya,  boiling  now  like  a 
cauldron.  This  street,  which  twenty  minutes  earlier 
had  been  so  placid  in  the  shining  morning  sun,  is 
now  a  riot  of  people  and  color  and  sound.  Blue- 
jacketed  Japs  in  white  puttees,  English  marines  with 
the  Union  Jack,  khaki-clad  Czechs,  with  green  and 
white,  marching  and  counter-marching,  cut  currents 
thru  the  eddying  throng,  each  moment  growing 
greater. 

Thru  the  bourgeois  quarters  the  glad  tiding  "The 
Soviet  has  fallen"  spreads  with  magic  swiftness. 
From  boudoir,  cafe,  and  parlor,  in  silks  and  smiles, 
they  hasten  forth  to  celebrate.  Svetlanskaya  be- 
comes a  grand  promenade,  brightly  splashed  with 
gay  plumes  and  petticoats  and  parasols. 

Some  of  the  toilettes  are  elaborate.  Fortunate 
ladies!  Tipped  off  in  advance  they  had  time  to 
adorn  themselves.  The  officers,  too,  blossom  out  in 
full  regalia — gold  braid  and  epaulets,  jangling  spurs 
— and  much  saluting.  They  make  escorts  for  the 
ladies,  or  form  into  marching  squads.  There  are 
hundreds  of  them.  One  wonders  how  Vladivostok 
could  have  held  so  many. 

And  so  many  bourgeois!  Well-kept,  rotund 
gentlemen  with  avoirdupois  enough  to  qualify  as 
cartoons  of  themselves.  They  hail  each  other,  faces 
beaming,  clasping  one  another's  hands,  embracing 


2  50  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

and  kissing,  exclaiming  ''The  Soviet  is  fallen"  as  tho 
it  were  an  Easter  greeting.  Two  big  fat  chinovniks, 
almost  apoplectic  with  joy,  try  to  fall  upon  one 
another's  bosom,  but  their  expansive  abdomens  are 
in  the  way.  In  their  efforts  to  embrace,  clutching 
at  one  another,  they  bid  fair  to  burst  themselves. 

With  incredible  swiftness  a  complete  change 
passes  over  this  city  of  the  proletarians.  It  be- 
comes a  city  of  the  well-fed  and  well-groomed,  their 
shining  faces  exultant,  congratulating  one  another, 
praising  God  and  the  Allies,  and  cheering  the 
Czechs, 

Poor  Czechs!  These  cheers  embarrass  and 
mortify  them.  Their  heads  hang  in  shame,  meet- 
ing a  Russian  workingman.  Some  indeed  refuse 
point-blank  to  go  into  this  garroting  of  a  work- 
ingman's  government.  None  of  them  relish  the  job 
of  crucifying  other  workmen  to  make  a  carnival 
for  the  bourgeoisie.  And  the  bourgeoisie  want  more 
than  a  holiday  with  bands  and  streamers.  They  want 
a  Roman  holiday  with  blood  and  victims.  They  want 
vengeance  and  retribution  on  these  workmen  who 
have  forgotten  their  station  in  life. 

"Now,  we  will  put  them  in  their  proper  places," 
they  exclaim.  "We  will  put  them  on  the  lamp-posts. 
It's  red  these  birds  admire,  is  it?  Very  well,  we 
shall  give  them  all  they  want  of  their  favorite  color. 
We'll  draw  it  from  their  veins ! " 

They  urge  the  Czechs  to  violence.  They  want  a 
part  in  it  themselves.    They  point  out  the  foremost 


THE  ALLIES  CRUSH  THE  SOVIET    251 

workmen  and  denounce  them.  They  know  where 
the  commissars  are  to  be  found,  and  lead  the  way 
into  office  and  workshop. 

Very  busy  also  is  a  crew  of  rat-faced,  swart-faced 
creatures — spies,  provocators  and  pogromists  of  the 
old  regime.  Swarming  out  of  their  holes  and  now 
come  into  their  own  again,  they  seek  by  excesses 
against  the  Bolsheviks  to  ingratiate  themselves  with 
the  bourgeoisie.  Like  weasels  they  penetrate  every- 
where, even  into  the  building  where  I  am. 

Suddenly  screams,  curses,  and  the  sound  of  pound- 
ing feet  break  out  on  the  stairs  above.  Four  men 
invading  the  party-offices  on  the  top-floor  have  laid 
hold  of  Zoya.  Single-handed  she  resists  them,  fight- 
ing back  every  inch  of  the  way.  By  twisting  her 
arms,  pummeling  and  pushing  her,  they  drag  her 
down  into  the  street  and  march  her  off  to  prison. 
Such  scenes  are  repeated  thruout  the  city.  Com- 
missars and  workmen  are  busy  at  their  tasks  in 
office,  shop  and  bank.  The  doors  are  flung  open. 
They  are  pounced  upon,  and  dragged  out  into  the 
highway. 

Thru  the  center  of  the  highway  a  narrow  lane  is 
opened.  Thru  this  channel,  the  captives,  manacled 
or  gripped  by  their  captors,  are  prodded  along  by 
revolver-butt,  and  bayonet-point.  Hoots,  jeers  and 
catcalls  ring  in  their  ears.  Clenched  fists  are  thrust 
in  their  faces.  Some  are  spat  upon  and  beaten  by 
the  mob  which  surges  into  the  passageway  blocking 
their  progress. 


2  52  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

An  extra  outburst  of  rage  breaks  on  the  head  of 
the  Commissar  of  Banks.  He  has  touched  them 
directly  in  their  vital  center — their  pocket-nerve. 
They  yell,  and  hoot,  and  would  tear  him  limb  from 
limb.  A  white  flannelled  gentleman,  red-faced  with 
fury,  breaks  thru  the  Czech  guards,  brandishing  a 
revolver,  grabs  the  commissar  by  his  arms,  and 
stalks  on  beside  him,  howling  like  an  Indian. 

One  by  one  the  commissars  are  shoved  along  this 
corridor  of  scowling  faces,  derisive  and  hate-con- 
torted. Their  own  faces  by  contrast  are  strangely 
serene  and  calm.  Some  are  pallid,  but  on  the  whole 
they  are  dauntless,  almost  debonair.  They  are  alert, 
terribly  interested  in  everything.  These  men  have 
tasted  life.  They  have  run  its  gamut,  from  prison- 
dungeons  to  high  affairs  of  state.  So  many  ad- 
ventures have  been  theirs.  What  new  surprise  lies 
before  them  around  the  turning?  The  most  thrilling 
of  all,  perhaps  the  final  one.  If  so,  let  it  come. 
Death  has  little  terror  for  them.  Long  ago  when 
they  gave  themselves  to  the  Revolution,  that  matter 
was  disposed  of.  Then  they  put  all  they  had,  their 
lives  included,  into  its  keeping. 

They  were  conscripts  of  the  Revolution.  When  it 
called — they  came.  Where  it  sent  them — they  went. 
What  it  exacted — they  performed,  obedient,  unques- 
tioning. Under  the  Czar,  the  Revolution  had  called 
them  to  the  task  of  agitators.  Under  the  Soviet  it 
drafted  them  to  the  post  of  commissars.  At  the  call 
of  the  Revolution  they  had  yielded  up  leisure,  com- 


THE  ALLIES  CRUSH  THE  SOVIET    253 

fort,  health,  and  found  joy  therein.  Now  they  were 
being  summoned  to  yield  up  their  lives.  In  the 
supreme  sacrij5ce  might  they  not  find  the  supreme 

joy? 

All  this  was  certainly  written  upon  the  face  of 
Melnikov.  Thru  this  thunderstorm  of  foes — hiss- 
ing, roaring,  and  howling — he  came  smiling  thru 
like  a  shaft  of  sunshine.  Svetlanskaya  means  "The 
Lighted  Way."  Always  for  me  it  will  be  lit  with  the 
countenance  of  this  workingman.  About  him  there 
was  something  celestial,  transcendent.  Climbing  up 
the  hill,  buffeted,  jeered  and  spat  upon,  he  was 
strangely  like  the  figure  of  another  Workingman, 
toiling  thru  another  hostile  multitude,  up  another  hill 
• — long  ago. 

Only  this  was  no  "Via  Dolorosa."  It  was  a  "Way 
of  Triumph,"  with  Melnikov  coming  up  like  a  con- 
queror. His  face  was  wreathed  in  smiles.  His 
sparkling  eyes  were  still  more  sparkhng,  his  features 
more  radiant  than  ever.  A  hoarse  voice  shouted 
"Scoundrel!  Hang  him!"  Melnikov  only  smiled. 
A  heavy  fist  struck  him  in  the  cheek.  He  smiled 
again.  It  was  the  smile  of  one  lifted  above  the  base 
passions  of  the  mob,  far  beyond  reach  of  its  blows 
and  jeers.  It  was  a  smile  of  pity  for  the  haters. 
Could  Melnikov  have  been  aware  of  the  power  in 
that  smile?  The  silent  conquests  it  made  that  day 
in  the  hearts  of  his  beholders?  It  was  a  magnet 
drawing  the  hesitant  and  wavering,  into  the  camp  of 
the  Revolution.    At  the  same  time  it  was  a  sword. 


•  2  54  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

wreaking  havoc  in  the  camp  of  the  Counter-Revolu- 
tionists. 

They  could  not  abide  this  smile  of  Melnikov  and 
the  laugh  of  Sukhanov.  They  were  irritated  and 
haunted  by  them.  The  bourgeoisie  would  have  liked 
to  strike  these  young  men  dead  in  the  streets.  But 
they  did  not  dare  do  it — ^yet.  The  commissars  were 
not  killed  but  jailed. 

The  Allies  for  the  present  are  against  any 
The  Soviet  Is  wholesale  massacre  of  the  workers.  They 
Submerged.  are  anxious  to  make  intervention  appear 
in  the  guise  of  a  crusade  for  democracy, 
welcomed  by  all  the  people.  Not  yet  has  it  un- 
masked itself  as  stark  Czaristic  reaction.  Vladi- 
vostok, in  the  Allied  plan,  is  to  be  the  foothold  for 
the  spring  upon  Siberia.  They  do  not  want  that 
foothold  too  slippery  with  blood.  In  the  hinterland, 
in  the  back  regions  of  Siberia,  peasants'  and  workers' 
blood  may  flow  in  torrents.  But  not  in  this  seaport 
town,  exposed  before  the  eyes  of  the  world.  A  few 
Red  Guards  and  workers  are  shot  down  in  their 
tracks.  But  there  is  no  general  blood-spilling.  The 
suddenness  of  the  onslaught,  the  overwhelming 
masses  of  troops,  have  smothered  the  Soviet. 

At  one  point  only  did  the  Soviet  forces  have  a 
chance  to  rally.  That  was  near  the  water-front, 
the  rendezvous  of  the  gruzchiki,  longshoremen, 
stevedores,  coal-heavers,  loaders  of  ships.  They 
were  of  peasant  origin,  huge  shaggy  fellows,  heavy- 


THE  ALLIES  CRUSH  THE  SOVIET    255 

muscled  for  their  heavy  work.  The  intricate  prob- 
lems of  state  and  politics  they  did  not  comprehend. 
But  one  simple  fact  they  did  comprehend.  Whereas 
once  they  were  slaves,  now  they  were  free!  From 
the  status  of  beasts  they  had  been  raised  to  the 
status  of  men.  And  they  knew  that  the  Soviet  had 
done  this. 

Now  they  see  the  Soviet  in  peril.  Rushing  into 
the  nearby  Red  Staff  Building,  they  bolt  and  bar 
the  doors,  and  barricade  the  windows,  taking  their 
posts,  rifles  in  hand,  ready  for  the  assault.  At  all 
costs  they  will  hold  this  ground  for  the  Soviet. 

The  odds  against  them  are  one  hundred  to  one. 
Two  hundred  freight-handlers  pitted  against  twenty 
thousand  seasoned  troops.  Revolvers  against  ma- 
chine-guns. Rifles  against  cannon.  But  on  the  side 
of  this  garrison  of  gruzchiki  is  the  flame  of  the 
Revolution.  It  has  fired  the  spirits  of  these  coal- 
heavers,  outwardly  so  gross  and  sluggish.  They  grow 
fearless,  swift,  and  daring.  All  afternoon  the  ring 
of  steel  and  flame  around  them  grows  denser  and 
closer.  They  watch  it  undaunted,  refusing  every 
call  to  capitulate.  And  as  night  begins  to  fall,  their 
guns  are  still  blazing  from  the  windows. 

In  the  shadows  a  Czech  crawls  close  up,  and 
hurls  an  incendiary  bomb  thru  a  window  of  the 
building,  setting  it  afire.  The  citadel  of  the  long- 
shoremen threatens  now  to  become  a  funeral-pyre. 
Enveloped  in  flame  and  smoke  they  grope  and 
Stumble  into  the  street,  hands  raised  in  surrender. 


2S6  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

Some  are  slaughtered,  some  are  clubbed  into  insen- 
sibility.   The  rest  are  marched  away  to  prison. 

Resistance  is  crushed.  The  Soviet  is  annihilated. 
The  Allies  congratulate  themselves  upon  the  success 
of  the  coup.  The  bourgeoisie  are  in  transports  of 
delight.  Lights  flame  from  the  windows  of  the  great 
houses  and  restaurants.  From  the  cafes  come 
snatches  of  song,  and  the  throb  of  the  orchestra. 
The  merrymakers  are  laughing,  dancing,  cheering 
the  Allied  uniforms.  From  the  churches  breaks 
forth  the  clanging,  chiming,  pealing,  booming  music 
of  the  bells — the  priests  within  offering  up  prayers 
for  the  Czar.  From  the  decks  of  the  battleships  the 
bugles  call  across  the  waters  of  the  bay.  The  city 
gives  itself  up  to  revelry  and  rejoicing. 

But  not  in  the  workingmen's  quarters.  There  is 
silence,  broken  only  by  the  sobbing  of  women.  Be- 
hind drawn  curtains  they  are  laying  out  their  slain. 
From  a  nearby  shed  comes  the  sound  of  hammering. 
The  men  are  joining  rough  planks  together,  making 
coffins  for  their  comrade  dead. 


CHAPTER   XVIII 

THE  RED  FUNERAL 

TT  was  the  Fourth  of  July.  I  was  standing  on  the 
Kitaiskaya  looking  down  upon  the  holiday  flags 
on  the  Brooklyn,  the  American  battleship  in  Vladi- 
vostok Bay.  Suddenly  I  heard  a  faraway  sound. 
Listening,  I  caught  the  strains  of  the  Revolutionary 
Hymn: 

"With  hearts  heavy  and  sad  we  bring  our  dead, 
Who  shed  their  blood  in  the  fight  for  freedom." 

Looking  up,  I  saw  on  the  crest  of  the  hill  the 
first  lines  of  some  vast  procession.  It  was  the 
funeral  of  the  gruzchiki  (longshoremen)  killed  four 
days  before  in  the  siege  of  the  Red  Staff  Building. 

To-day  the  people,  rising  out  of  their  grief  and 
terror,  were  coming  forth  to  bury  these  defenders 
of  the  fallen  Soviet.  Out  of  the  workmen's  quar- 
ters they  streamed,  jamming  the  street,  not  from 
curb  to  curb,  but  from  wall  to  wall.  They  came 
billowing  over  the  hilltop  by  thousands  until  the 
whole  long  slope  was  choked  with  the  dense,  slow- 
moving  throng,  keeping  time  to  the  funeral  march 
of  the  revolutionists. 

257 


2  58  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

Up  thru  the  gray  and  black  mass  of  men  and 
women  ran  two  lines  of  white-bloused  sailors  of 
the  Bolshevik  fleet.  Above  their  heads  tossed  a 
cloud  of  crimson  standards  with  silvered  cords  and 
tassels.  In  the  vanguard,  four  men  carried  a  huge 
red  banner  with  the  words:  "Long  Live  the  Soviet  of 
Workmen's  and  Peasants'  Deputies!  Hail  to  the 
International  Brotherhood  of  the  Toilers!" 

A  hundred  girls  in  white,  carrying  green  wreaths 
from  forty- four  unions  of  the  city,  formed  a  guard 
of  honor  for  the  dead  gruzchiki.  The  coffins  with 
the  red  paint  still  wet  upon  them,  were  borne  upon 
the  shoulders  of  their  comrades.  The  music  crashed 
out  by  the  Red  Fleet  Band  was  lost  in  the  volume  of 
song  that  rose  from  the  seventeen  thousand  singers. 

Here  was  color  and  sound  and  motion.  But  there 
was  something  else,  a  something  which  compelled 
fear  and  awe.  I  had  seen  a  score  of  the  great  pro- 
cessions of  Petrograd  and  Moscow,  peace  and  vic- 
tory and  protest  and  memorial  parades,  military  and 
civilian,  impressive  as  only  Russians  could  make 
them. 

But  this  was  different. 

From  these  defenseless  poor,  stripped  of  their 
arms,  and  with  sorrowing  songs  bearing  off  their 
dead,  there  came  a  threat  more  menacing  than  that 
from  the  twelve-inch  guns  of  the  Allied  Fleet,  riding 
in  the  harbor  below.  It  was  impossible  not  to  feel  it. 
It  was  so  simple,  so  spontaneous  and  so  elemental. 
It  came  straight  out  of  the  heart  of  the  people.    It 


THE  RED  FUNERAL  259 

was  the  people,  leaderless,  isolated,  beaten  to  earth, 
thrown  upon  its  own  resources,  and  yet,  out  of  its 
grief,  rising  magnificently  to  take  command  of  itself. 

The  dissolution  of  the  Soviet,  instead  of  plung- 
ing the  people  into  inactive  grief  and  dissipating 
their  forces,  begot  a  strange,  unifying  spirit.  Seven- 
teen thousand  separate  souls  were  welded  into  one. 
Seventeen  thousand  people,  singing  in  unison, 
found  themselves  thinking  in  unison.  With  a  com- 
mon mass  will  and  mass  consciousness,  they  formu- 
lated their  decisions  from  their  class  standpoint — 
the  determined  standpoint  of  the  revolutionary 
proletariat. 

The  Czechs  came,  offering  a  guard  of  honor.  'We 
noozhno!"  (It  is  not  necessary!)  the  people  replied. 
"You  killed  our  comrades.  Forty  to  one  you  fought 
against  them.  They  died  for  the  Soviet  and  we  are 
proud  of  them.  We  thank  you,  but  we  cannot  let 
the  guns  which  shot  them  down  guard  them  in  their 
death!" 

"But  there  may  be  danger  for  you  in  this  city," 
said  the  authorities. 

"Never  mind,"  they  answered.  "We,  too,  are  not 
afraid  of  death.  And  what  better  way  to  die  than 
beside  the  bodies  of  our  comrades!" 

Some  bourgeois  societies  came,  presenting  me- 
morial wreaths. 

"Ne  noozhno,"  (it  is  not  necessary),  the  people 
answered.  "Our  comrades  died  in  a  struggle  against 
the  bourgeoisie.    They  died  fighting  cleanly.    We 


26o  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

must  keep  their  memory  clean.  We  thank  you,  but 
we  dare  not  lay  your  wreaths  upon  their  coffins." 

The  procession  poured  down  the  Aleutskaya  Hill, 
filled  the  large  open  space  at  the  bottom,  and  faced 
up  toward  the  British  Consulate.  Nearby,  on  the 
left,  was  a  work  car  with  a  tower  for  repairing 
electric  wires.  Whether  it  was  there  by  design  or 
accident  I  do  not  know.  Presently  it  was  to  serve 
as  a  speaker's  rostrum. 

The  band  played  a  solemn  dirge.  The  men  bared 
their  heads.  The  women  bowed.  The  music  ceased 
and  there  was  a  silence.  The  band  played  a  second 
time.  Again  there  was  the  bowing  and  baring  of 
heads  and  again  the  long  silence.  And  yet  there  was 
no  speaker.  It  was  like  a  huge  Quaker  meeting  in  the 
open  air.  And  just  as  a  sermon  has  no  place  in 
Russian  public  worship,  so  here  a  speech  was  not 
essential  to  this  act  of  public  devotion.  But  should 
some  one  from  the  people  feel  the  impulse  to  speak 
there  was  the  platform  awaiting  him.  It  was  as  if 
in  the  pause  the  people  were  generating  a  voice. 

At  last  out  of  the  crowd  one  came  and  climbed 
upon  the  high  platform.  He  had  not  the  gift  of 
oratory  but  his  frequent  iteration,  "They  died  for 
us.    They  died  for  us,"  touched  others  to  utterance. 

First  came  a  peasant,  bronzed  and  bearded  and 
in  peasant  costume.  He  said:  "All  my  life  has 
been  one  of  toil  and  fear.  .  .  .  Pain  and  torture  and 
killing  without  end  we  had  in  the  dark  days  of  the 
Czar.   Then  the  morning  of  the  Revolution  came  and 


THE  RED  FUNERAL  261 

these  terrors  passed  away.  Workingmen  and  peas- 
ants were  very  happy  and  I  was  happy  too.  But 
suddenly  in  the  midst  of  our  rejoicing  came  this 
blow.  Once  more  all  is  night  around  us.  We  can 
not  believe  it;  but  here  before  our  eyes,  dead  and 
cold,  lie  our  brothers  and  comrades  who  fought  for 
the  Soviet.  And  in  the  north  other  comrades  are 
falling  before  the  guns.  We  listen  and  strain  to 
hear  the  sound  of  the  peasants  and  workers  of  other 
lands  coming  to  the  rescue.  But  it  is  in  vain.  All 
we  can  hear  is  the  sound  of  the  guns  in  the  north." 

As  he  finished,  against  the  blue  sky  appeared  a 
figure  in  white.  A  woman  had  climbed  upon  the 
platform.  At  the  behest  of  the  crowd  she  began  to 
speak: 

"All  thru  the  past  we  women  have  seen  our  men 
led  off  to  the  wars  while  we  wept  at  home.  Those 
who  ruled  told  us  that  it  was  right  and  for  our 
glory.  Those  wars  were  far  away  and  we  did  not 
understand.  But  our  men  here  were  killed  before 
our  eyes.  This  we  can  understand.  And  we  under- 
stand that  in  it  there  was  neither  right  nor  glory. 
No,  it  was  a  cruel,  heartless  wrong  and  every  child 
born  of  the  mothers  of  the  working-class  shall  hear 
the  story  of  this  wrong." 

Most  eloquent  of  all  was  a  lad  of  seventeen,  the 
secretary  of  a  league  of  young  Socialists.  "We  were 
students  and  artists  and  such  kind  of  people.  We 
held  ourselves  aloof  from  the  Soviet,"  he  said.  "It 
seemed  to  us  foolish  for  workmen  to  govern  without 


262  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

the  wisdom  of  the  wise.  But  now  we  know  that  you 
were  right  and  we  were  wrong.  From  now  on  we 
shall  stand  with  you.  What  you  do  we  will  do.  We 
pledge  our  tongues  and  pens  to  make  known  the 
wrongs  that  you  have  suffered  the  length  and  breadth 
of  Russia  and  thruout  the  world." 

Suddenly  the  word  went  thru  the  throng  that 
Constantin  Sukhanov  had  been  paroled  until  five 
o'clock  and  that  he  was  coming  with  counsels  of 
peace  and  moderation. 

While  some  were  affirming  his  coming  and  others 
were  denying  it,  he  himself  appeared.  He  was 
quickly  passed  along  upon  the  shoulders  of  the 
sailors.  In  a  storm  of  cheers  he  climbed  the  ladder 
and  came  out  upon  the  platform-top,  smiling.  .  .  . 

Twice  his  eyes  swept  across  that  field  of  upturned 
faces  filled  with  trust  and  love,  awaiting  the  words 
of  their  young  leader. 

As  if  to  avert  the  flood  of  tragedy  and  pathos  that 
beat  suddenly  upon  him  from  every  side,  he  turned 
his  head  away.  His  eyes  fell  for  the  first  time  upon 
the  red  coffins  of  the  men  who  had  been  slain  in 
defense  of  his  Soviet.  That  was  too  much.  A 
shudder  passed  thru  his  frame,  he  threw  up  his 
hands,  staggered,  and  would  have  fallen  headlong 
into  the  crov/d,  but  a  friend  caught  him.  With  both 
hands  pressed  to  his  face,  Sukhanov,  in  the  arms  of 
his  comrades,  sobbed  like  a  child.  We  could  see  his 
breath  come  and  go  and  the  tears  raining  down  his 
cheeks.    The  Russians  are  little  given  to  tears.    But 


THE  RED  FUNERAL  263 

that  day  seventeen  thousand  Russians  sobbed  with 
their  young  leader  on  the  public  square  of  Vladi- 
vostok. 


Sukhanov  knew  that  many  tears  were  an 
A  Pledge  to  indulgence,  and  that  he  had  a  big  and  seri- 
the  Dead.  ous  task  to  perform.  Fifty  feet  behind 
him  was  the  British  Consulate,  and  fifty 
rods  before  him  were  the  waters  of  the  Golden  Horn 
with  the  frowning  guns  of  the  Allied  Fleet.  He 
wrenched  himself  away  from  his  grief  and  gather- 
ing himself  together  began  his  message.  With  an 
ever  mounting  passion  of  earnestness  he  spoke,  clos- 
ing with  words  destined  to  become  the  rallying  cry 
for  the  workers  in  Vladivostok  and  the  Far  East: — 
"Here,  before  the  Red  Staff  Building  where  our 
comrade  gruzchiki  were  slain,  we  swear  by  these 
red  coffins  that  hold  them,  by  their  wives  and  chil- 
dren that  weep  for  them,  by  the  red  banners  which 
float  over  them,  that  the  Soviet  for  which  they  died 
shall  be  the  thing  for  which  we  live,  or,  if  need  be, 
hke  them  die.  Henceforth  the  return  of  the  Soviet 
shall  be  the  goal  of  all  our  sacrifice  and  devotion. 
To  that  end  we  shall  fight  with  every  means.  The 
bayonets  have  been  wrested  from  our  hands,  but 
when  the  day  comes  and  we  have  no  guns,  we  shall 
fight  with  sticks  and  clubs,  and  when  these  are  gone, 
then  with  our  bare  fists  and  bodies.  Now  it  is  for 
us  to  fight  only  with  our  minds  and  spirits.    Let  us 


264  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

make  them  hard  and  strong  and  unyielding.    The 
Soviet  is  dead.    Long  live  the  Soviet!" 

The  crowd  caught  up  the  closing  words  in  a  tre- 
mendous demonstration,  mingled  with  the  strains  of 
the  "International."  Then  that  haunting  "Funeral 
Hymn  of  the  Revolution"  at  once  so  plaintive  and 
triumphant: 

"You  fell  in  the  fatal  fight 
For  the  liberty  of  the  people,  for  the  honor  of  the  people. 
You  gave  up  your  lives  and  everything  dear  to  you. 
The  time  will  come  when  your  surrendered  Ufe  will  count. 
The  time  is  near:  when  tyranny  falls,  the  people  arise,  great 

and  free. 
Farewell,  brothers,  you  chose  a  noble  path, 
At  your  grave  we  swear  to  fight,  for  freedom  and  the  people's 

happiness." 

A  resolution  was  read  proclaiming  the  restoration 
of  the  Soviet,  the  objective  of  all  the  future  struggles 
of  the  revolutionary  proletariat  and  peasants  of  the 
Far  East.  At  the  call  for  the  vote  seventeen  thou- 
sand hands  shot  into  the  air.  They  were  the  hands 
which  had  built  the  cars  and  paved  the  streets, 
forged  the  iron,  held  the  plough,  and  swung  the  ham- 
mer. All  kinds  of  hands  they  were:  the  big,  rough 
hands  of  the  old  gruzchiki,  the  artisans',  deft  and 
sinewy,  the  knotted  hands  of  the  peasants,  thick  with 
callouses,  and  thousands  of  the  frailer,  whiter  hands 
of  the  working  women.  By  these  hands  the  riches 
of  the  Far  East  had  been  wrought.  They  were  no 
different  from  the  scarred,  stained  hands  of  labor 
anywhere  in  all  the  world.    Except  in  this  regard: 


THE  RED  FUNERAL  265 

for  a  time  they  had  held  the  power.  The  Govern- 
ment had  been  within  their  grasp.  Four  days  ago 
it  had  been  wrested  from  their  grasp,  but  the  feel 
of  it  was  still  within  their  hands— these  hands  raised 
now  in  solemn  pledge  to  take  that  power  again. 

A  sailor  striding  down  from  the  hill- 
"The  Americans  top  pushed  thru  the  crowd  and  climbed 
Understand."  upon  the  platform. 

"Comrades! "  he  cried  joyously,  "we 
are  not  alone.  I  ask  you  to  look  away  to  the  flags 
flying  over  there  on  the  American  battleship.  You 
cannot  see  them  down  there  where  you  stand.  But 
they  are  there.  No,  comrades,  we  are  not  alone  to- 
day in  our  grief.  The  Americans  understand  and 
they  are  with  us!" 

It  was  a  mistake,  of  course.  This  was  July  the 
Fourth.  Those  flags  had  been  hung  out  in  celebra- 
tion of  our  Day  of  Independence.  But  the  crowd 
did  not  know  that.  To  them  it  was  hke  the  sudden 
touch  of  a  friend's  hand  upon  a  lonely  traveler  in  a 
foreign  land. 

With  enthusiasm  they  caught  up  the  cry  of  the 
sailor:  "The  Americans  are  with  us!"  And  the  vast 
conclave  of  workers  lifting  up  their  coffins,  wreaths 
and  banners  were  once  more  in  motion.  They  were 
going  to  the  cemetery,  but  not  directly.  Tired  as 
they  were  from  long  standing  in  the  sun,  they  made 
a  wide  detour  to  reach  the  street  that  runs  up  the 
steep    hill    to    the    American    Consulate.      Then 


2  66  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

straight  up  the  sharp  slope  they  toiled  in  a  cloud  of 
dust,  still  singing  as  they  marched,  until  they 
came  before  the  Stars  and  Stripes  floating  from  the 
flagstaff.  And  there  they  stopped  and  laid  the  coffins 
of  their  dead  beneath  the  flag  of  America. 

They  stretched  out  their  hands,  crying,  "Speak  to 
us  a  word!"  They  sent  delegates  within  to  implore 
that  word.  On  the  day  the  great  Republic  of  the 
West  celebrated  its  independence,  the  poor  and  dis- 
inherited of  Russia  came  asking  sympathy  and  un- 
derstanding in  the  struggle  for  their  independence. 

Afterward,  I  heard  a  Bolshevik  leader  bitterly 
resentful  at  this  "compromise  with  revolutionary 
honor  and  integrity." 

"How  stupid  of  them,"  he  said.  "How  inane  of 
them !  Have  we  not  told  them  that  all  countries  are 
alike — all  imperialists?  Was  this  not  repeated  to 
them  over  and  over  again  by  their  leaders?" 

Truly  it  had  been.  But  with  this  demonstration 
of  the  Fourth  of  July  the  leaders  had  little  to  do. 
They  were  in  prison.  The  affair  was  in  the  hands  of, 
the  people  themselves.  And,  however  cynical  many 
leaders  were  about  the  professions  of  America,  the 
people  were  not  so.  In  the  hour  of  their  affliction, 
these  simple  trusting  folk,  makers  of  the  new  Social 
Democracy  of  the  East,  came  stretching  forth  their 
hands  to  the  old  Political  Democracy  of  the  West. 

They  knew  that  President  Wilson  had  given  his 
assurance  of  help  and  loyalty  to  the  "people  of  Rus- 
sia."   They  reasoned:  "We,  the  workers  and  peas- 


THE  RED  FUNERAL  267 

ants,  the  great  majority  here  in  Vladivostok,  are  we 
not  the  people?  Today  in  our  trouble  we  come  to 
claim  the  promised  help.  Our  enemies  have  taken 
away  our  Soviet.  They  have  killed  our  comrades. 
We  are  alone  and  in  distress  and  you  alone  of  all  the 
nations  of  the  earth  can  understand."  No  finer 
tribute  could  they  offer  than  to  come  thus,  bringing 
their  dead,  with  the  faith  that  out  of  America  would 
come  compassion  and  understanding.  America,  their 
only  friend  and  refuge. 

But  America  did  not  understand.  The  American 
people  did  not  even  hear  a  word  about  it.  These 
Russian  folk  do  not  know  that  the  American  people 
never  heard  about  it.  All  they  know  is  that  a  few 
weeks  after  that  appeal  came  the  landing  of  the 
American  troops.  They  united  with  Japanese  troops, 
marching  into  Siberia,  shooting  down  peasants  and 
workers. 

And  now  these  Russian  folk  say  to  one  another: 
"How  stupid  we  were  to  stand  there  in  the  heat  and 
the  dust  stretching  out  our  hands  like  beggars!" 


CHAPTER   XIX 


EXIT 


npHE  Bolsheviks  will  be  crushed  like  egg  shells," 
-■-  said  the  wisemen  as  the  Allies  started  into  Si- 
beria. The  idea  of  serious  Soviet  resistance  was  ridi- 
culed. The  Czar's  government,  then  Kerensky's,  had 
tumbled  like  a  house  of  cards.  Why  should  not  the 
Soviet  government  go  the  same  way? 

The  American  Major  Thacher  has  pointed  out, 
why  not:  The  Czar's  power  was  based  on  his  armies; 
it  was  only  necessary  to  disintegrate  these  armies 
and  the  Czar  fell.  The  Kerensky  government  rested 
in  the  cabinet;  it  was  only  necessary  to  surround 
his  ministers  in  the  Winter  Palace  and  Kerensky 
fell.  The  Soviet  government,  however,  was  rooted 
in  thousands  of  local  Soviets — an  organism  made  up 
of  countless  cells;  to  destroy  the  Soviet  government, 
every  one  of  these  separate  organizations  must  be 
destroyed.    And  they  did  not  relish  destruction. 

As  the  alarm  was  sounded  thru  the  Far  East  the 
peasants  and  workers  rallied  against  the  invaders. 
They  fought  fiercely,  yielding  ground  only  inch  by 
inch.  In  the  two  cities  north  of  Vladivostok  the 
Soviets  had  been  established  without  the  killing  of 

268 


EXIT  269 

a  single  person.  In  overthrowing  these  Soviets 
thousands  were  now  killed,  and  not  only  the  hos- 
pitals, but  sheds  and  warehouses  were  filled  with  the 
wounded.  Instead  of  an  easy  "military  promenade 
thru  Siberia"  the  Interventionists  faced  a  hard 
bloody  conflict. 

The  Vladivostok  bourgeoisie  were  amazed  at  the 
stubborn  resistance.  Then  enraged  they  turned  on 
all  partisans  of  the  Soviet  in  fury. 

I  had  no  hankering  for  martyrdom.     So  I 
/  Get  avoided  the  main  street  and  went  out  in  dis- 

Arrested       guise  or  under  cover  of  night.     I  was  an 
a  Little.       outcast.    But  that  did  not  grieve  me.    I  was 
concerned  for  the  manuscript  of  my  book  on 
Russia.    It  was  in  the  Soviet  building— now  head- 
quarters of  the  new  White  government. 

I  decided  that  the  only  way  to  get  it  was  to  walk 
brazenly  into  the  enemy's  camp  and  ask  for  it.  I 
did  so  and  fell  straight  into  the  hands  of  the  new 
Secret  Service  Chief. 

"I've  been  looking  for  you.  Thank  you  for  com- 
ing," he  said  with  mock  politeness.  "You  will  stay 
with  us."    I  was  a  prisoner  of  the  Counter-Revolu- 

tion. 

Fortunately  among  the  Americans  was  an  old 
classmate  of  mine,  Fred  Goodsell.  He  negotiated  in 
my  behalf  and  secured  my  release— but  not  my 
manuscript. 

Now  I  ventured  to  return  to  my  lodgings.    Some 


2  70  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

spy  observing  my  arrival  must  have  telephoned 
the  Whites.  I  was  busy  arranging  my  papers  when 
an  automobile  whirled  up.  Six  White  Guards 
jumped  out,  rushed  into  the  room,  and  shoving 
their  revolvers  into  my  face,  began  yelling,  "We've 
got  you  now,  we've  got  you." 

"But  I've  already  been  arrested  and  released," 
I  protested. 

"We're  not  going  to  arrest  you,  you  damned 
swine.    We're  going  to  kill  you,"  they  shouted. 

Sudden  noise  outside  again.  Another  motor-car 
dashed  up.  Bang!  Another  crash  at  the  door!  A 
captain  and  four  more  men  with  rifles  careened 
into  the  room.  They  were  Czechs  declaring  they 
had  orders  for  my  arrest. 

"But  we  have  already  arrested  him,"  said  the 
Whites. 

"No,"  insisted  the  Czechs.  "We're  going  to  take 
him." 

"But  we've  got  him,"  persisted  the  Whites. 

It  was  quite  thrilling  to  find  myself  a  person  of 
such  sinister  importance.  My  gratification  over  it 
was  tempered  a  bit  by  the  sight  of  the  bayonets. 
There  were  too  many  of  them — too  much  readiness 
to  use  them.  Instead  of  a  captive  I  might  soon  be 
a  corpse.  Happily  the  Czech  captain  had  a  sense 
of  humor. 

"Your  wishes  in  the  matter?"  he  said  turning  to 
me  with  a  deep  bow.  "Whose  prisoner  do  you 
prefer  to  be?" 


EXIT  271 

"Your  prisoner — the  Czechs,"  I  repHed. 

With  magnificent  noblesse  oblige  he  turned  to  the 
Whites.  "Gentlemen,  he  is  yours,"  he  declared 
magnanimously. 

He  appeased  his  own  soldiers  by  letting  them 
loose  on  my  papers  (they  were  afterwards  delivered 
to  the  American  Consul). 

The  Whites  hustled  me  into  their  automobile  and 
thru  the  city  where  a  few  days  earlier  I  had  ridden 
as  a  guest  of  the  Soviet,  I  rode  now  ringed  with 
bayonets  and  with  tv/o  revolvers  pressed  against  my 
ribs — a  prisoner  of  the  Whites. 

White  headquarters  was  surrounded  by  an  excited 
bourgeois  mob  watching  the  round  up  of  Reds  and 
hailing  each  victim  with  catcalls  and  cries  of  "give 
him  the  rope."  I  was  pushed  thru  the  jeering  crowd 
into  the  building  and  by  great  good  luck  straight  into 
the  arms  of  Squersky,  a  former  acquaintance.  He 
motioned  me  not  to  recognize  him  and  in  due  time 
secured  my  release.  This  time  I  came  out  with  a 
document  which  read:  "Citizens — You  are  re- 
quested not  to  arrest  the  American  Williams." 

But  there  was  little  protection  in  this  pa- 

Homeward        per,  for  black  hatred  against  the  Soviet 

Bound.  grew  from  day  to  day.    I  had  the  feeling 

of  a  hunted  animal  and  in  ten  days  lost 

as  many  pounds.     "At  any  moment  you  may  lose 

your  life,"  said  the  American  Vice-Consul.     "Two 

parties  have  sworn  to  shoot  you  down  at  sight." 


2  72  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

''I  am  anxious  to  leave  but  I  have  no  money  to 
leave  with,"  I  told  him.  He  could  see  my  per- 
plexity, but  he  could  not  see  that  it  was  any  con- 
cern of  his. 

The  workingmen  heard  of  my  plight  and  came  to 
my  rescue.  They  were  in  hard  straits  but  they 
raised  a  thousand  rubles.  The  men  in  jail  smuggled 
out  another  thousand.  Now  I  was  ready  to  go. 
But  the  Japanese  Consul  refused  to  vise  my  pass- 
port. He  confronted  me  with  a  list  of  my  crimes, 
chief  among  which  were  articles  against  intervention 
that  I  had  published  in  the  Soviet  papers.  The 
Tokio  Foreign  Office  did  not  like  these  articles.  It 
had  cabled  that  in  no  circumstances  was  my  pres- 
ence to  be  allowed  to  pollute  the  sacred  soil  of  Japan. 
The  Chinese,  however,  gave  me  a  vise  and  I  booked 
on  a  coasting-steamer  bound  for  Shanghai. 

My  last  night  was  spent  with  tovarishe  in  a  hiding- 
place  in  the  hills.  The  Soviet  had  not  been  de- 
stroyed. It  had  gone  underground.  In  the  secret 
retreat  the  leaders  yet  uncaptured,  gathered  to  plan 
and  organize.  In  farewell  they  sang  for  me  the 
hymn  of  the  English  Transport  Workers,  taught 
them  by  Jerome: 

"Hold  the  fort  for  we  are  coming! 
Union  men  be  strong; 
Side  by  side  we  battle  onward, 
Victory  will  come." 

With  these  words  ringing  in  my  ears  on  July  ii, 
I  sailed  past  the  AUied  battleships  and  out  into  the 


EXIT  273 

Pacific.  I  stewed  in  Shanghai  a  month  before  I 
could  get  passage  for  America.  At  last  I  got 
it  and  eight  weeks  after  I  left  the  Golden  Horn 
of  the  Far  East  I  sighted  the  Golden  Gate  of 
Cahfornia. 

As  our  steamer  swung  to  anchor  in  San  Fran- 
cisco harbor  a  launch  ran  alongside  and  officers  in 
naval  uniform  climbed  aboard.  They  were  mem- 
bers of  the  American  Naval  Intelligence  sent  out  to 
welcome  me  to  the  homeland.  No  prodigal,  return- 
ing from  long  rioting  in  a  far  country,  could  have 
had  a  warmer  reception.  Their  solicitude  for 
my  welfare  was  most  embarrassing.  They  over- 
whelmed me  with  attention,  insisted  on  escorting  me 
to  their  quarters  and  tending  to  all  details  of  my 
baggage.  They  assured  me  of  their  profound  in- 
terest in  all  Soviet  affairs  and  to  prove  it  relieved  me 
of  every  pamphlet,  document  and  note-book.  Their 
appetite  for  Russian  literature  was  insatiable.  Lest 
one  scrap  of  it  should  escape  them  they  looked  into 
my  wallet,  shoes,  hat-band,  even  the  lining  of  my 
coat.  Likewise  they  looked  into  my  pedigree,  my 
past  and  my  future.  Then  they  passed  me  on  to 
other  authorities  who  looked  into  my  ideas. 

"Now  you  are  a  Socialist,  Mr.  Williams,"  said 
one  of  my  inquisitors.  "You  are  also  an  Anarchist, 
aren't  you?" 

I  denied  the  charge. 

"Well,  what  other  beliefs  do  you  hold?" 

"Altruism,  optimism  and  pragmatism,"  I  told  him. 


2  74  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

He  duly  recorded  them  in  his  note-book.  More 
strange  and  dangerous  Russian  doctrines  being  im- 
ported into  America! 

After  three  days  of  pleasant  camaraderie,  I  was 
sent  on  to  Washington. 


CHAPTER   XX 


RETROSPECT 


JT  was  not  the  revolutionists  who  made  the  Rus- 
-■■  sian  Revolution.  This  in  spite  of  hosts  of  revo- 
lutionists who  tried  their  best  to  make  it.  For  a 
century  gifted  men  and  women  of  Russia  had  been 
agitated  over  the  cruel  oppression  of  the  people.  So 
they  became  agitators.  Into  the  villages,  the  shops 
and  the  slums  they  went  crying: 

"Shake  to  earth  your  chains  like  dew, 
Which  in  sleep  have  fallen  on  you. 
Ye  are  many,  they  are  few." 

But  the  people  did  not  rise.  They  did  not  even 
seem  to  hear.  Then  came  that  supreme  agitator — 
Hunger.  Hunger,  rising  out  of  economic  collapse 
and  war,  goaded  the  sluggish  masses  into  action. 
Moving  out  against  the  old  worm-eaten  structure 
they  brought  it  down.  Elemental  impersonal  forces 
did  what  human  agencies  found  impossible. 

The  revolutionists,  however,  had  their  part.  They 
did  not  make  the  Revolution.  But  they  made  the 
Revolution  a  success.  By  their  efforts  they  had 
prepared  a  body  of  men  and  women  with  minds 
trained  to  see  facts,  with  a  program  to  fit  the  facts 
and  with  fighting  energy  to  drive  it  thru.    There 

27S 


2  76  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

were  a  million  of  them — perhaps  more,  possibly  less. 
The  important  thing  is  not  their  number,  but  the 
fact  that  they  were  organized  to  act  as  receivers 
of  the  bankrupt,  old  order,  as  a  salvage-corps  of  the 
Revolution. 

At  the  core  of  this  were  the  Communists.  H.  G. 
Wells  says,  "In  the  vast  disorganization  an  emer- 
gency government  supported  by  a  disciplined  party 
of  perhaps  150,000  adherents — the  Communist 
Party — took  control.  ...  It  suppressed  brigand- 
age, established  a  sort  of  order  and  security  in  the 
exhausted  towns  and  set  up  a  crude  rationing  system, 
the  only  possible  government  .  .  .  the  only  idea,  the 
only  solidarity." 

For  four  years  the  Communists  have  had  con- 
trol of  Russia.  What  are  the  fruits  of  their  steward- 
ship? 

"Repressions,  tyranny,  violence,"  cry  the  enemies. 
"They  have  abolished  free  speech,  free  press,  free 
assembly.  They  have  imposed  drastic  military  con- 
scription and  compulsory  labor.  They  have  been 
incompetent  in  government,  inefficient  in  industry. 
They  have  subordinated  the  Soviets  to  the  Com- 
munist Party.  They  have  lowered  their  Communist 
ideals,  changed  and  shifted  their  program  and  com- 
promised with  the  capitalists." 

Some  of  these  charges  are  exaggerated.  Many 
can  be  explained.  But  they  cannot  all  be  explained 
away.     Friends  of  the  Soviet  grieve  over  them. 


RETROSPECT  277 

Their  enemies  have  summoned  the  world  to  shudder 
and  protest  against  them. 

When  I  am  tempted  to  join  the  vvailers  and  the 
mud-slingers  my  mind  goes  back  to  a  conversation 
on  the  docks  of  Vladivostok  in  June,  191 8.  Colonel 
Robins,  of  the  American  Red  Cross,  was  talking  to 
Constantin  Sukhanov,  President  of  the  Soviet. 

"If  no  help  comes  from  the  AlUes,  how  long  can 
the  Soviet  last?" 

Sukhanov  shook  his  head  ruefully. 

"Six  weeks?"  queried  Robins. 

"It  will  be  hard  to  hold  on  longer,"  said  Sukhanov. 

Robins  turned  to  me  with  the  same  question.  I, 
too,  was  dubious  about  the  outlook. 

We  were  sympathizers.  We  knew  the  might  and 
the  vitality  of  the  Soviet.  But  we  saw  also  the  tre- 
mendous obstacles  it  confronted.  And  the  odds 
seemed  against  it. 

In  the  first  place  the  Soviet  faced  the 

Forces  Ranged    same  conditions  that  had  overwhelmed 

Against  the  the  Czar   and   Kerensky  governments, 

Bolsheviks.         i.  e.,   the   dislocation   of   industry,   the 

paralysis  of  transport,  the  hunger  and 

misery  of  the  masses. 

In  the  second  place  the  Soviet  had  to  cope  with 
a  hundred  new  obstacles — desertion  of  the  intelli- 
gentsia, strike  of  the  old  officials,  sabotage  of  the 
technicians,  excommunication  by  the  church,  the 
blockade  by  the  Allies.    It  was  cut  off  from  the  grain 


2  78  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

fields  of  the  Ukraine,  the  oil  fields  of  Baku,  the  coal 
mines  of  the  Don,  the  cotton  of  Turkestan — fuel  and 
food  reserves  were  gone.  *'Now,"  said  their  enemies, 
"the  bony  hand  of  hunger  will  clutch  the  people 
by  their  throat  and  bring  them  to  their  senses."  To 
prevent  supply  trains  reaching  the  cities,  agents  of 
the  imperialists  dynamited  the  railway  bridges  and 
put  emery  into  the  locomotive  bearings. 

Here  were  troubles  enough  to  break  the  strongest 
souls.  But  still  more  were  coming.  The  capitalist 
press  of  the  world  was  mobilized  against  the  Bol- 
sheviks. They  were  pictured  as  "hirelings  of  the 
Kaiser,"  "red-eyed  fanatics,"  "cold-blooded  assas- 
sins," "long  bearded  ruffians  running  amuck  by  day, 
carousing  in  the  Kremlin  at  night,"  "profaners  of 
art  and  culture,"  "despoilers  of  women."  As  a 
crowning  infamy  the  "Decree  for  the  Nationalization 
of  Women,"  was  forged  and  broadcasted  thru  the 
world.  The  public  was  called  upon  to  transfer  their 
hate  from  the  Huns  to  the  Bolsheviks. 

While  abroad  hatred  against  the  Bolsheviks  as 
the  new  "enemies  of  civihzation"  mounted  from  day 
to  day,  these  selfsame  Bolsheviks  were  straining 
brains  and  sinews  to  rescue  civilization  in  Russia 
from  total  collapse.  Watching  them  at  their  heart- 
breaking, back-breaking  tasks,  Ransome  wrote: 

"No  one  contends  that  the  Bolsheviks  are  angels. 
I  only  ask  that  men  shall  look  thru  the  fog  of  libel 
that  surrounds  them  and  see  the  ideal  for  which 
these  young  men  are  struggling  in  the  only  way  in 


RETROSPECT  279 

which  they  can  struggle.  If  they  fail  they  will  fail 
with  clean  shields  and  clean  hearts,  having  striven 
for  an  ideal  which  will  live  beyond  them.  Even  if 
they  fail,  they  will  none  the  less  have  written  a  page 
more  daring  than  any  other  I  can  remember  in  the 
story  of  the  human  race.  .  .  .  When  in  after  years 
men  read  that  page  they  will  judge  your  country  and 
my  country  by  the  help  or  hindrance  they  gave  to 
the  writing  of  it." 

This  appeal  was  in  vain. 

As  the  monarchists  of  Europe  combined  to  crush 
the  idea  loosed  on  the  world  by  the  French  Revolu- 
tion, so  the  capitalists  of  Europe  and  America  com- 
bined to  crush  the  idea  loosed  on  the  world  by  the 
Russian  Revolution.  To  these  famished,  frozen, 
typhus-stricken  Russians  sailed  no  ships  of  good  will 
laden  with  books,  tools,  teachers  and  engineers  but 
grim  ships  of  war  and  transports  laden  with  troops 
and  officers,  guns  and  poison-gas.  Landings  were 
made  at  strategic  points  on  the  coast  of  Russia. 
Monarchists,  landlords  and  Black  Hundreds  flocked 
to  these  rallying  centers.  New  White  armies  were 
conscripted,  drilled  and  equipped  with  hundreds  of 
miUions  of  dollars  of  supplies.  The  Interventionists 
started  their  drive  on  Moscow,  seeking  to  plunge 
the  sword  into  the  heart  of  the  Revolution. 

Out  of  the  East  rolled  the  hordes  of  Kolchak 
following  the  trail  of  the  Czechs  across  Siberia.  Out 
of  the  West  struck  the  armies  of  Finland,  the  Letts 
and  Lithuanians.    Down  from  the  forests  and  snow- 


28o  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

fields  of  the  North  moved  the  British,  French  and 
Americans.  Up  from  the  seaports  of  the  South 
plunged  the  tanks,  aeroplanes  and  Death  Battalions 
of  Denikin.  From  all  points  of  the  compass  they 
came.  Out  of  the  Esthonian  marshes — Yudenich. 
Out  of  Poland — the  veteran  legions  of  Peltura.  Out 
of  Crimea — the  cavalry  of  Baron  Wrangel. 

A  million-bayonetted  ring  of  steel  closed  in  upon 
the  Revolution.  The  Revolution  staggered  under 
the  blows  rained  upon  it,  but  its  heart  was  un- 
daunted.    If  it  must  die — it  would  die  fighting. 

Once  more  in  the  war  weary  villages 
The  Revolution      and    destitute    towns    throbbed    the 
Fights  for  Life.      drums  beating  the  call  to  arms.    Once 
more  the  worn-out  lathes  and  looms 
were  ordered  to  produce  uniforms  and  rifles.    Once 
more  the  crippled  railways  were  freighted  with  sol- 
diers and  cannon.    Out  of  the  almost  exhausted  re- 
sources of  Russia  the  Revolution  armed,  uniformed 
and  officered  5,000,000  men  and  the  Red  Armies 
took  the  field. 

Only  400  miles  from  Moscow  they  hurled  them- 
selves against  Kolchak  and  pushed  his  panic-stricken 
forces  back  the  4,000  miles  they  had  advanced  across 
Siberia.  In  the  pine  forests  of  the  North,  clad  in 
uniforms  of  white,  sliding  thru  the  snow  on  skis,  they 
met  the  Allies  and  pushed  them  back  on  Archangel, 
forcing  them  to  ship  for  home  across  the  waters  of 
the  White  Sea.    They  stopped  the  headlong  rush 


RETROSPECT  281 

of  Denikin  at  Tula,  the  smithy  of  Russia,  "In 
whose  red  fires  the  red  steel  is  welded  into  the 
bayonets  of  the  invincible  Red  Army."  Driven 
back  to  the  Black  Sea  shores  he  escaped  on  a  British 
cruiser. 

Budenny's  Cavalry  racing  day  and  night  across 
the  Ukrainian  steppes  flung  themselves  suddenly  on 
the  Polish  flanks,  turned  the  victorious  advance  of 
the  legionaries  into  a  disastrous  retreat  and  harried 
them  up  to  the  gates  of  Warsaw.  Wr angel  was 
beaten  and  bottled  up  in  the  Crimea,  and  while  the 
shock  troops  of  the  Soviet  hurled  themselves  against 
his  concrete  forts,  the  main  Red  Army  hurried  across 
the  frozen  Sea  of  Azov  and  the  Baron  fled  to  Turkey. 
In  the  outskirts  of  Petrograd,  under  its  very  domes, 
Yudenich  was  cut  to  pieces,  the  armies  of  the  Baltic 
States  were  beaten  back  behind  their  borders,  and 
the  Whites  annihilated  in  Siberia.  The  Revolution 
triumphed  all  around  the  circle. 

The  Counter-Revolutionists  were  broken  not  only 
by  the  heavy  battalions  of  the  Soviet,  but  by  the  Idea 
incarnated  in  these  armies  of  the  Revolution. 

They  were  armies  with  banners,  red  banners  em- 
blazoned with  the  watchwords  of  a  new  world.  They 
advanced  into  battle  singing  the  songs  of  justice 
and  fraternity.  They  treated  their  captured  enemies 
as  misguided  brothers.  They  fed  them,  bound  up 
|heir  wounds  and  sent  them  back  to  tell  in  their 
own  ranks  stories  of  Bolshevik  hospitality.  They 
bombarded  the  AUied  Camp  with  questions: 


282  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

"Why  did  you  come  to  Russia,  Allied  Soldiers?" 
"Why  should  workmen  of  France  and  England  mur- 
der their  fellow- workers  of  Russia?"  "Do  you  want 
to  destroy  our  Workmen's  Republic?"  "Do  you  want 
to  restore  the  Czar?"  "You  are  fighting  for  the 
bond  holders  of  France,  the  land  grabbers  of  Eng- 
land, the  imperialists  of  America.  Why  shed  blood 
for  them?"    "Why  don't  you  go  home?"  * 

Red  soldiers  rose  up  to  shout  these  questions 
across  the  trenches.  Red  sentries  with  hands  up- 
lifted rushed  forward  crying  them  out.  Red  aero- 
planes dropped  them  circHng  down  from  the  skies. 

The  allied  troops  pondered  over  these  queries  and 
were  shaken.  Their  morale  broke  down.  They 
fought  half  heartedly.  They  mutinied.  The  Whites 
in  tens  of  thousands — whole  battalions  and  ambu- 
lance corps — came  over  to  the  Revolution.  One 
after  another  the  armies  of  the  Counter-Revolution 
crumpled  up  or  melted  away  like  snow  in  a  Russian 
spring.  The  great  steel  cordon  tightening  around 
the  Revolution  was  smashed  to  bits. 

The  Revolution  was  triumphant.  The  Soviets 
were  saved.    But  with  what  appalling  sacrifices! 

"For  three  years,"  says  Lenin,  "our 

Havoc  Wrought      whole  energy  was  devoted  to  the  tasks 

by  Intervention,      of  war."     The  wealth  of  the  nation 

was  poured  into  the  army.     Fields 

were  untilled,  machines  untended.    Lack  of  fuel  shut 

down  the  factories.    Green  wood  under  the  boilers 

*  Appendix  IV.  A  Bolshevik  Circular  for  British  Soldiers. 


POCCMiiCHAfl  COUMA/lMCTllHECHAfl  OifflEPATMBHAfl   COBETCHAH  PFCnrB/IMHA.  npo<EiAPM«6rix  ctcam.  cot»«i«iiimK 

B€^orj6AfA€ItCWlX>  UAVASHTO^- 
E0A€HH«i4,  A€HHHMH4  ,Ka/lHAlK4, 


TOB4Pni4H!EOPHTeCL  C  3AB43011! 
yHMHT0«AMT6   BOUIb! 

The  Red  Army  has  Crushed  the  Whiie  Guard  Parasites — Yudenich, 
Denikin,  Kolchak. — Comrades!  Fight  now  against  Infection!  Annihi- 
late THE  Typhus-bearing  Louse!" — Soviet  Health  Poster. 


RETROSPECT  283 

ruined  the  locomotives.  The  retreating  armies  tore 
up  railway  tracks,  blew  up  bridges  and  depots  and 
fired  the  grain  fields  and  the  villages.  The  Poles 
not  only  destroyed  the  water-works  and  electric-sta- 
tion of  Kiev,  but  in  sheer  malice  dynamited  the 
Cathedral  of  St.  Vladimir. 

The  Counter-Revolutionists  turned  their  retreat 
into  an  orgy  of  destruction.  With  torch  and  dyna- 
mite they  laid  waste  the  land  leaving  behind  a  black 
wake  of  ruins  and  ashes. 

A  host  of  other  evils  came  out  of  the  war — 
drastic  censorship,  arbitrary  arrests,  drum-head 
court-martials.  The  high  handed  measures  charged 
against  the  Communists  were  to  a  large  extent  meas- 
ures of  war — none  the  less  they  were  casualties  to 
the  ideals  of  the  Revolution. 

Then  the  human  casualties!  The  death  toll  at 
the  front  was  large.  The  death  lists  from  the  hos- 
pitals were  appalling.  Medicines,  gauze  and  surgi- 
cal instruments  could  not  come  thru  the  blockade. 
So  limbs  were  amputated  without  anesthetics. 
Wounds  were  bandaged  with  newspapers.  Gangrene 
and  blood  poisoning,  typhus  and  cholera  swept  thru 
the  armies  unchecked. 

The  Revolution  could  have  sustained  the  further 
loss  in  man-power — for  Russia  is  vast.  But  it  could 
not  afford  the  loss  in  brain-power  and  soul-power, 
the  wholesale  massacre  of  its  directing  energizing 
spirits — the  Communists.  It  was  these  Communists 
who  bore  the  brunt  of  the  fighting.     They  were 


2  84  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

formed  into  shock  battalions.  They  were  rushed 
into  gaps  to  stiffen  the  wavering  Hnes.  Captured 
they  were  always  killed.  In  the  three  years'  war 
half  the  young  Communists  of  Russia  were  slaugh- 
tered. 

A  mere  recital  of  casualties  means  nothing,  for 
statistics  are  only  unemotional  symbols.  Let  the 
reader  recall  the  young  men  he  has  met  in  the  pages 
of  this  book.  They  were  at  once  dreamers  and  hard 
workers,  idealists  and  stern  realists — the  flower  of 
the  Revolution,  the  incarnation  of  its  dynamic  spirit. 
It  seems  incredible  for  the  Revolution  to  go  on 
without  them.  But  it  does  go  on.  For  they  are 
dead.  Nearly  everyone  in  this  book  is  now  in  his 
grave.    Here  is  the  way  some  of  them  died: 

Volodarsky — assassinated  in  the  general  plot  to 
kill  all  Soviet  leaders. 

Neibut — executed  on  the  Kolchak  Front. 

Yanishev — bayonetted  by  a  White  Guard  on  the 
Wrangel  Front. 

Woskov — died  of  typhus  on  the  Denikin  Front. 

Tunganogi — shot  at  his  desk  by  White  Guards. 

Utkin — dragged  from  motor  car  and  shot. 

Sukhanov — led  into  the  woods  in  the  early  morn- 
ing and  clubbed  to  death  with  rifle  butts. 

Melnikov — taken  out  of  prison,  shot  and  blud- 
geoned. 

"They  were  tortured,  they  were  stoned,  they  were 
sawn  asunder,  they  were  set  wandering  in  deserts 


RETROSPECT  285 

and  in  mountains,  in  caves  and  in  dens  of  the  earth." 

It  was  a  cold  selective  killing  of  the  keymen  of 
the  revolution,  a  massacre  of  its  future  builders.  An 
incalculable  loss  to  Russia — for  these  were  men  who 
could  withstand  the  corruption  of  office  and  the 
poison  of  power.  Men  who  could  live  as  valorously 
as  they  died. 

They  went  to  their  death  in  order  that  the  Revolu- 
tion might  live.  And  it  does  live.  Tho  crippled  and 
compromised,  out  of  the  long  ordeal  of  famine,  pesti- 
lence, blockade  and  war,  the  Russian  Revolution 
emerges  victorious. 

Is  the  Revolution  worth  these  sacrifices?  These 
are  its  assured  results: 

One.  It  has  destroyed  root  and  branch  the  State 
apparatus  of  Czarism. 

Two.  It  has  transferred  the  great  estates  of  the 
crown,  the  landlords  and  the  monastic  orders  into 
the  hands  of  the  people. 

Three.  It  has  nationalized  the  basic  industries 
and  begun  the  electrification  of  Russia.  It  has  fenced 
off  Russia  from  the  unlimited  exploitation  of  free- 
booting  capitalists. 

Four.  It  has  brought  into  the  Soviets  1,000,000 
workers  and  peasants  and  given  them  direct  experi- 
ence in  government.  It  has  organized  8,000,000 
workers  into  trade  unions.  It  has  taught  40,000,000 
peasants  to  read  and  write.  It  has  opened  the  doors 
of  tens  of  thousands  of  new  schools^  libraries  and 


286  THROUGH  THE  RUSSIAN  REVOLUTION 

theatres  and  roused  the  masses  to  the  wonders  of 
science  and  art. 

Five.  It  has  broken  the  spell  of  the  past  over 
a  great  people.  Their  potential  forces  have  become 
kinetic.  Their  fatalistic:  ''It  was  so,  and  it  will  be 
so,"  is  changed  to  "It  was  so,  but  it  will  not  be  so." 

Six.  It  has  assured  self-determination  to  a  score 
of  subject  races  formerly  held  in  vassalage  to  the 
Russian  Empire.  It  has  given  them  free  hand  to 
develop  their  own  language,  literature  and  institu- 
tions. Persia,  China,  Afghanistan  and  other  back- 
ward countries — that  is  "countries  with  great  nat- 
ural resources  and  small  navies" — it  has  treated  as 
equals. 

Seven.  It  has  not  paid  lip-service  to  "open  diplo- 
macy," but  has  made  it  a  reality.  "It  has  swept  the 
secret  treaties  into  the  ash-barrel  of  history." 

Eight.  It  has  pioneered  the  way  to  a  new  society 
and  made  invaluable  laboratory  experiments  in  So- 
cialism on  a  colossal  scale.  It  has  quickened  the 
faith  and  increased  the  morale  of  the  working-classes 
of  the  world  in  their  battle  for  the  new  social  order. 

The  wise  men  rise  up  to  point  out  that  these  results 
might  have  been  obtained  in  a  better  way.  Likewise 
the  Reformation,  the  Independence  of  America,  the 
Abolition  of  Slavery  might  have  been  achieved  in  a 
more  gracious,  less  violent  manner.  But  history  did 
not  move  that  way.  And  only  the  foolish  quarrel 
with  history. 


APPENDIX   I 

THE  DEATH  OF  A  RED  REGIMENT 

Interview  of  Mr.  N.  Shiffrin  with  the  editor  of  a  military 
paper  of  the  Counter-Revolutionary  army  of  the  North.  Pub- 
lished in  the  anti-Bolshevik  daily  Der  Tag,  September  7,  1919: 

"As  you  know  the  Bolsheviks  changed  the  names  of  the  old 
regiments.  The  Moscow  troops  have  'K.L.'  on  their  shoulder 
straps — the  initials  of  Karl  Liebknecht.  We  captured  one  of 
these  regiments  and  they  were  tried.  The  trial  at  the  White  front 
is  brief.  Every  soldier  is  examined,  and  if  he  admits  that  he  is 
a  Communist  he  is  immediately  sentenced  to  death  by  hanging 
or  shooting.    The  Reds  are  well  aware  of  this. 

"Lieutenant  K.  approached  the  captured  regiment  and  said: 
'Those  of  you  who  are  true  Communists  show  yourselves  courage- 
ous and  step  forward.'  A  painfully  oppressive  interval.  .  .  . 
Slowly  in  closed  ranks  over  half  of  the  regiment  steps  forward. 
They  are  sentenced  to  be  shot.  But  before  being  shot  they 
must  dig  their  own  graves. 

"It  is  twilight.  The  air  is  full  of  the  odor  of  fragrant  northern 
flowers.  The  green  dome  of  the  village  church  is  seen,  sur- 
rounded by  sleepy  poplars.  Peasants,  women,  children  and  sol- 
diers crowd  on  the  field,  huddling  together  like  sheep  in  a  storm. 

"The  condemned  are  told  to  take  off  their  clothes.  The  front 
is  poor  and  their  uniforms  are  needed  by  the  Whites.  In  order 
to  save  the  clothes  from  being  soiled  with  blood  or  torn  by 
bullets  the  prisoners  are  ordered  to  undress  before  they  are  shot. 
Slowly  the  Communists  take  off  their  shirts,  and  tying  their 
clothes  together  in  a  bundle,  they  put  them  aside. 

"They  stand  there  in  the  field,  freezing,  and  in  the  moonlight 
287 


2  88  APPENDIX 

their  skin  appears  extremely  white,  almost  transparent.  Each  of 
them  is  given  a  pick-axe  and  they  begin  digging  large  common 
graves.  The  dew  is  falling  like  a  mild  drizzle  and  there  is  a  tear 
in  every  eye.  The  naked  Communists  keep  on  digging.  It  is  get- 
ting darker  and  darker.  There  is  a  chaos  of  restlessly  moving 
limbs.    It  is  hard  to  distinguish  the  naked  from  the  dressed. 

"At  last  the  graves  have  the  necessary  depth.  The  condemned 
si[;h  from  weariness.  Many  throw  themselves  on  the  soft  wet 
ground  and  rest.  It  is  their  last  repose.  Only  now  I  notice  that 
many  have  bandages  around  their  feet.  They  have  already 
been  wounded  in  the  struggle. 

"Lieutenant  K.  asks  them  to  state  their  last  wish.  Two  take 
thin  rings  off  their  fingers  and  give  them  to  the  Lieutenant. 
The  others  have  no  wishes  to  make,  altho  every  one  of  them 
has  a  home,  a  wife,  children,  relatives.  I  ask  one  of  them  'What 
made  a  Communist  of  you?' 

"He  replies:  'The  accursed  life!     The  world  needs  happiness.* 

"The  iiring  squads  are  holding  their  rifles  ready  to  shoot.  The 
naked  Communists  take  their  positions  close  to  one  another, 
forming  a  white  wall  in  the  moonlight.  .  .  .  There  is  a  com- 
mand, a  flash  and  the  sound  of  rifles.  .  .  .  The  Communists  are 
still  standing  erect.  A  second  volley  rings  out.  The  bullets  strike 
home  in  their  hearts,  thick  blood  streams  leap  into  space.  Some 
are  only  slightly  wounded.  And  in  the  fraction  of  a  second 
before  the  soldiers  shoot  again,  I  hear  deep  sickening  groans. 
Volley  follows  volley.  Now  those  who  are  still  alive  cry  out: 
'Ho  there,  take  better  aim!'  One  points  to  his  heart,  crying,  'Aim 
here!' 

"Finally,  all  are  dead.  Some  are  lying  near  the  edge  of  the 
graves,  others  have  fallen  into  them.  It  is  all  over.  Nothing 
disturbs  the  quiet." 

II 

THE  TRAIN  OF  DEATH 

This  is  part  of  the  diary  of  Mr.  Rudolph  Bukely,  a  Red  Cross 
worker,  formerly  a  banker  in  Honolulu.    It  reveals  the  conditions 


A  soldier  of  the  Red  Army  captured  by  the  Whites.    He  confesses  he  is  a 
Communist  and  is  bound  to  a  stake  to  be  shot. 


Some  of  the  Bolshevik  prisoners  on  the  Train  of  Death,  2,000  of  whom  were 
shot,  starved,  or  frozen  to  death. 


APPENDIX  289 

following  Allied  Intervention  in  Siberia,  and  shows  the  atrocities 
of  White  Terrorists  against  Bolsheviks  and  even  innocent  people. 
It  is  abbreviated  from  the  American  Red  Cross  Magazine  of 
April  1919  which  says:  "Propriety  has  demanded  the  exclusion  of 
much  that  is  unprintable." 

"It  is  the  eighteenth  day  of  November,  1918.  I  am  at  Nikolsk- 
Ussurisk  in  Siberia.  In  the  past  two  days  I  have  seen  enough 
misery  to  fill  a  life-time.  I  will  try  to  set  down  in  my  own 
manner  what  I  have  seen. 

"I  have  seen,  through  the  windows  of  box-cars  forty  animals 
who  once  were  human  men,  women  and  children;  faces  glared 
at  me  which  I  could  not  recognize  as  human  beings.  They  were 
like  beasts'  faces,  of  a  species  unknown  to  man.  Stark  mad- 
ness and  terror  stared  from  their  eyes,  and  over  all  the  un- 
mistakable signs  of  death. 

"I  have  seen  the  dead  lying  along  the  roadside,  and  fifty  or 
sixty  men  fighting  like  dogs  for  pieces  of  bread  thrown  to  them 
by  the  sympathetic  poor  people  of  Nikolsk.  .  .  . 

"This  'train  of  death,'  for  by  that  name  all  Eastern  Siberia 
now  knows  it,  left  Samara  about  six  weeks  ago  in  charge  of 
Russian  officers.  It  had  on  board  at  that  time  2,100  prisoners 
of  all  sorts. 

"Since  that  day  800  of  these  wretches  have  died  from  starva- 
tion, filth,  and  disease.  There  were,  as  near  as  we  could  count, 
1,325  men,  women,  and  children  penned  up  in  these  awful  cars 
yesterday. 

"It  seems  a  wicked  thing  to  say,  but  the  thought  has  surely 
come  to  me  that  to  kill  these  people  painlessly  would  require 
perhaps  three  dollars'  worth  of  poison  or  ten  dollars'  worth  of 
ammunition;  and  yet  for  weeks  this  train  of  fifty  cars  has  been 
wandering,  driven  on  from  station  to  station,  every  day  a  few 
more  corpses  being  dragged  out.  Many  of  these  people  have 
been  in  box-cars  for  five  weeks  in  their  original  clothing.  There 
are  from  35  to  40  in  a  box-car,  measuring  say  25  by  11  feet,  and 
the  doors  have  seldom  been  open  save  to  drag  out  the  bodies  of 


290  APPENDIX 

the  dead,  or  some  woman  who  might  better  be.  I  have  climbed 
into  these  cars  at  night  with  my  flashlight.  I  have  seen  men 
with  the  death  rattle  in  their  throat,  half  naked,  with  lice  and 
vermin  visible  on  them;  others  just  lying  in  a  semi-un- 
conscious stupor;  and  others  with  the  whining  grin  of  im- 
beciles, holding  out  their  hands  for  a  few  cigarettes  or  kopecks, 
chuckling  with  glee  like  apes  upon  being  given  them. 

"The  Russian  officer  in  charge  of  the  train  has  made  incon- 
sistent statements  about  the  reasons  why  these  people  have  been 
subjected  to  such  awful  deprivation  and  abuse.  He  tries  to  make 
the  best  story  of  it  possible.  .  .  .  Often  for  days  at  a  time  there 
has  been  no  one  to  give  them  even  bread.  Were  it  not  for  the 
kindness  of  the  poor  villagers  who,  with  tears  running  down  their 
cheeks,  give  them  what  little  they  can  afford,  they  would  be 
absolutely  without  nourishment. 

"It  is  impossible  to  tell  in  print  the  story  of  the  unfortunate 
women  imprisoned  here.  They  are  treated  better  than  the  men. 
You  all  know  why.  In  one  car  are  ii  women.  On  the  inside 
of  the  car  hangs  a  piece  of  string.  On  it  are  four  pairs  of  stock- 
ings owned  by  these  ii  women.  The  floor  is  covered  with  refuse 
and  filth.  There  are  no  means  of  cleaning  it,  neither  brooms  nor 
buckets.  They  have  not  taken  off  their  clothing  for  weeks.  All 
around  the  sides  of  the  cars  run  two  rows  of  planks,  on  which 
the  inmates  sleep  at  night  and  sit  hunched  up  by  day.  If  there 
ever  is  any  official  food  for  the  prisoners,  these  women  get  the 
first  pick  and  their  physical  condition  is  much  better. 

"Since  we  arrived  a  cooking  car  has  been  put  on  the  train,  with 
a  large  iron  kettle,  and  yesterday  the  guards  claim  to  have 
given  the  prisoners  a  little  soup.  One  kettle  for  1,325  people, 
and  soup  passed  through  a  window  a  foot  by  a  foot  and  a  half, 
by  means  of  an  old  rusty  can !  Yesterday  one  of  the  women  was 
taken  out  by  a  Russian  officer.  He  will  return  her  when  the 
train  pulls  out.  ...  As  we  walked  past  the  train,  a  man  hailed 
us  from  one  of  the  cars  and  the  guards  were  told  that  there 
were  dead  inside.  We  insisted  on  the  door  being  opened  and  this 
is  what  we  saw; 


APPENDIX  291 

"Lying  right  across  the  threshold  was  the  body  of  a  boy.  No 
coat,  merely  a  thin  shirt,  in  such  tatters  that  his  whole  chest 
and  arms  were  exposed;  for  trousers  a  piece  of  jute  bag  pinned 
around  him,  and  no  shoes  or  stockings.  What  agony  that  boy 
must  have  suffered  in  the  Siberian  cold  before  he  died  of  filth, 
starvation,  and  exposure! 

"And  yet  'diplomacy'  prevents  us  from  taking  charge  and  giving 
aid.     But  we  are  holding  the  train! 

"We  climbed  into  the  car  and  found  two  other  dead  lying  on 
the  second  tier  of  bunks  amongst  the  living.  Nearly  every  man 
was  sunken-eyed,  gaunt,  and  half  clad.  They  were  racked  by 
terrible  coughing.  They  had  the  stamp  of  death  on  them.  If 
aid  does  not  come  quickly  they  will  die.  We  looked  into  a  few 
cars  only,  but  at  one  window  we  saw  a  little  girl  perhaps  eleven 
years  old.  Her  father,  she  said,  had  been  mobilized  into  the 
Red  Guard.  So  now  father,  mother,  and  child  are  on  that  train 
and  will  die  there.  Dr.  Rosett  is  one  of  the  most  beautiful  char- 
acters that  I  have  ever  known.  When  I  saw  him  in  the  car 
talking  to  these  poor  wretches  and  trying  to  comfort  them,  I 
could  not  help  thinking  of  the  Good  Physician  and  how  He, 
too,  labored  among  the  maimed,  the  halt  and  the  blind. 

".  .  .  .  It  is  a  strange  thing  that  they  all  look  at  you  with  an 
expression  sorrowful  in  the  extreme,  but  never  with  a  trace  of 
bitterness.  Suffering  seems  to  have  destroyed  in  them  the  power 
to  express  anger.  I  have  visited  the  train  at  least  ten  times  and 
I  have  never  as  yet  seen  any  expression  of  any  kind  pass  over 
the  faces  of  these  poor,  tortured,  dumb  creatures. 

"I  went  into  the  hospital  last  night.  Fourteen  were  lying  on 
the  filthiest  straw  imaginable.  Three  of  them  turned  their  dull 
eyes  on  me,  recognized  the  Red  Cross  uniform  and  got  upon 
their  poor  worn  knees.  One  of  them,  an  old  man  of  sixty,  had 
a  silver  crucifix  hanging  around  his  neck.  They  sobbed  soundless, 
body-racking  sobs,  and  said  in  Russian,  'May  God  and  Jesus 
Christ  bless  you  and  keep  you  for  what  you  have  done  for  us.' 
We  felt  absolutely  repaid  for  all  our  work  of  these  days,  during 
which  time  I  have  not  bathed  or  shaved,  nor  had  my  clothes  off, 


292  APPENDIX 

for  I  have  dropped  exhausted  on  my  bed  when  I  have  finished 
transcribing  my  notes,  and  it  was  time  to  sleep.  .  .  . 

"There  is  no  use  disguising  the  fact  that  these  people  are  nearly 
all  going  to  die,  for  as  soon  as  the  train  shall  have  pulled  out 
the  old  conditions  will  return  and  there  will  be  once  more  the 
corpses  thrown  out  day  by  day." 

Mr.  Bukely's  prophecy  that  the  death  train  would  still  be  a 
death  train  was  fulfilled.  It  went  on  over  the  Trans-Siberian, 
first  west  then  east,  back  and  forth,  driven  from  town  to  town, 
the  authorities  at  each  place  refusing  to  allow  the  prisoners  to  be 
taken  out  of  the  train  or  the  train  to  remain  within  its  jurisdic- 
tion. 

On  and  on,  days  and  nights,  weeks  running  into  months,  the 
wretched  company  ever  dwindling  as  death  takes  its  cruel  and 
incessant  toll.  [This  was  but  one  of  many  trains  of  death  run  by 
the  anti-Bolshevist  governments.} 

Ill 

THE  BURIAL  OF  YANISHEV 

The  Moscow  Izvestia  of  July  15,  1920,  says: 

"On  July  13  the  Moscow  proletariat  buried  Comrade  Mikhail 
Petrovich  Yanishev  under  the  Kremlin  wall.  The  first  speaker, 
the  Chairman  of  the  Moscow  Soviet,  L.  B.  Kamanev  said: 

"  'Of  the  many  men  who  gave  all  to  the  cause  of  the  working- 
class.  Comrade  Yanishev  was  one  of  the  truest.  Wherever  there 
was  call  for  an  honest,  brave  and  energetic  man,  Yanishev  was 
sent.  Recently  he  was  appointed  Chairman  of  the  Moscow 
Revolutionary  Tribunal.  He  was  ordered  to  leave  that  respon- 
sible post  and  sent  to  the  front  against  Denikin.  On  the  way  to 
the  Western  front  he  was  ordered  to  the  defense  of  South  Russia 
from  the  bands  of  Wrangel.  Tho  wounded  in  the  shoulder  he  did 
not  leave  his  place  in  the  front  lines,  but  continued  leading  his 
division  forward  until  the  treacherous  hand  of  a  White  Guard 
brought  him  down  with  a  bayonet.    He  is  dead.    But  the  cause 


APPENDIX  293 

for  which  Comrade  Yanishev  gave  his  life  will  not  die.  His 
blood  was  not  spUt  in  vain.  Many  others  will  carry  on  the 
struggle  and  bring  it  to  a  victorious  finish.' 

"Comrade  Likhachev  spoke  and  the  ceremony  ended  with  a 
salute  of  three  guns." 

IV 

A  BOLSHEVIK  CIRCULAR  FOR  BRITISH  SOLDIERS 

Why  have  you  volunteered  to  come  to  Russia? 

Why?  Is  it  that  you  like  war  so  much?  Do  you  enjoy  this 
rolling  in  mud  and  blood?  Do  you  get  satisfaction  from  seeing 
mangled  bodies,  and  wrecked  towns  and  villages?  You  claim 
to  be  the  representatives  of  a  civilized  race!  Is  this  how  you 
propose  to  bring  civilization  into  Russia? 

Or  is  it  that  you  feared  being  out  of  work  and  came  to  Russia 
as  a  form  of  employment?  Were  you  tempted  by  the  increased 
pay  and  extra  rations?  If  that  is  so,  it  is  strange  employment 
for  men  who  have  just  finished  a  war  for  "lasting  peace." 

Does  it  not  strike  you  that  what  you  are  getting  for  your 
work  is  sheer  Blood  Money?  It  is  the  kind  of  work  that  cut- 
throats, blackguards,  thieves  and  hooligans  undertake  to  do  for 
money.  If  these  are  the  reasons  for  which  you  came,  it  is  not 
much  use  appealing  to  your  reason  and  humanity.  The  only 
argument  that  we  can  effectively  use  against  you  is  the  bullet 
and  bayonet,  and  you  will  find  that  the  Red  Army  will  give  you 
all  you  want  of  that.  You  will  find  your  job  "soft"  enough  when 
you  find  yourself  sucked  in  the  mud,  in  the  marshes  and  forests  of 
Northern  Russia. 

We  cannot  believe,  however,  that  the  majority  of  you  vol- 
unteered for  these  reasons.  Probably  you  were  induced  by  the 
lies  circulated  by  the  capitalist  press  about  the  anarchy  and 
terror  prevailing  in  Russia.  Probably  you  have  been  induced  to 
believe  that  Bolsheviks  are  devils,  who  must  be  destroyed  in 
order  that  the  peace  of  the  world  may  be  secured.  If  that  is  so, 
we  are  convinced  that  when  you  learn  the  truth  about  Russia, 


294  APPENDIX 

you  too  will  refuse  to  be  the  executioners  of  the  Russian  people, 
just  like  the  British  troops  you  replaced  in  the  Caucasus,  and 
the  French  and  foreign  troops  in  other  parts  who  have  refused. 

There  is  no  anarchy  in  Russia  except  that  which  the  capitalist 
governments  of  the  Allies  are  creating  by  invading  Russia.  You 
are  not  allaying  anarchy,  you  are  creating  it.  You  are  not 
bringing  order  in  a  country  which  is  accused  of  disturbing  the 
peace  of  the  world,  you  are  commencing  a  new  war. 

You  are  simply  the  tools  of  the  capitalists  and  landlords  in 
your  countries  who  have  sent  you  here  to  "punish"  the  Russian 
workers  and  peasants  for  having  dared  to  revolt  against  their 
oppressors.  The  Russian  Soviet  Republic  is  a  Workers'  and 
Peasants'  Republic.  The  land  and  the  wealth  of  Russia  now 
belong  to  the  working-people  of  Russia.  You  have  been  brought 
here  to  overthrow  the  power  of  the  workers  and  restore  Czarism, 
landlordism  and  capitalism.  Your  governments  are  officially 
supporting  the  Czarist  officers,  Kolchak  and  Denikin,  with  arms 
and  money  for  the  avowed  purpose  of  restoring  the  old  regime. 
And  you  are  not  merely  helping,  you  are  doing  this. 

Without  your  aid,  the  counter-revolution  in  Russia  would  have 
been  suppressed  long  ago,  the  civil- war  would  have  been  ended 
and  order  restored.  And  the  Russian  people  would  have  long 
ago  had  the  opportunity  of  developing  their  agriculture  and  in- 
dustry. 

Volunteers!  You  are  workingmen  too.  What  interests  have 
you  in  fighting  for  the  gang  of  Russian  counter-revolutionaries 
and  international  capitalists?  As  workingmen,  your  business 
should  be  to  support  your  fellow-workers  in  those  places  where 
they  succeed  in  taking  power,  for  the  victory  of  the  workers  in 
one  country  is  a  step  toward  the  emancipation  of  the  workers 
in  all  countries. 

In  fighting  the  Russian  workers,  you  are  Scabbing;  your  fel- 
low-workers at  home,  knowing  the  real  reason  of  your  being 
sent  here,  are  preparing  for  a  general  strike  against  intervention 
in  Russia.  In  continuing  to  do  the  work  of  your  government, 
you  are  Scabbing  on  your  fellow  workers  at  home. 


APPENDIX  295 

Comrades!  It  is  dirty  work  you  are  doing.  Have  the  courage 
to  pitch  it.  Do  not  let  it  be  said  that  English  workingmen  were 
so  mean  and  contemptible  as  to  suppress  their  own  fellow-workers 
for  the  sake  of  a  Uttle  extra  money  and  food. 

Comrades !  Do  not  be  scabs.  Stand  by  your  class  in  the  great 
world  movement  for  the  emancipation  of  labor. 

V 

YESTERDAY  AND  TODAY 
By  Maxim  Gorky 

Yesterday  was  the  day  of  the  Great  Falsehood — the  last  day 
of  its  power. 

For  ages,  man  has,  spider-like,  thread  by  thread,  diligently 
woven  the  strong  cobweb  of  a  cautious  philistine  life,  impreg- 
nating it  more  and  more  with  falsehood  and  greed.  Man  fed 
on  the  flesh  and  blood  of  his  fellow  men.  The  means  of  pro- 
duction were  used  to  oppress  men, — this  cynical  falsehood  was 
regarded  as  immutable  truth. 

And  yesterday  this  road  brought  mankind  to  the  madness 
of  the  great  World  War.  In  the  red  glow  of  this  nightmare 
the  ugly  nakedness  of  this  old  falsehood  was  brought  to  light. 
Now  we  see  the  old  world  shaken  to  its  foundations.  Its  hidden 
secrets  are  exposed,  and  today  even  the  blind  have  opened  their 
eyes  and  see  the  utter  ugliness  of  the  past. 

Today  is  the  day  of  reckoning  for  the  falsehood  which  reigned 
yesterday. 

The  violent  explosion  of  the  people's  patience  has  destroyed 
the  outworn  order  of  life,  and  it  cannot  again  be  re-established 
in  its  old  forms.  Not  all  of  the  outworn  past  is  annihilated,  but 
it  will  be — tomorrow. 

Today  there  is  a  great  deal  of  horror,  but  it  is  all  natural  and 
comprehensible.  Is  it  not  natural  that  people  infected  by  the 
strong  poisons  of  the  old  order — alcohol  and  syphilis — should  not 
be  generous?    Is  it  not  natural  for  people  to  steal, — if  theft  was 


296  APPENDIX 

the  fundamental  law  of  yesterday?  Is  it  not  natural,  that  tens, 
hundreds,  thousands  of  men  should  be  killed,  after  being  accus- 
tomed for  years  to  kill  them  by  millions?  The  seed  of  yester- 
day brings  the  fruit  of  today. 

We  should  understand  that  in  the  midst  of  the  dust  and  mud 
and  chaos  of  today,  there  has  already  begun  the  great  work  of 
liberating  mankind  from  the  strong,  iron  cobweb  of  the  past. 
It  is  as  painful  and  difficult  as  the  pangs  of  a  new  birth;  but  it 
is  the  death  of  the  evil  of  yesterday,  going  through  its  last  hours 
together  with  the  man  of  yesterday. 

It  has  so  happened  that  the  peoples  marching  to  the  decisive 
battle  for  the  triumph  of  justice  are  led  by  the  least  experienced 
and  weakest  fighters, — by  the  Russians,  a  people  of  a  backward 
land,  a  people  worn  out  by  its  past  more  than  any  other  people. 
Only  yesterday  the  whole  world  looked  upon  them  as  semi-bar- 
barians, and  today,  almost  dying  from  hunger,  they  are  marching 
toward  victory  or  death  with  the  ardor  and  courage  of  veterans. 

Everyone  who  sincerely  believes  that  the  irresistible  aspira- 
tion of  mankind  toward  freedom,  beauty,  and  a  sensible  life  is 
not  a  vain  dream,  but  that  it  is  a  real  force  which  alone  can 
create  new  forms  of  life,  the  lever  which  can  move  the  world, — 
every  honest  man  must  recognize  the  universal  significance  of  the 
activity  now  carried  on  by  the  earnest  revolutionists  of  Russia. 

The  Revolution  should  be  interpreted  as  a  gigantic  attempt  to 
incorporate  in  life,  the  great  ideas  and  watchwords  created  and 
enunciated  by  the  teachers  of  mankind.  Yesterday  the  Socialist 
thought  of  Europe  pointed  the  way  to  the  Russian  people;  today 
the  Russian  worker  is  striving  for  the  triumph  of  European 
thought. 

If  the  honest  Russian  revolutionists,  few  in  number,  sur- 
rounded by  enemies  and  exhausted  by  starvation,  shall  be  con- 
quered, the  consequences  of  this  terrible  calamity  will  fall  heavily 
on  the  shoulders  of  all  the  working  class  of  Europe. 

The  Russian  worker  is  confident  that  his  brothers  in  spirit 
will  not  permit  the  strangling  of  the  revolution  in  Russia,  that 
they  will  not  permit  the  resuscitation  of  the  order,  which  is  ex- 


APPENDIX  297 

piring  and  which  will  disappear, — if  the  revolutionary  thought  of 
Europe  will  comprehend  the  great  tasks  of  today. 

Come  and  go  with  us  towards  the  new  hfe,  whose  creation 
we  work  for  without  sparing  ourselves  and  without  sparing  any- 
body or  anything.  Erring  and  suffering,  in  the  great  joy  of  labor 
and  in  the  burning  hope  of  progress,  we  leave  to  the  honest 
judgment  of  history  all  our  deeds.  Come  with  us  to  battle  against 
the  ancient  order  and  to  labor  for  the  new.  Forth  to  life's  free- 
dom and  beauty! 

VI 

DECLARATION  OF  THE  RIGHTS  OF  THE  WORKING  AND 
EXPLOITED  PEOPLES 

(Rejected  by  the  Constituent  Assembly,  January  18,  1918. 
Accepted  by  the  great  Third  Congress  of  Soviets,  January  27, 
1918.) 

I.  RUSSIA  is  declared  a  Republic  of  Workmen's,  Soldiers' 
and  Peasants'  councils.  The  whole  central  and  local  authority 
rests  with  the  Councils  (Soviets).  The  Russian  Soviet  Republic 
is  declared  a  free  alliance  of  free  nations  and  a  federation  of 
national  republics. 

n.  With  the  object  of  removing  the  exploitation  of  man  by 
man,  of  preventing  the  division  of  society  into  classes,  of  merci- 
lessly suppressing  all  exploiters,  of  establishing  a  socialist  organi- 
zation of  society  and  of  securing  the  victory  of  Socialism  in  all 
lands,  the  Great  Convention  (Third  All-Russian  Congress)  makes 
the  following   declarations: 

(a)  With  the  object  of  realizing  the  socialization  of 
land,  all  private  property  in  the  land  is  abol- 
ished, and  the  whole  territory  of  the  Republic  is 
declared  the  property  of  the  people  and  is  with- 
out compensation  handed  over  to  the  working 
population  on  the  basis  equal  rights  of  utiliza- 
tion for  all.  All  forests,  natural  wealth  and 
water  power  of  public  value,  all  live  and  dead 
stock,  model  farms  and  agricultural  stations,  are 
declared  national  property. 


298  APPENDIX 

(b)  As  a  first  step  towards  the  complete  transference 

of  factories,  mines,  railways,  and  of  the  means 
of  production  and  distribution  to  the  possession 
of  the  Workers'  and  Peasants'  Republic,  the  de- 
crees concerning  Workmen's  Control  and  con- 
cerning the  Supreme  Council  of  Public  Economy 
are  hereby  confirmed. 

(c)  As  one  of  the  conditions  for  the  emancipation  of 

the  working  masses  from  the  yoke  of  capitalism, 
the  transference  of  all  banks  to  the  possession 
of  the  Workers'  and  Peasants'  Soviet  Republic  is 
confirmed. 

(d)  With  the  object  of  removing  parasitical  elements 

of  society  and  of  securing  industrial  organiza- 
tion on  a  public  basis,  the  obligation  of  every 
citizen  to  work  is  recognized. 

(e)  In  the  interests  of  securing  the  full  authority  of 

the  toiling  masses  and  of  removing  all  possibili- 
ties of  a  re-establishment  of  the  power  of  the 
exploiters,  the  arming  of  the  workers,  the  forma- 
tion   of   a    Red    Army    out    of   workmen    and 
peasants,   and   the   complete   disarming    of   the 
propertied  classes  is  hereby  decreed. 
III.    With  the  firm  intention  of  rescuing  mankind  from  the 
claws  of  finance-capital  and  of  imperialism,  which  have  flooded 
the  earth  with  blood  in  the  most  criminal  of  all  wars,  the  Great 
Convention  endorses  and  confirms  the  following  acts  of  the  Soviet 
Commissars: 

(a)  The  annulling  of  the  Secret  Treaties,  the  organiza- 
tion of  fraternization  between  the  workmen  and 
peasants  of  the  armies  now  opposing  each  other 
in  the  field,  the  conclusion  at  all  costs  of  a 
democratic  peace  by  the  workers  themselves, 
without  annexations  or  indemnities,  on  the  basis 
of  the  self-determination  of  nations  through 
revolutionary  means. 


APPENDIX  299 

(b)  The  complete  break  with  the  barbarous  policy  of 

capitalist  civilization,  which  estabUshes  the 
power  of  the  exploiters  in  a  few  select  nations  at 
the  cost  of  the  enslavement  of  hundreds  of  mil- 
lions of  the  toiling  masses  in  Asia,  in  the  Colo- 
nies and  in  all  small  countries. 

(c)  The  recognition  of  the  complete  independence  of 

Finland,  the  withdrawal  of  the  Russian  armies 
from  Persia,  and  the  right  of  self-determination 
for  Armenia. 

(d)  The  annulling  of  the  loans  which  were  concluded 

by   the   Government    of    the   Tsar,   the   foreign 
banks  and  the  Russian  bourgeoisie,  as  the  first 
blow    against    international    bank    and   finance- 
capital. 
IV.    The  Great  Convention  believes  that  the  time  is  at  hand  for 
the  decisive  struggle  with  the  exploiters,  for  whom  there  is  now 
no  place  in  the  organs  of  government.    Power  must  be  now  wholly 
and  exclusively  in  the  hands  of  the  toiling  masses  and  of  their 
representative  organs — the   Soviets  of  Workmen's,  Soldiers'  and 
Peasants'  Deputies. 


Dr.  Wm. 


W'ovschin   collection 


The  President  of  the  Soviet  Republic  is  Kalinin — not  Lenin.  Kalinin  is  here 
seated  in  front  of  a  village  hut  conferring  with  the  peasants.  (Sec  next  page). 


Moscow,  Oct.  2ah,  1921— The  humblest  peasant  may  come  to  ask 
the  help  or  advice  of  Kalinin,  the  President  of  the  Soviet  Republic 
with  none  to  bar  his  way. 

Around  him  come  pressing-  two  or  three  score  of  men  dressed  in 
rough  untanned  sheepskin  or  dun-colored  cloth,  that  hall-mark  of  the 
Russian  villagers.  Some  are  carrying  a  sack  of  food  or  a  bed-roll, 
token  of  the  long  journey  they  made  to  lay  their  case  before  Kalinin. 

He  greets  his  visitors  simply  and  talks  to  one  after  another  in  the 
same  peasant  diale-ct  as  theirs. 

It  is  hard  to  realize  that  here  before  one's  eyes  is  the  secret  of  the 
no  small  Bolshevist  hold  on  the  Russian  people.  More  than  any  of 
his  colleagues,  more  even  than  Lenin,  Kalinin  knows  what  the  peas- 
ants think,  what  they  love  or  hate  and  what  they  want. 

However  impossible  it  is  for  him  to  appease  their  grievance  or 
satisfy  their  requests,  he  contrives  somehow  to  send  them  away  com- 
forted and  almost  contented.  For  the  man  streams  magnetism  in 
every  word  and  gesture. 

"See,  now,  little  mother,"  he  says  persuasively  to  an  old  woman 
who  has  traveled  a  thousand  miles  to  ask  Kalinin  that  her  village  be 
let  off  the  food  tax  because  the  harvest  is  only  half  what  was 
estimated,  "your  crop  is  only  500  poods  instead  of  1,000.  Then  you  will 
pay  only  25  poods  instead  of  55  on  each  hundred— that  is  your  tax. 

"More  than  that  we  cannot  do,  for  we  must  feed  our  hungry 
brothers  on  the  Volga,  who  have  no  crop  at  all— you  would  not- 
have  them  starve." 

The  old  woman  shakes  her  head  strongly  and  backs  away  with  the 
evident  feeling  that  somehow  she  has  got  the  tax  reduced  50  per  cent, 
which  will  be  good  news  for  her  fellow-villagers. 

Next  comes  a  young  soldier  who  claims  that  as  a  veteran  of  the 
Polish  war  he  should  not  pay  a  tax  at  all. 

"But  you  are  a  man  of  Tula,"  says  Kalinin,  "and  Tula  folks,  farm 
as  well  as  they  fight.  Why,  I  hear  Tula  has  the  best  crop  in  Russia. 
Surely  you  won't  grudge  help  to  hungry  brothers  not  so  clever  or 
lucky  as  you?"  ; V' 

The  soldier  looks  sheepish  but  sticks  stubbornly  to  his  point. 

"This  is  the  first  year  I  have  been  able  to  sow  or  reap  my  own 
harvest  for  seven  years,  Comrade  Kalinin.  Others  reaped  while 
J  was  fighting  to  defend  them.     Now  let  them  pay  the  tax  for  me." 

The  President  takes  him  up  like  a  flash.  j 

"What !"  he  cries,  "Others  worked  to  feed  you  while  you  were 
winning  glory?"— he  bends  forward  and  touches  the  red  star  medal 
on  the  youngster's  army  overcoat — "well,  now  you,  too,  must  give 
something  to  help  those  who  need  it." 

This  time  he  has  struck  home.  The  soldier  flushes  with  pride, 
and,  as  he  shakes  the  President's  hand  with  a  firm  grip,  he  mutters: 

"That's  only  fair,  comrade.  I  will  tell  the  rest  of  the  soldiers  of 
our  village  what  you  say,  and  all  will  help." 

And  so  it  goes.  An  old  man  from  Tambov  and  a  widow  from  a 
village  near  Moscow  get  part  of  their  tax  remitted  because  the  former 
is  supporting  a  war-broken  son,  and  the  latter,  five  fatherless  little 
children.  And  the  peasants  go  back  to  Russia's  myriad  villages  with 
a  message  of  good  tidings  from  Kalinin,  the  new  Little  Father  of 
the  people. 

Walter  Durant\%  correspondent, 
in  the  New  York  Times,  Oct.  29th,  1921 


VII 


PLACARDS   AND  POSTERS 

Machine-guns  played  their  part  in  the  Revolution.  But  & 
bigger  part  was  played  by  the  printing-presses.  The  Soviet 
waged  a  mighty  battle  with  ink  as  well  as  lead.  Every  crisis> 
every  important  event,  produced  its  corresponding  placard  or 
poster.  They  were  pasted  on  walls  and  kiosks — one  on  top  of 
the  other — in  some  places  20  and  30  deep.  Arranged  in  order, 
they  would  tell  a  complete  stor>':  The  History  of  the  Revolu- 
tion in  Posters  from  the  Walls  of  Petrograd  and  Moscow. 

Six  of  these  posters  appear  in  the  foregoing  text.  Five  more 
are  printed  in  the  following  pages.  (On  the  left  hand  page,  a 
facsimile  of  the  original  Russian;  on  the  right  hand  page,  in 
English.) 

1.  To  ALL  Workers  of  Petrograd  (page  303).  An  appeal 
to  celebrate  the  success  of  the  November  Revolution — not  by 
strikes  and  demonstrations,  but  by  quietness  and  work. 

2.  The  Commission  on  Public  Education  (page  305).  The 
Bolsheviks  had  the  majority  in  the  newly  elected  Petrograd  Duma. 
They  sought  to  arouse  public  sentiment  in  protest  against  the 
teachers'  strike. 

3.  Pravda  {Truth)  (page  307).  Two  half-pages  of  the  of- 
ficial Bolshevik  newspaper,  calling  the  people  to  arms  against  the 
Germans  and  Japanese.  In  issue  No.  33,  February  23,  the  price  is 
25  kopecks.  In  issue  No.  4s,  two  weeks  later,  the  price  is  30 
kopecks.  The  two  issues  show  likewise  the  change  of  name  in 
the  Party.  Note  also  the  double  number  in  the  date  line, 
"23  (10)  February."  By  Soviet  decree  the  old  Julian  calendar— 
13  days  behind  the  rest  of  the  world — was  replaced  by  the 
Gregorian  calendar. 

4.  From  the  Samar.\  Federation  of  Anarchists  (page  309). 
In  order  to  blacken  the  Anarchists,  it  was  said  that  they  had 
declared  for  the  Nationalization  of  Women.  Infuriated  at  this 
slander,  they  put  out  this  hot  repudiation.  The  so-called  "Decree 
for  the  Nationalization  of  Women,"  of  course,  had  no  existence 
anywhere  in  Russia.  Even  the  most  extreme  groups  never  con- 
sidered the  idea.  It  was  a  monstrous  canard  invented  by  the 
enetfiies  of  the  Revolution. 

5.  The  Cry  for  Bread  (page  311).  This  is  an  appeal  of  the 
cities  to  the  peasants  of  the  Ukraine  and  the  Volga  in  1918.  Now 
it  is  this  Volga  region  that  is  stricken  with  drouth — the  worst 
since  1873.    These  peasants  in  turn  are  appealing  for  bread. 

301 


'o  BrtPfb  paOcmHivnp 


Ein  Bnam  nspemi&a  wb  usmkwb  Cofi^Tanrb.  DejiSbisi  Hefffeim  ca* 
mi»uiTpyAHbM.Hajsoiia3MaBa'niAOHoagiacjioQ0Jse2SH]fiOif«e|ieaK- 
1^1  oajio  o6e3oe<SBTb  Essmioe  topHtecTBO  aantBiffb  crpenuie- 

,  gLnaC£'&  ll@IlM@H%,9@flSaH%  ipC^^BTb  3ib  3TH  flBH 


4to6bi.o6derimtb  Eoboesis'  BaponHemi^  QpaiBBTejibCTBy  Cbirfc- 

fPlAajObi  HOiBbie  3aK0iEb3  Bss  paSoiieBai  Bsiiiiocy  h  bii  Tonrb 
mtfst  ttmmb  B3i»  cai^ax^  cspsbBn*  aaHonii  a  paSoqeniik 

UbmUieHBOCT^ 

3aOaGTara  h  BMCipjieiilH  paSoqHXi  fnatoi  b% 


Mu  npocHMi  saci  oeMenAeBBo  n^eicpaTHTb  ic%  9koHO!(^ecKlB  a  ooAHnniecida 
^aCacTOBKs,  BC^Bf^  cra-rs  ea  pa()^0Ty  a  iipon3BOAB7&  ee  Bt  nooapMit  nopanK%.  PaSora 
Ba  sasoAaxiS  a  bo  scixi  npcjifipisiTiax'h  aeo0xoniDia  hobomj  npaBjaTejnkCrBy  Cob^tobi) 
noTOMy  TTO  BCHKoe  "pasctpoAcTBO  paGon  cosnae'Tb  009  aact>  aoBiiia  saTpyABeala. 
Ro+ppuxt  B  6e3'i  Toro  aoBo^itao.  Bci  ki.  CBocMy  Mtcry. 

Jlynnee  cpencTBO  QOAAepataxb  aoBoe  npasBTeAbCTBO  Cob%tob'&  b%  9tq  npa— 
HCDonaafl  CBoe  ixbno. 

Kg  SilPQBCTB!!^!^  TBSPP'  mMMM  nPOJieTQPiQTO!  flo  3JIpaBCIByeTl 


Hes[Tpa,^x,itJujS[  Cos£i7s  <^a5p.aUBO«3aso^' 


TamvatU  d^QOMKffk  HcVVSHV  CAou-k  oea.  &.  CDft  . 


To  All  Workers 

OF  PETROGRAD! 

Comrades !  The  Revolution  is  winning,  the  Revolution 
has  won.  All  the  power  has  passed  over  to  our  Soviets. 
The  first  weeks  are  the  most  difficult  ones.  The  broken 
reaction  must  be  finally  crushed,  a  full  triumph  must  be 
secured  for  our  endeavors.  The  working-class  ought  to 
—must— show  in  these  days 

THE  GREATEST  FIRMNESS  AND  ENDURANCE 

in  order  to  facilitate  the  execution  of  all  the  aims  of  the 
new  People's  Government  of  Soviets.  In  the  next  few 
days,  decrees  on  the  Labor  question  will  be  issued. 
Among  the  very  first  will  be  the  decree  on  Worker's 
Control  over  the  production  and  regulation  of  industry. 

Strikes  and  demonstrations  of  the  worker 
masses  in  petrograd  now  can  only  do  harm. 

We  ask  you  to  stop  immediately  all  economic  and  political  strikes,  to  take 
up  your  work,  and  do  it  in  perfect  order.  The  work  in  factories  and  all  in- 
dustries is  necessary  for  the  new  Government  of  Soviets,  because  any  inter- 
ruption of  this  work  will  only  create  new  difficulties,  and  we  have  enough  as 
it  is.    All  to  your  places. 

The  best  way  to  support  the  new  Government  of  Soviets  in  these  days— is 
by  doing  your  job. 

LONG  LIVE  THE  IRON  TENACITY  OF  THE  PROLETARIAT! 
LONG  UVE  THE  REVOLUTION! 

Petrograd  Soviet  of  W.  &  5.  D. 

Petrograd  Council  of  Trade  Unions. 

Central  Council  of  Factory-Shop  Committees^ 

IThia  is  tht  traiulaium  ofth*  Ruttian  text  on  oppotite  page.) 


Orb  ffoMGcia  no  Hapopmy  OOpoBasiio  p 
^eflp^>HOi  ropoACROii  j|pl 

ToBapMu^H  pa6oHie  h  pa6oTHHiv>iI 

3a  HicKOjibKO  AHett  ao  npasAiiiKa  duna  ofiiiHueHa 
safiacTOBKa  Y^mjsxm  ropoACKHXi  ymsEnii.  ynanpfl  vstiir 
sMicb  isa  cTopoHi  fiypHiyasia  npoTEB'b  patonaro  h 
i^cTbfiacKaro  npaBErejOiCTBa. 

ToBapHimi,  opraHasyMre  po;tHTejibCEie  KOHHreru  B 
E&SHOCire  pesojnoidH  npoTHBi  3adacT0BKH  ynamwh. 
OSpamairecb  bi  pafiOHSue  CoBina  Fa6o^HZ%  b  Goj- 
xaTCRM'B  AenyraroBi,  npo^ecdoHajibHue  consu,  i^ar 
^rao-saBOACEie  h  napTitsne  lOMzreTU  ci  upeura- 
B»meBr&  ycTparaaTb  heteeti  upoiecTa.  7cipasBatTe 

COSCTBSEELiMZ  CEiaHH  CJIKl  fl  pa3BJI0HeHUI  flJIfl  aItoRi 

Tpefiyfire  BosoSEOBjEemfl  saEflrii  nocjii  srpasABSEa  n 
cpGKi,  EQTop&si  yKasten  Ileflipajibflas  Sjua. 

ToBapsEtB,  yHpiojiESTe  cboi  nosflidH  vh  a(b%  Bapon* 
earo  odpasoBaEiE,  BacTaEBaire  Ea  EosTpojii  Dpojierap* 
CEsn  opraEBsanii  nsjub  aisojioBi 

XoMDcda  no  JtapoixoMy  OIpaaoSaMbo 

iipii  Ifodspaiibxofi  Tojolkkoli  lljfMi 

304 


From  the  Commission  on  Public  Education 
of  ttie  Central  City  Duma. 

Comrade  uiorVmgmenand  uiorldngoiomen! 

A  few  days  before  the  holidays,  a  strike  has  been 
declared  by  the  teachers  of  the  public  schools.  The 
teachers  are  siding  with  the  burgeoisie  against  the 
Workers'  and  Peasants'  Government. 

Comrades,  organize  Parents'  Committees  and  pass 
resolutions  against  the  strike  of  the  teachers.  Pro- 
pose to  the  District  Soviets  of  Workers'  and  Soldiers' 
Deputies,  the  Trade  Unions,  the  Factory-Shop  and  Party 
Committees,  to  organize  protest  meetings.  Arrange 
with  your  own  resources  Christmas  trees  and  entertain- 
ments for  the  children,  and  demand  the  opening  of 
the  schools,  after  the  holidays  at  the  date  which  will 
be  set  by  the  Central  Duma. 

Comrades,  strengthen  your  position  in  public  edu- 
cation, insist  on  the  control  of  the  proletarian  organ- 
izations over  the  schools. 

Commbsion  on  Public  Education 

of  the  Central  City  Duma. 

(3%ti  it  ihe  trantlation  of  the  Rn«»ian  text  on  oppoBxU  pagt.) 
305 


PoccfacKifl  ConJlajan^^eMOKpatTWecKafl  PaCoiaa  llapTig. 


14-bHa  28  HOtu 

JTpojiemaplu  Setr»  empam,  cofSuHtHmmt 


ii?iiin>  Bo  AWAtrb  |*~^"~","~"  """  ■ "   "  "* 

PEJWKUIIt  " 


H  U  (2A9).  Cltton. 


EmEflHEBHAfl  TASETA. 


es  (10)  ^ipui  1)13  e. 


HtMenKie  reHcpanu  opraHH30Ba;iH  \)Abp»"e  6aTa;u.0Hbi  m  epacnjioxi.,  6e3T.  npe. 
A^J^pc^AeHi,^,  HanoJiH  hu  Hcmiy  apMiw,  mhpho  npHCT^nHBmiJK)  Kt>  fleMo6HJiH3auiH. 

Ho  jf»K©  cc8Hip3TMBneMSa  oprasiBpiyeTcn.  Oho  pocxe-n.  m  ByReTi. 
pocTH  c>  B«as5!fia.8SH-b  HMSP^JTb,.  Ec-fe  -isaiuiii  cwiibi  OTRaRMWi-fc  ma  0x0031. 

&!60   OH8«    MflyXT.,    ■HRTOBIS   BejJMJTB.  nOM-feUHKKaMi.  0X05paKHE,JH  K[TI> 

cxbnHamH  aaas/iM.  Ohm  mj:^^,  •iToSi.  sossxataoBiHTb  sosn^CKsa  "pa^ 
N  xosnScMiiM  nuBoaasKOJit,  wa  a^aSp'JSSBfft.  n  aaBonax-B...  Ckm  HRsr»>j 

•IXOSl.     BepHSfTi*     SbSBlUBBSfTE.    SI(SB«iSUJl£n?®M-B.    ••    SOSnCBaMT.    S'CBSaSiO- 

BbiwTb  —  xpoH-by  seaflJiH  N^wJfniaiiAb). 

Pa6oHie.  HpecTbHHe.  bonaaTbil  Ha  saiMnry  coBtrcKOPI  pecnyennHn!  Bc-fe.  He 
Meann,  et  pnabi  HpacHoi*  apwin.  coiwaxiiHswal  

1,1-1111,1,1,  II  I     I     III      ■    II   ■!    r--^'~'^"^^'*~ 


/ 


PoccIRcKa>r  KoMMyHncmMeckag  fTaprbi  (gojibtaeBHyoBT*). 


l|-fciia30Kon*' 

■a  iBcsi  aop>  a  m. 
tffoitmapfa  m/u«  empvn,  atiainiilmtnl 

At/IAHI) 


BTTMrntfOPTAIftHOimmiHCTllHrCHCI)  (IIHIK  (SMbinernB). 


M  45  (271)  CT<(k>Ti. 


EWEXlHEBHAa   fASETA, 


i  napra  (J4  ^g^au)  UIS  r. 


PyccKie  KOHTp-b-peBom^ilioHepbi,  cb  KHnseMi*  JlbBO- 
BbiM'b  eso  rii£a3'&,  co3j:^^ji^«  ^a  J^ajibHesi'2'b  BocTOH'fe  hobog 

PpaBMTeJIbCTSO. 

flpenaxenm  BcxynNJiiM  e-b  coiasib  cb.nnoHCKHKJn  KmnapjanncxaMNi 
HXoSbi  saHaSaneiSTb  crpaify. 

I1oiH-baA|HKt9  M  KanHxanHCxbi  Bf3-&»3a  BoscxaHooneHtn  CBoeA  BiiacxN 
Hafl-b  paSoMHMU  n  HpacxbaHaMM  Aponarar-fa  JSnioHin  Ra/sbHiA  BocxoH-fa« 

K-b  opy»si»o,  paSo^flie  fi  KpecTbnise!  BcTaBaAre  Bcii, 
KaKib  OAUH'b  ^ssj^OB'&H'b,  Ha  6opb6y  3a  BGiiMKyio  peso* 

Bcb  Ha  3aBi(NTy  couiia/ie3CTM*4ecKaro  OTenecTBa! 
KT»  opywiio! 


.'io6 


Bttsmn  Social^  Democratic  Labor  Party.  Prlc«  25  kopecks. 

'"  '  «a nilra*4  tUliaiu 30 kop. 


TRUTH 

(CENTRAL  ORGAN  OF  TU£  R.  S.-D.  L.  P. 


Worlcen  of  all  Countries  Unite  I 

s               Cdltortal  unii  Wnln  Offices.  Petrosrail,  i 

I                                 Ivanovskaya  No.  14  ^ 

I                                                 :  (ifnr«    is  frjyen    flaHr.  «icc«pt  = 

9                                                 =boll<J>jr<rroml0A.U.  ta4F.M.  | 

=  *=^''•:l'"^"•'"•«'l^omMf^'^'1."Tn"w^«d«l  I 

:  vittl   tf>e  editor    r#- E  6  loublcs  per  month.  = 

r  celveddaily.  <rxciptholi-|  lo  percent,  dincount  on  bundle  = 

:  d«>s  from   12  lo   1   P.  M    =  urderiofnotl.aBlhsn  lOcopies.  = 

5  and  from  7  to  8  P.  M.          =  7S'  kop    cbarffe  of  change  of  | 

1   I17.mi  Subscript! 


No.  33  <259)  Sam.day DAILY       PAPER 23  (lOl  February.  1918 

l==- — _^^— ^^___^___^^___^_.^_^_____________________ 

German  generals  organized  shock  battalions  and  withoLl  warning  attacked 
;-our  army  which  was  peacefully  beginning  to  demobilize. 

But  resistance  is  already  being  organized.  It  grows  and  will 
continue  to  grow  daily.  We  sliail  exert  all  our  strength  to  drive 
oul  the  German  White  Guards! 

For  they  come  to  restore  to  the  landlords  the  peasants'  land. 
They  come  to  restore  the  employers'  rights  and  the  employers' 
■arbitrary  rule  over  the  mills  and  the  factories.  They  come  to 
restore  the  Romanovs  who  are  both  landlords  and  employers-' 
their  throne,  their  estates  and  their  billions. 

Workers,  Peasants  and  Soldiers  \  To  the  Defense  of  the  Soviet  Republic ! 
All  to  the  ranks  of  the^Bed  Aany  of  Socialists! 

Russian  Communist  Party  (Bolshevik).  ri'r^®i!d^t!!Ji!?5*£p*" 

Workers  of  all  Countries  Unite  I 

.MIIHIUII II lillllllllMIIIIIMilllliliilllllllilMllllllllMlllilillUUUIUtUJlll, 

1  N  Editorial  and  Wain  Offices.  Pelragrad,                | 

3  Ivanovskaya  No.  &4                                 | 

:  :  Office    is  open    daily,   except   3 

I  |huliilar»rrumluA.M   ta4['.M.    3 

=   ^  ,                     .         .               z                  SubaenplioriB.                     = 

:  Caller*  on  business  |  fy„„  n,^,^,,  ,„  ,„^„  calendar)  % 

J  with    the  editor    re- E  6  roubles  per  month.  = 

i  ceiveddaily.etceptholi.  i  lOperccnt   discount  on  bondle  | 

i  d:i.«s  Irui.i   12  lu   I    !■    M    =  ordlriornoIlesHthan  Illcupiea.  | 

E  and  from  7  tuti  f    U  E  75  kop     charico  af  change  of  i 

E  E  ad.lri.S4  i 

accepted  * 


-^  •  -  T  1     h  I    n7.lH :  ^""scriptl'ins  are  accepiec 

CENTRAL  ORGAN  OF  THE  COMMUNIST         |  ^^'tii""' <>«ice. ,'  f^H  f  ',l"C:Jt.l  \^L\u'^'' '"  "'  ^ 


PARTlf  (BOLSHEVIK).  i  i         Telephone  437.53 


lllllM|lllt# 


N«.45  (27l)Satut<iay DAILY      PAPER March  9  (Feb.  24  >  1918 

Russian  counter-revolutionists,  with  prince  Lvov 
at  the  headf  have  formed  a  new  government  in  the 
Far  East. 

The  Traitors  have  allied  themselves  with  Japanese  Imperialists 
fn  order  to  enslave  the  country. 

The  landlords  and  capitalists  in  order  to  restore  their  rule 
4>ver  the  woriters  and  peasants  are  selling  the  Far  East  to  Japan. 

To  arms,  workers  and  peasants!  Arise  all  as  one 
man  and  fight  for  the  great  revolution ! 

All  to  the  defense  of  the  socialist  fatherland! 

—;—   TO    ARIVIS!  . 

iThis  is  the  translation  of  the  Russian  text  on  opposite  page.) 


01  mmm  mmm 

mmm 


no  noBOiiy  ..jiekpeta'. 

Rpar  fitMciMcii.  Hpar  iia,v»'T   iinvuf    ii  tmnn:    II  n  rnorii    n:i.(i-iiiiii 
KomyiicTB}>T.  II  Ii  rj-m-n  u:i(i-iitiii  it.ii'iti'iui'T.   11    uviiiai-Tfu    in    i:oiun 

OTBpUTllTC.IbUMli   IlliOIIUICIUllllonilUJ)    N>-|iM. 

Mi)ar  ynicTi'iiiiux — on  ;i;aai,o-T     nn-iio.irTiia.  ii  n^simm-p   itri-s  xi» 
iii>ro  aiiiipxiicriJ.  iu>uiiiiiniit<<  iiuin>i;(i  miahh  (■iiu<'><ai<i- 
'   II  upar  paciipocTpniiiiPT  :i.tinrTiiyit«  imimictv.   'ito   nio''"u:i   jt;i    iipD- 
cmpncTCii  .10  iiaciuita  h<i-iiiiiiiii.  Ot   iiannTU   iiviimi  |iurii|<(icipninii-'i  oi< 
ciioiivd  rpnaHUMH  pyiniMii  «i<M:pi'T  o  touuxnuauuii  h{'Tiihiiii>  . 

Kauafl  rpynafl,  iir.icnafl  niiOHOicnntn! 

lioKaHu,  itoajo  ii  iioHcio^ty    aiiapxiicTU  ()(>]ik»tch  co  noiKiniii   .Titipi^ 
Tasij  II  wiKOHaMii  BCHKax  wacTen,-  tok  MorvT  .in  ouii  cann  iiHuycuarfc 

aOKpOTwV 

Bparii  BCflnaroHacn.iim.— MorjT  .iii  aiiiipxiicTu  xpeOonaTi.  iinji  .tiHi»* 
AOuycuaTb  upuiiyAUTe.ibuari}  OTfjiUAeHun  (Keiiuiiiiil-' 

CBoaLBo  »e  uatljeToi  tbkhx  CypuAaiioiiiax  octoh.  mto  ironcpBT  :>Ton 
opoBoitauuH,  HTO  aauparyr  co6fl  r  ctuh  utiix  i.iiiuk  muaflmiuy 

H«T  Ii  uert  CrpeiflCb  HarpasHTb   Ha   eac   CescoBHaTe.iuiiJfl  Maccu. 
spar  Be  psacsBTaj  u  oiHumua  To.ibRO  cbok)  rpflsnyio  Ayineimy. 

Vbh!— CH  eme  ne  yana.!  ecefi  ocrpoTU  Hameroopywua— r.iK  yaiiaer! 

CvepTii  apoBOKaTopaul  BoBoomaAHaa  ciaepTb!  Ha  xecie— dea   Kojre- 
68BHfl— BcenH  cpeACTBaMR  H  BCflRsa  opysHeu! 

H  bchbhS,  KTo-Taflito  U4H  «BHO— 6yAet  noAiepacHBaxb  9Ty  K.iene- 
T7,  opHKHAbiB&acb  OAypaieHHUH   HrueHBOH,— 6yA0T   oO'flBjeii   coyiacT- 

BUBOM  8T011  TeKHOB  08HAfai>  6jJier  OO'flBJeU    flpOBOKaTOpOX-    U     UOCTUr> 
HOT  BX  yUOTb  0AB8. 

H  BCflBBt},  BTO— C  HaVB  HIB  RO  C  BaXB  —  BO  <ieCTBO  MlHBeT  H  OopCT- 

«fl,  ejMi  uoMoraTb  Ban  b  pacBpase,  CjJUST  C9»  >ctuti>  8tbv  ajLOBmu^t 
nXBi  BOAUHaiontefica  peanqBe. 

iS,SB  pacopuBU  oraa  xbatbt  y  bwA 

U  see  cpeACXU  OyAjr  sopoum! 

CaxapcKaa  ^tdepaifijt  Amjtjeucmim: 

3C8 


mOMTHE  SMEAFEDMTIOK 
OF  ffiRCKSTS 

inviewofthe'decree'* 

The  enemy  is  impotent.  The  enemy  is  sinking  ever  lower 
and  lower.  And  in  his  fall  he  blasphemes.  In  his  fall  he  slinjrs 
mud  at  us.   He  stoops  to  the  most  hideous  provocatory  measures. 

The  enemy  of  the  oppressed— he  thirsts  for  domination.  He 
fearsthe  Anarchists  who  have  raised  high  the  banner  of  freedom. 

The  enemy  is  spreading  malicious  calumny,  insinuating  thar 
our  freedom  includes  violence  and  rape.  In  our  name  he  i'^ 
spreading  with  his  own  soiled  hands  the  "Decree  about  the 
Nationalization  of  Women. ' ' 

What  crude,  absurd  provocation ! 

For  ages,  everywhere,  the  Anarchists  have  fought  against 
all  kinds  of  decrees  and  laws  no  matter  by  what  authorities 
these  were  set  up.   How  then  can  they  themselves  issue  decrees? 

Enemies  of  all  violence,  how  can  the  Anarchists  demand  cr 
even  allow  force  in  the  treatment  of  women? 

How  many  such  asses  will  be  found  who  will  be  ready  to 
believe  the  provocateurs  and  who  will  appear  in  the  camp  of 
these  serpents? 

No,  never!  In  his  attempt  to  set  against  us  the  ignorant 
masses,  the  enemy  did  not  calculate  correctly  and  only  exposed 
his  own  filthy  soul. 

Alas!  he  does  not  yet  know  the  power  of  our  weapon — but 
he  will  know  it! 

Death  to  the  provocateurs!  No  mercy  for  them!  On  the 
spot— without  hesitation — by  all  means,  with  any  weapon! 

And  everyone,  who — secretly  or  openly — supports  this  cal- 
umny,  by  pretending  that  he  is  an  innocent  lamo  who  has  been 
duped  by  someone,  will  be  considered  an  accomplice  of  this 
black  band,  as  a  provocateur.    And  they  will  meet  the  same  fate. 

Everyone — whether  he  be  with  us  or  not — but  who  lives 
honestly  and  struggles  for  his  living,  will  help  us  dispense  jus- 
tice, and  will  himself  mete  out  vengeance  to  these  venomous 
reptiles  of  reaction. 

We  have  enough  fire  for  this  purpose! 

And  all  means  will  be  fair! 

Samara  Federation  oj  Anarchists. 

IThiti*  tht  trantlatior,  of  the  Russian  text  on  opposite  page.) 
.309 


.......... 

...... 

>c 

(L.f.( 

s 

1- 

X 

1 

10 

3* 

0 

ed 

CO 

\o 

|>^ 

1  4a 

3? 

0   : 

^ 

S 
§ 

1- 

S 

0. 

C/ 

■ 

0 

n. 

■ 

i  ......... 

\o 

B.I... 

■■■■■■    1 

X 


oa 


X 


•-a 


<a3 

a' 

eusJ 

SSS 
CO 

vcs> 


<=>        CQ        ,.^ 
O       e^       <=> 


e^     c=a 

C^         CO 

00        mjCm 


esa    laJ 


>€« 


CQ 


«■«■!■■■■■ 

s' 

CQ 

■....a. 

e 

X 

1       ^ 

§ 

0 
X 

ae 

a. 

ae 

s    e; 

s 

X 

0 
c    . 

IX 

t- 

>s 

0 

0; 

s 

■■uuatM 

niMi 

■uiHUUiaS 

310 


.  S  1 

^mt»      '^^      CO 

fl)  J=  •:S 

L  c=  "S 

rand  soldier.    : 

■■■■■■■■■•■■■••■na 

t2   g. 

^    s 

t-      a 

i  1 

en 

a? 

en 


CD 


CO 

c: 

&• 

CO 


0^  ^. 

f  i5 


CO         "O 

Ll-J  S- 


Pd 
&&a 


>  w  S  CO  >  ^ 


TT    CD  4J+J  ^ 

<£2  3  5  ^ifiCJ 


■a 

(8 


w 


o 

.5 

a. 
IE 


BQ 


ca 

c 

CO 

c 


.s  .  .s -^ 
»  g;  1 4> 

TS    O     O    S 

s  a  * 

C9    >-     3    01 

u  ^   a  ^ 
«a  a>   ID  (u 

E5  &! 

'2.5  ^O 
m 


13 


d   ^ 


•?»^         ■  rrt     M"l 


•^     Qj     ;=3 


■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■ 

i    «  ^  s  i 


CO 


(TO 
CO 

a? 


0.-C:  t/,  fO'flj  CO 
^-^^       ©  o 


311 


•o 

c 

03  ^i^ 

£c 

«° 


c  - 


6  o 

O      IH 

at;?? 


I)  £  "o  "O  fe 

uj    ™  I"*  _J3   ^ 

"O  'O  fl)  ■i->^ 

c 


«  o 


c3    a> 


2  wJS 


p.  >>  o  o    I 

^  s  ^  >  i 


9  ^ 


«H 


2  ^Jc 


v> 


a  «  s?  a 


g.s 


•a 

03 


73 


& 


■OS  1-s 

_  c    >  „ 
Oco 

^(0 


P.S  « 

2  2  S 
<D   C   es 

o  a  .2 

mo© 
to   2   W 


q  a  c 


s^ 


_  (0     o  t- 

032 


•^  r    Bj   [0 

«i  o    2 

•O  <M    ^ 


nQ 


S'% 


C    C    rt 


m: 


mmmmmmmmi.^mmm:'''':  •■ ' 


