UCSB    LIBRARY 
6 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 


The  History  of  the 
Russian  Revolution 
to  Brest-Litovsk 


By    L.    TROTSKY 


LONDON :  GEORGE   ALLEN    &   UNWIN   LTD. 
RUSKIN  HOUSE     40  MUSEUM  STREET,  W.C.  i 


First  published  in  1919 


(All  rights  reserved) 


INTRODUCTION 

THE  present  booklet  was,  for  the  most  part, 
written  in  snatches,  in  circumstances  but 
little  favourable  to  concentrated  work.  It  was 
at  Brest-Litovsk,  between  the  sittings  of  the 
Peace  Conference,  that  the  different  chapters  of 
this  sketch,  which  has  for  its  main  purpose  to 
acquaint  the  workers  of  the  world  with  the  causes, 
progress,  and  meaning  of  the  Russian  November 
Revolution,  were  put  together.  History  willed 
it  that  the  delegates  of  the  most  revolutionary 
regime  the  world  has  ever  known  had  to  sit 
at  the  same  diplomatic  table  with  the  represen- 
tatives of  the  most  reactionary  caste  among  all 
the  ruling  classes.  At  the  sittings  of  the  Peace 
Conference  we  did  not  for  one  moment  forget 
that  we  were  the  representatives  of  a  revolutionary 
class.  We  addressed  our  speeches  to  the  war- 
weary  workers  of  all  countries.  Our  energies 
were  sustained  by  the  profound  conviction  that 
the  final  word  in  ending  the  war,  as  in  all  other 
questions,  would  be  said  by  the  European  work- 
ing class.  When  speaking  to  Kiihlmann  and 
Czernin,  we  all  the  time  had  in  our  mind's  eye 
our  friends  and  comrades,  Karl  Liebknecht  and 
Fritz  Adler.  My  own  free  time  I  devoted  to 

5 


INTRODUCTION 

preparing  a  pamphlet  intended  for  the  workers 
of  Germany,  Austria-Hungary,  and  of  all  other 
countries.  The  bourgeois  Press  of  the  whole 
of  Europe  is  unanimous  in  its  slanders  and 
execrations  of  the  proletarian  regime  in  Russia. 
The  Socialist  "  patriotic  "  Press,  bereft  of  courage 
and  of  faith  in  its  own  work,  has  revealed  a 
total  incapacity  to  understand  and  to  interpret 
to  the  working  masses  the  meaning  of  the 
Russian  Revolution.  I  want  to  come  to  their 
help  by  means  of  the  present  booklet.  I  believe 
that  the  revolutionary  workers  of  Europe  and  of 
other  parts  of  the  world  will  understand  us.  I 
believe  that  they  will,  in  the  near  future,  start 
on  the  same  work  as  we  are  now  engaged  in, 
but  that,  aided  by  their  greater  experience  and 
their  more  perfect  intellectual  and  technical 
means,  they  will  perform  this  work  more 
thoroughly,  and  will  help  us  to  overcome  all 
difficulties. 

L.  TROTSKY. 
BREST-LITOVSK, 
February  12,  1918. 


EVENTS  at  the  present  time  succeed  one 
another  so  rapidly  that  it  is  difficult  to 
reproduce  them  from  memory  even  in  their  simple 
chronological  order.  I  have  no  papers  or  docu- 
ments at  hand.  At  the  same  time  the  periodical 
breaks  in  the  negotiations  at  Brest-Litovsk  give 
me  a  certain  amount  of  leisure  which,  under 
present  conditions,  is  not  likely  to  recur.  I 
shall,  therefore,  try  to  sketch  from  memory  the 
course  and  development  of  the  November  Revo- 
lution, reserving  to  myself  the  right  to  complete 
and  correct  my  narrative  at  some  future  date, 
with  the  aid  of  documentary  evidence. 

What  distinguished  our  party  almost  from  the 
very  first  stage  of  the  Revolution  was  the  firm 
conviction  that  the  logic  of  events  would  even- 
tually place  it  in  power.  I  am  not  speaking  here 
of  the  theoreticians  of  our  party,  who,  many  years 
before  the  Revolution,  even  before  the  Revolu- 
tion of  1905,  had  come  to  the  conclusion,  from 
a  close  analysis  of  the  class  relations  in  Russia, 
that  the  victorious  course  of  a  revolution  would 
inevitably  place  the  power  of  the  State  in  the 
hands  of  the  proletariat,  supported  by  the  wide 

r 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

masses  of  the  poorest  peasantry.  The  main 
foundation  for  this  belief  was  the  insignificance 
of  the  Russian  middle-class  democracy  and  the 
concentrated  character  of  Russian  industry,  and, 
therefore,  the  immense  social  importance  of  the 
Russian  working  class.  The  insignificance  of 
the  Russian  middle -class  democracy  is  but  the 
obverse  side  of  the  power  and  importance  of  the 
proletariat.  True,  the  war  temporarily  deceived 
many  people  on  this  point,  and,  above  all,  it 
deceived  the  leading  sections  of  middle -class 
democracy  itself.  The  war  assigned  the  decisive 
r61e  in  the  Revolution  to  the  army,  and  the  old 
army  was  the  peasantry. 

Had  the  Revolution  developed  more  normally, 
that  is,  in  conditions  of  peace-time,  such  as 
prevailed  in  1912,  when  it  really  began,  the 
proletariat  would  inevitably  have  taken  the  lead- 
ing role  throughout,  whilst  the  peasant  masses 
would  have  been  gradually  towed  along  by  the 
proletariat  into  the  revolutionary  whirlpool.  But 
the  war  imparted  an  entirely  different  logic  to 
the  course  of  events.  The  army  had  organized  the 
peasantry,  not  on  a  political,  but  on  a  military 
basis.  Before  the  peasant  masses  found  them- 
selves united  on  a  common  platform  of  definite 
revolutionary  demands  and  ideas,  they  had  already 
become  united  in  regiments,  divisions,  corps,  and 
armies.  The  lower  middle-class  democrats, 
scattered  throughout  this  army,  and  playing  a 
leading  part  in  it  both  in  a  military  and  in- 
tp^ectual  sense,  were  almost  entirely  imbued  with 
8 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

middle -class  revolutionary  sentiments.  The  deep 
social  discontent  of  the  masses  grew  ever  deeper 
and  strove  for  expression,  particularly  owing  to  the 
military  debacle  of  Tsardom.  Immediately  the 
Revolution  broke  out,  the  advanced  sections  of 
the  proletariat  revived  the  traditions  of  1905  by 
calling  upon  the  popular  masses  to  organize  in 
representative  bodies,  viz.  the  "  Councils  "  of 
delegates  (Soviets). 

The  army  thus  had  to  send  representatives 
to  revolutionary  bodies  before  its  political  con- 
sciousness in  any  way  corresponded  to  the  level 
of  the  rapidly  developing  revolutionary  events. 
Whom  could  the  soldiers  send  as  their  representa- 
tives? Naturally,  only  those  intellectuals  and 
semi-intellectuals  who  were  to  be  found  in  their 
midst  and  who  possessed  at  least  a  minimum 
amount  of  political  knowledge,  and  were  capable 
of  giving  utterance  to  it.  In  this  way,  by  the 
will  of  the  awakening  army,  the  lower  middle - 
class  intellectuals  found  themselves  suddenly 
raised  to  a  position  of  enormous  influence. 
Doctors,  engineers,  lawyers,  journalists,  who  in 
pre-war  days  had  led  a  humdrum  private  life 
and  laid  no  claim  of  any  sort  to  political  in- 
fluence, became,  overnight,  representatives  of 
whole  corps  and  armies,  and  discovered  that  they 
were  the  "  leaders  "  of  the  Revolution.  The 
haziness  of  their  political  ideas  fully  corresponded 
to  the  formless  state  of  the  revolutionary  con- 
sciousness of  the  masses  themselves.  They  con- 
temptuously looked  down  upon  us  as  mere 

9 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

sectarians  because  we  were  urging  the  social 
demands  of  the  working  class  and  the  peasants 
in  a  most  resolute  and  uncompromising  fashion. 
At  the  same  time  these  lower  middle-class  demo- 
crats, in  spite  of  their  proud  demeanour  of  revolu- 
tionary upstarts,  felt  a  profound  diffidence  both 
in  their  own  capacities  and  in  the  masses  who 
had  raised  them  to  such  an  unexpectedly  high 
place.  Calling  themselves  Socialists  and  really 
regarding  themselves  as  such,  these  intellectuals 
looked  up  to  the  political  authority  of  the  Liberal 
bourgeoisie,  to  its  knowledge  and  its  methods, 
with  an  ill-concealed  respect.  Hence  the  en- 
deavour of  the  lower  middle-class  leaders  to 
obtain,  at  all  costs,  the  co-operation  of  the 
Liberal  middle  class  by  way  of  an  alliance  or 
coalition.  The  programme  of  the  party  of 
Socialist  Revolutionaries,  based  as  it  all  is  on 
vague  humanitarian  formulae,  and  employing 
general  sentiments  and  moral  constructions  in 
the  place  of  class -war  methods,  was  the  most 
suitable  spiritual  dress  that  could  have  been  found 
for  these  improvised  leaders.  Their  efforts  to 
find  some  sort  of  support  for  their  own  intel- 
lectual and  political  helplessness  in  the  impressive 
political  and  scientific  knowledge  of  the  bour- 
geoisie found  a  theoretical  sanction  in  the  teach- 
ing of  the  Mensheviks,  who  argued  that  the 
present  Revolution  was  a  bourgeois  revolution, 
and  could  not,  therefore,  be  carried  through 
without  the  participation  of  the  bourgeoisie  in 
the  Government.  A  natural  bloc  was  thus  formed 
10 


between  the  Socialist  Revolutionaries  and  Men- 
sheviks,  expressing  both  the  timid  and  hesitating 
political  mind  of  the  middle-class  intellectuals 
and  its  vassal  attitude  towards  Imperialist 
Liberalism. 

To  us,  it  was  perfectly  clear  that  the  logic  of  the 
class  struggle  would  sooner  or  later  destroy  this 
temporary  combination  and  fling  aside  the  leaders 
of  this  period  of  transition.  The  hegemony  of 
the  lower  middle -class  intellectuals  was  at  bottom 
the  expression  of  the  fact  that  the  peasantry, 
suddenly  called  to  take  part  in  organized  political 
life  through  the  machinery  of  the  army,  had  by 
sheer  weight  of  numbers  pushed  aside  and  over- 
whelmed the  proletariat  for  the  time  being.  Even 
more,  in  so  far  as  the  middle -class  leaders  had 
been  raised  to  a  dizzy  height  by  the  powerful  mass 
of  the  army,  the  working  class  itself,  with  the 
exception  of  its  advanced  sections,  could  not  but 
become  imbued  with  a  certain  political  respect 
for  them  and  try  to  maintain  political  contact 
with  them  for  fear  of  rinding  themselves  divorced 
from  the  peasantry.  And  this  was  a  very  serious 
matter,  for  the  older  generation  still  remembered 
the  lesson  of  1905,  when  the  proletariat  was 
crushed,  just  because  the  massive  peasant  reserves 
had  not  come  up  in  time  for  the  decisive  battles. 
That  is  why  in  the  first  phase  of  the  new  Revolu- 
tion also  the  proletarian  masses  showed  them- 
selves highly  accessible  to  the  political  idealogy  of 
the  Socialist  Revolutionaries  and  the  Mensheviks 
— especially  as  the  Revolution  had  aroused  the 

11 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

hitherto  slumbering  backward  masses  of  workers, 
and  thus  made  the  hazy  radicalism  of  the 
intellectuals  a  sort  of  preparatory  school  for 
them.  The  Council  of  Workers',  Soldiers',  and 
Peasants'  Delegates  meant  in  these  conditions  the 
predominance  of  peasant  amorphousness  over 
proletarian  Socialism,  and  the  predominance  of 
intellectual  Radicalism  over  the  peasant  amor- 
phousness. 

The  structure  of  Soviets  rose  so  rapidly  to  a 
gigantic  height  mainly  because  of  the  leading 
part  played  in  their  labours  by  the  intellectuals, 
with  their  technical  knowledge  and  middle-class 
connections.  But  to  us  it  was  perfectly  clear  that 
this  grand  structure  was  built  on  deep  internal 
contradictions  and  would  inevitably  collapse  at 
the  next  stage  of  the  Revolution. 

THE  QUESTION  OF  WAR. 

The  Revolution  grew  directly  out  of  the  war, 
and  the  latter  became  the  touchstone  for  all 
parties  and  forces  of  the  Revolution.  The  in- 
tellectual leaders  had  been  against  the  war.  Many 
of  them,  while  the  Tsar  was  still  on  his  throne, 
considered  themselves  as  belonging  to  the  left 
wing  of  the  International,  and  were  Zimmer- 
waldians.  But  everything  changed  immediately 
they  felt  themselves  to  be  in  "  responsible  " 
positions.  To  pursue  a  revolutionary  Socialist 
policy  would  have  meant  in  the  circumstances  a 
break  with  their  own  and  the  Entente  bour- 
geoisie, but,  as  we  have  said,  the  political  im- 
12 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

potence  of  the  middle-class  intellectuals  and 
semi-intellectuals  led  them  to  seek  protection  in 
an  alliance  with  bourgeois  Liberalism.  Hence 
the  pitiful  and  truly  disgraceful  role  of  the 
middle -class  leaders  in  respect  of  the  question 
of  the  war.  They  confined  themselves  to  lamenta- 
tions and  rhetoric,  and  addressed  secret  exhorta- 
tions and  entreaties  to  the  Allied  Governments, 
while,  in  practice,  they  walked  the  same  paths 
as  the  Liberal  bourgeoisie.  The  soldiers  in  the 
trenches  were,  of  course,  unable  to  follow  the 
argument  that  the  war,  in  which  they  had  fought 
for  three  years,  had  changed  its  character 
because  certain  new  personalities,  calling  them- 
selves Socialist  Revolutionaries  and  Mensheviks, 
were  taking  part  in  the  Government  at  Petro- 
grad.  Miliukoff  had  replaced  the  tchinovnik 
Pokrovsky,  Terestchenko  then  succeeded  Miliukoff 
— that  meant  that  bureaucratic  perfidy  was  first 
replaced  by  militant  Cadet  Imperialism,  then  by 
unprincipled  nebulousness  and  political  servility*; 
but  this  did  not  result  in  any  objective  changes, 
and  there  seemed  no  way  out  of  the  terrible 
vicious  circle  of  the  war.  In  this  lay  the  primary 
cause  for  the  further  dissolution  of  the  army. 
The  agitators  had  been  telling  the  masses  of 
soldiers  that  the  Tsarist  Government  had  been 
driving  them  to  slaughter  for  no  object  or  sensei; 
but  those  who  replaced  the  Tsar  were  able  neither 
to  change  the  character  of  the  war  in  any  way  nor 
to  make  a  fight  for  peace. 

During  the  first  months  of  the  Revolution  there 

18 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

had  been  a  mere  marking  of  time.  This  provoked 
the  impatience  alike  of  the  army  and  of  the 
Allied  Governments.  Hence  the  offensive  of 
July  i st.  It  had  been  demanded  by  the  Allies, 
who  insisted  that  the  old  Tsarist  bills  must  be 
honoured  by  the  Revolution.  Frightened  at  their 
own  impotence  and  at  the  growing  discontent  of 
the  masses,  the  lower  middle-class  leaders  readily 
accepted  these  demands.  They,  indeed,  began 
to  think  that  an  attack  by  the  Russian  Army  was 
all  that  was  wanted  in  order  to  attain  peace. 
An  offensive  began  to  appear  to  them  as  a  way 
out  of  the  wilderness,  as  a  means  of  solving  the 
problem  of  the  situation,  as  the  one  hope  of 
salvation.  It  is  difficult  to  imagine  a  more 
monstrous  and  more  criminal  illusion.  At  that 
time  they  spoke  of  the  offensive  in  exactly  the 
same  terms  in  which  the  Social-Patriots  of  all 
countries  had  spoken  at  the  beginning  of  the 
war  about  the  necessity  of  supporting  the  cause 
of  national  defence,  of  strengthening  the  sacred 
unity  of  the  nation,  etc.  All  their  Zimmerwaldian 
Internationalism  vanished  as  by  magic. 

To  us,  who  were  in  opposition,  it  was  clear 
that  the  offensive  was  a  terribly  perilous  step, 
that  it  might  even  endanger  the  whole  Revolution. 
We  warned  all  and  sundry  that  the  army,  newly 
awakened  and  shaken  as  it  was  by  the  thunder 
of  events  which  as  yet  it  had  only  half  understood, 
could  not  be  sent  into  battle  without  previously 
imparting  to  it  new  ideas  which  it  could  assimi- 
late. .We  warned,  remonstrated,  threatened.  But 
14 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

the  parties  in  power,  bound  as  they  were  to  the 
bourgeoisie,  had  no  other  way  left  open  to  them, 
and  naturally  treated  us  with  enmity  and  im- 
placable hatred. 

THE  CAMPAIGN  AGAINST  THE  BOLSHEVIKS. 
The  future  historian  will  be  unable,  without 
deep  emotion,  to  look  through  the  Russian  papers 
for  May  and  June  1917,  when  the  minds  of  the 
people  were  being  prepared  for  the  offensive. 
Almost  all  the  articles,  without  exception,  in  all 
the  official  and  semi-official  organs  were  directed 
against  the  Bolsheviks.  There  was  scarcely  a 
charge,  scarcely  a  calumny,  that  was  not  levelled 
against  us  in  that  period.  Of  course,  the  leading 
role  in  this  campaign  was  played  by  the  Cadet 
bourgeoisie,  whose  class  instinct  led  it  to  recog- 
nize that  the  question  at  issue  was  not  merely 
the  offensive,  but  the  entire  further  course  of 
the  Revolution  and,  in  the  first  place,  the  form 
of  Government  authority.  The  whole  bourgeois 
machinery  for  manufacturing  "  public  opinion  " 
was  put  into  motion  at  full  steam.  All  the 
Government  offices  and  institutions,  publications, 
public  platforms,  and  university  chairs  were  drawn 
into  the  service  of  this  one  general  aim:  of 
making  the  Bolsheviks  impossible  as  a  political 
party.  In  this  concentrated  effort  and  in  this 
dramatic  newspaper  campaign  against  the  Bolshe- 
viks were  already  contained  the  first  germs  of 
the  civil  war  which  was  bound  to  accompany 
the  next  phase  of  the  Revolution.  The  sole  aim 

15 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

of  all  this  incitement  and  slander  was  to  create 
an  impenetrable  wall  of  estrangement  and  enmity 
between  the  labouring  masses  on  the  one  hand 
and  "  educated  Society  "  on  the  other. 

The  Liberal  bourgeoisie  understood  that  it 
could  not  win  the  support  of  the  masses  with- 
out the  help  of  the  lower  middle-class  demo- 
crats, who,  as  we  pointed  out  above,  had 
temporarily  become  the  leaders  of  the  revo- 
lutionary organizations.  Consequently,  the 
immediate  aim  of  the  political  incitements 
against  the  Bolsheviks  was  to  bring  about  an 
irreconcilable  feeling  of  enmity  between  our 
party  and  the  wide  ranks  of  the  Socialist 
intellectuals,  who,  having  broken  away  from  the 
proletariat,  could  not  but  fall  into  political 
bondage  to  the  Liberal  bourgeoisie. 

It  was  during  the  first  All-Russian  Congress 
of  the  Soviets  that  the  first  alarming  crash  of 
thunder  occurred,  which  warned  of  the  coming 
storm.  Our  party  had  projected  an  armed 
demonstration  at  Petrograd  for  June  23rd.  Its 
proximate  object  was  to  bring  pressure  to  bear 
upon  the  Congress.  "  Take  over  the  power  in 
the  State  " — this  it  was  that  the  Petrograd  workers 
wanted  to  tell  the  Socialist  Revolutionaries  and 
Mensheviks  who  had  come  from  all  parts  of  the 
country.  "  Spurn  the  bourgeoisie  I  Have  done 
with  the  idea  of  coalition,  and  take  the  reins  of 
power  into  your  own  hands  !  "  We  were  quite 
certain  that  if  the  Socialist  Revolutionaries  and 
Mensheviks  broke  with  the  Liberal  bourgeoisie, 
16 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

they  would  be  compelled  to  seek  support  from 
the  most  energetic  and  most  advanced  elements 
of  the  proletariat,  which  would  thus  obtain  the 
leading  r61e  in  the  Revolution.  But  that  was 
just  what  frightened  the  lower  middle -class 
leaders.  In  conjunction  with  the  Government, 
in  which  they  had  their  own  representatives,  and 
shoulder  to  shoulder  with  the  Liberal  and  counter- 
revolutionary bourgeoisie,  they  opened  a  truly 
savage  campaign  against  the  projected  demon- 
stration so  soon  as  they  got  wind  of  it.  Every- 
thing possible  was  set  in  motion  against  us. 
,We  were  at  that  time  a  small  minority  at  the 
Congress,  and  we  gave  way*;  the  demonstration 
did  not  take  place.  But  all  the  same  it  left 
a  very  deep  mark  in  the  minds  of  the  two  con- 
tending parties,  and  made  the  gulf  between  them 
deeper  and  their  mutual  antagonism  more  acute. 
At  the  closed  sitting  of  the  Presidential  Bureau 
of  the  Congress,  in  which  also  representatives 
of  the  various  parties  took  place,  Tsereteli,  then 
a  member  of  the  Coalition  Government,  speaking 
with  all  the  resoluteness  of  a  narrow-minded 
lower  middle-class  doctrinaire,  declared  that  the 
only  danger  threatening  the  Revolution  was  the 
Bolsheviks  and  the  Petrograd  workers  who  had 
been  armed  by  them.  He  therefore  argued  that 
the  people  "  who  did  not  know  how  to  use 
arms  "  must  be  disarmed.  Of  course,  he  had 
in  mind  the  Petrograd  workers  and  that  portion 
of  the  Petrograd  garrison  which  supported  our 
party.  However,  no  disarming  took  place,  as 

B  17 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

the  political  and  psychological  conditions  were  not 
yet  ripe  enough  for  such  an  extreme  measure. 

To  compensate  the  masses  for  the  loss  of 
their  demonstration,  the  Congress  of  the  Soviets 
itself  organized  an  unarmed  demonstration  on 
July  i  st.  And  that  day  became  the  day  of 
our  political  triumph.  The  masses  turned  out 
in  overwhelming  numbers,  but  although  they 
came  out  in  answer  to  the  call  of  the  official 
Soviet  authority — a  sort  of  counterblast  to  the 
miscarried  demonstration  of  June  23rd — the 
workers  and  soldiers  had  inscribed  on  their 
banners  and  placards  the  demands  and  battle- 
cries  of  our  party:  "Down  with  the  secret 
treaties  I  "  "  Down  with  the  policy  of  strategical 
offensives  !  "  "  Long  live  an  honourable  peace  !  " 
"  Down  with  the  ten  capitalist  Ministers  !  "  "  All 
power  for  the  Soviets  I  "  There  were  only  three 
placards  with  expressions  of  confidence  in  the 
Coalition  Government:  one  from  a  Cossack 
regiment,  another  from  the  Plekhanoff  group, 
and  a  third  from  the  Petrograd  "  Bund,"  an 
organization  consisting  largely  of  non-proletarian 
elements.  This  demonstration  proved  not  only 
to  our  opponents,  but  also  to  ourselves,  that  we 
were  far  stronger  in  Petrograd  than  had  been 
imagined. 

THE  OFFENSIVE  OF  JULY  IST. 

As  a  result  of  this  demonstration  of  the  revo- 
lutionary masses  a  Government  crisis  seemed 
inevitable.  But  the  impression  made  by  the 
18 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

demonstration  was  wiped  out  by  the  news  from 
the  front  announcing  that  the  revolutionary  army 
had  taken  the  offensive.  On  the  very  same  day 
when  the  workers  and  garrison  of  Petrograd  had 
been  demanding  the  publication  of  the  secret 
treaties  and  a  public  offer  of  peace,  Kerensky 
had  thrown  the  revolutionary  troops  into  the 
offensive.  This,  of  course,  was  no  fortuitous 
coincidence.  Everything  had  been  arranged 
beforehand,  and  the  moment  for  the  offensive 
had  been  chosen  not  on  military,  but  on  political 
grounds.  On  July  2nd  there  was  a  series  of 
so-called  patriotic  demonstrations  in  the  streets 
of  Petrograd.  The  Nevsky  Prospekt,  the  main 
bourgeois  artery,  was  full  of  excited  groups  of 
people,  amongst  which  officers,  journalists,  and 
well-dressed  ladies  were  carrying  on  a  bitter 
campaign  against  the  Bolsheviks. 

The  first  news  of  the  results  of  the  offensive 
was  favourable,  and  the  leading  Liberal  organs 
considered  that  the  chief  task  had  been  accom- 
plished— that  the  blow  struck  on  July  ist,  quite 
apart  from  what  might  be  its  subsequent  military 
developments,  would  prove  fatal  to  the  further 
progress  of  the  Revolution.  It  would  lead  to 
the  re-establishment  of  the  old  army  discipline 
and  strengthen  the  commanding  position  of  the 
Liberal  bourgeoisie  in  the  country.  ,We,  how- 
ever, had  predicted  something  else  besides.  In 
a  special  declaration  which  we  read  out  at  the 
first  Congress  of  the  Soviets  a  few  days  before 
the  offensive,  we  had  stated  that  that  offensive 

19 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

would  inevitably  destroy  the  internal  coherence 
of  the  army,  that  it  would  put  different  sections 
of  it  against  one  another,  and  that  it  would  lend 
an  enormous  preponderance  to  the  counter- 
revolutionary elements,  since  the  maintenance  of 
discipline  in  a  shattered  army,  whose  vigour  had 
not  been  renewed  by  new  ideals,  would  be 
impossible  without  the  employment  of  brutal 
measures  of  repression.  In  other  words,  we  had 
predicted  in  that  declaration  all  those  conse- 
quences which  were  subsequently  comprised  under 
the  name  of  Kornilovism.  We  considered  that 
the  Revolution  was  running  the  greatest  danger 
alike  in  the  case  of  the  offensive  succeeding 
(which,  however,  we  did  not  believe)  and  in 
the  case  of  its  failing,  as  we  thought  to  be  almost 
inevitable.  The  success  of  the  offensive  would 
have  the  effect  of  uniting  the  lower  with  the 
upper  middle  class  in  common  chauvinistic  aspira- 
tions, thus  isolating  the  revolutionary  proletariat, 
while  its  failure  might  lead  to  the  complete  col- 
lapse of  the  army,  to  a  chaotic  retreat,  the  loss 
of  more  provinces,  and  the  disappointment  and 
despair  of  the  masses. 

Events  turned  out  in  accordance  with  the  second 
part  of  the  alternative.  The  news  of  the  victorious 
advance  of  the  army  did  not  continue  long.  It 
was  succeeded  by  gloomy  communications  re- 
garding the  refusal  of  many  sections  of  the  army 
to  support  the  attacking  troops,  the  terrible  losses 
among  the  officers,  who  sometimes  alone  formed 
shock  battalions,  and  so  on. 
20 


The  background  to  these  military  events  was 
formed  by  growing  difficulties  in  the  internal 
life  of  the  country.  The  Coalition  Government 
had  not  made  a  single  decisive  step  forward  in 
the  solution  of  the  agrarian,  industrial,  or  national 
questions.  The  food  supply  and  transport  were 
becoming  more  and  more  dislocated.  Local 
conflicts  became  more  and  more  frequent.  The 
"  Socialist "  Ministers  tried  to  persuade  the 
masses  to  wait.  All  decisions  and  measures  were 
being  put  off,  including  the  convocation  of  the 
Constituent  Assembly.  The  insolvency  and  in- 
stability of  the  regime  were  obvious.  There 
were  two  possible  ways  out:  either  to  hurl  the 
bourgeoisie  from  power  and  allow  the  Revolution 
to  go  forward,  or  to  "  restrain  "  the  masses  by 
means  of  brutal  repression.  Kerensky  and 
Tsereteli  were  pursuing  a  middle  course,  and 
only  succeeded  in  making  the  confusion  worse 
confounded.  When  once  the  Cadets,  by  far  the 
cleverer  and  more  far-seeing  representatives  in 
the  Coalition,  saw  that  the  failure  of  the  July 
offensive  might  strike  a  heavy  blow  not  only  at 
the  Revolution,  but  also  at  the  parties  standing 
at  the  head  of  affairs,  they  hastened  to  step  aside 
for  the  time  being,  thus  throwing  the  whole 
weight  of  the  responsibility  on  their  colleagues 
of  the  Left.  On  July  1 5th  a  Ministerial  crisis 
broke  out,  ostensibly  over  the  Ukrainian  question. 
This  was  altogether  a  moment  of  great  political 
tension  in  every  sense.  Deputations  and  indi- 
vidual delegates  arrived  from  different  parts  of 

21 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

the  front,  bearing  the  tale  of  the  chaos  which 
now  reigned  supreme  in  the  army  as  a  result  of 
the  offensive.  The  so-called  Government  Press 
demanded  stern  measures  of  repression.  Similar 
demands  commenced  to  appear  more  and  more 
frequently  in  the  so-called  Socialist  Press. 
Kerensky  was  more  and  more  rapidly,  or,  rather, 
more  and  more  openly,  passing  over  to  the  side 
of  the  Cadets  and  the  Cadet  generals,  ostenta- 
tiously displaying  his  enmity  and,  indeed,  hatred 
towards  the  revolutionary  parties  in  general.  The 
Allied  Embassies  were  exerting  pressure  on  the 
Government,  demanding  the  re -establishment  of 
discipline  and  the  continuation  of  the  offensive. 
Confusion  reigned  supreme  in  Government  circles, 
whilst  the  indignation  of  the  workers  grew  apace 
and  imperatively  demanded  some  outlet.  "  Seize 
the  opportunity  of  the  resignation  of  the  Cadet 
Ministers  and  assume  complete  control  over  the 
Government  " :  such  was  the  call  of  the  Petrograd 
workers  on  the  leading  Soviet  parties,  the  Socialist 
Revolutionaries  and  the  Mensheviks.  I  remember 
the  sitting  of  the  Executive  Committee  of 
July  1 5th.  The  Socialist  Ministers  reported  on 
the  new  Government  crisis.  We  waited  with 
intense  interest  to  hear  what  position  they  would 
take  up  now  that  the  Government  had  ingloriously 
gone  to  pieces  at  the  first  serious  test  provoked 
by  the  Coalition  policy  itself.  Tsereteli  was  the 
reporter.  He  explained  to  us  very  fully  that 
the  concessions  he  and  Terestchenko  had  made 
to  the  Kieff  Rada  in  no  way  meant  the  dismem- 
22 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

berment  of  the  country,  and  did  not  justify  the 
action  of  the  Cadets  in  leaving  the  Ministry. 
Tsereteli  charged  the  Cadet  leaders  with  being 
doctrinaires  on  the  question  of  centralism,  with 
a  want  of  understanding  of  the  need  of  a  com- 
promise with  the  Ukrainians,  and  so  forth.  The 
impression  made  by  the  reporter  was  really  a 
pitiful  one  !  The  hopeless  doctrinaire  of  the 
Coalition  accusing  the  Cadets  of  being  doctrin- 
aires— the  Cadets,  those  sober-minded  political 
champions  of  Capitalism,  who  had  seized  the 
first  opportunity  for  making  their  political 
bailiffs  pay  the  cost  for  the  fateful  turn  which 
they  had  imparted  to  the  course  of  events  by  the 
July  offensive  !  After  all  the  experiences  of  the 
Coalition,  it  -might  have  seemed  that  there  could 
be  only  one  way  out,  viz.  to  break  with  the 
Cadets  and  to  form  a  purely  Soviet  Government. 
The  correlation  of  forces  inside  the  Soviets  at 
the  time  was  such  that  a  Soviet  Government 
would  have  meant,  from  a  party  point  of  view, 
the  concentration  of  power  in  the  hands  of  the 
Socialist  Revolutionaries  and  Mensheviks.  We 
were  deliberately  aiming  at  such  a  result,  since 
the  constant  re-elections  to  the  Soviets  provided 
the  necessary  machinery  for  securing  a  suffi- 
ciently faithful  reflection  of  the  growing  radicali- 
zation  of  the  masses  of  the  workers  and  soldiers. 
We  foresaw  that  after  the  break  of  the  Coalition 
with  the  bourgeoisie  the  radical  tendencies  would 
necessarily  gain  the  upper  hand  on  the  Soviets. 
In  such  conditions  the  struggle  of  the  proletariat 

28 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

for  power  would  naturally  shift  to  the  floor  of 
the  Soviet  organizations,  and  would  proceed  in 
a  painless  fashion.  On  their  part,  having  broken 
with  the  bourgeoisie,  the  lower  middle-class  demo- 
crats would  themselves  become  the  target  for 
its  attacks,  and  would,  therefore,  be  compelled 
to  seek  a  closer  alliance  with  the  Socialist  work- 
ing class,  and  sooner  or  later  their  political 
amorphousness  and  irresolution  would  be  over- 
come by  the  labouring  masses  under  the  influence 
of  our  criticism.  This  is  why  we  urged  the 
two  leading  Soviet  parties  to  take  the  reins  of 
power  into  their  own  hands,  although  we  our- 
selves had  no  confidence  in  them,  and  frankly 
said  so. 

But  even  after  the  Ministerial  crisis  of  July 
i  5th,  Tsereteli  and  those  who  thought  with  him 
did  not  give  up  their  pet  idea  of  a  coalition.  They 
explained  to  the  Executive  Committee  that  the 
chief  Cadet  leaders  were,  it  was  true,  demoralized 
by  doctrinairism  and  even  by  counter-revolu- 
tionary sympathies,  but  that  in  the  provinces 
there  were  many  bourgeois  elements  who  would 
march  side  by  side  with  the  revolutionary  demo- 
cracy and  whose  co-operation  would  be  secured 
by  the  co -option  of  some  representatives  of  the 
upper  middle  class  in  the  new  Ministry.  Dan 
was  already  placing  high  hopes  on  a  new  Radical- 
Democratic  party  which  had  been  concocted  about 
that  time  by  a  few  doubtful  politicians.  The  news 
that  the  Coalition  had  broken  to  pieces  only 
to  give  rise  to  a  new  Coalition  spread  rapidly 
24 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

throughout  Petrograd,  and  created  a  wave  of 
dismay  and  indignation  in  the  workers'  and 
soldiers'  quarters.  This  was  the  origin  of  the 
events  of  July  1 6th- 1 8th. 

THE  JULY  DAYS. 

Already  during  the  sitting  of  the  Executive 
Committee  we  had  been  informed  over  the  tele- 
phone that  the  machine-gun  regiment  was  getting 
ready  for  a  demonstration.  We  then  took 
measures,  also  over  the  telephone,  to  restrain 
it«;  but  important  events  were  preparing  under- 
neath. Representatives  of  army  units  disbanded 
for  insubordination  were  coming  from  the  front 
with  alarming  accounts  of  repressions,  which 
made  the  Petrograd  garrison  very  uneasy.  The 
discontent  of  the  Petrograd  workers  with  the 
official  leaders  was  proving  the  more  acute,  as 
Tsereteli,  Dan,  and  Tshkheidze  were  obviously 
bent  on  falsifying  the  sentiments  of  the  prole- 
tariat by  trying  to  prevent  the  Petrograd  Soviet 
from  giving  expression  to  the  new  views  of  the 
labouring  masses.  The  All-Russian  Executive 
Committee,  elected  at  the  June  Congress  and 
depending  for  support  on  the  more  backward 
provinces,  was  pushing  the  Petrograd  Soviet  more 
and  more  to  the  background  and  was  taking 
into  its  own  hands  even  the  conduct  of  purely 
Petrograd  affairs.  A  conflict  was  inevitable. 
The  workers  and  soldiers  were  exerting  pressure 
from  below,  giving  violent  expression  to  their 
discontent  with  the  official  policy  of  the  Soviet, 

25 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

and  demanded  from  our  party  more  drastic 
action.  We  considered  that  in  view  of  the  still 
backward  condition  of  the  provinces  the  hour 
for  such  action  had  not  yet  struck  ;  but  at  the 
same  time  we  feared  lest  the  events  at  the  front 
might  produce  an  immense  confusion  in  the  ranks 
of  the  revolutionary  workers  and  create  despair 
among  them. 

In  the  ranks  of  our  party,  the  attitude  towards 
the  events  of  July  1 6th- 1 8th  was  perfectly 
definite.  On  the  one  hand,  there  was  the  fear 
that  Petrograd  might  become  isolated  from  the 
more  backward  provinces  ;  on  the  other  hand, 
there  was  the  hope  that  an  active  and  energetic 
intervention  of  Petrograd  might  save  the  situa- 
tion. The  party  propagandists  in  the  lower  ranks 
went  hand  in  hand  with  the  masses  and  carried 
on  an  uncompromising  agitation. 

There  was  still  some  hope  that  a  demonstration 
of  the  revolutionary  masses  might  break  down 
the  obstinate  doctrinairism  of  the  Coalitionists 
and  compel  them  to  realize  at  last  that  they 
could  only  maintain  themselves  in  power  if  they 
completely  broke  with  the  bourgeoisie.  Contrary 
to  what  was  said  and  written  at  the  time  in  the 
bourgeois  Press,  there  was  no  intention  whatever 
in  our  party  of  seizing  the  reins  of  power 
by  means  of  an  armed  rising.  It  was  only 
a  revolutionary  demonstration  which  broke  out 
spontaneously,  though  guided  by  us  politically. 
The  Central  Executive  Committee  was  sitting  at 
the  Taurida  Palace  when  the  stormy  waves  of 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

armed  soldiers  and  workers  surrounded  the  Palace 
on  every  side.  Among  the  demonstrators  there 
was,  undoubtedly,  an  insignificant  minority  of 
Anarchists  who  were  ready  to  use  arms  against 
the  Soviet  Centre.  There  were  also  some, 
obviously  hired,  Black  Hundred  elements  who 
tried  to  seize  the  occasion  for  causing  a  riot  and 
pogroms.  It  was  from  these  elements  that 
demands  emanated  for  the  arrest  of  Tchernoff  and 
Tsereteli,  for  the  forcible  suppression  of  the 
Central  Committee,  etc.  There  was  even  an 
actual  attempt  made  to  arrest  Tchernoff.  Sub- 
sequently, at  Kresty  Prison,  I  met'  a  sailor  who  had 
taken  part  in  that  attempt.  He  turned  out  to  have 
been  an  ordinary  criminal  and  had  been  imprisoned 
at  the  Kresky  for  burglary.  But  the  bourgeois 
and  compromise -mongers'  Press  had  described 
the  whole  movement  as  being  merely  of  a  pogrom 
and  counter-revolutionary  character,  and  yet,  at 
the  same  time,  as  a  Bolshevik  manoeuvre,  having 
as  its  direct  object  the  seizure  of  power  by  armed 
coercion  of  the  Central  Executive  Committee. 
The  movement  of  July  1 6th- 1 8th  showed  with 
perfect  clearness  that  the  leading  parties  of  the 
Soviet  lived  in  Petrograd  in  a  complete  political 
vacuum.  It  is  true  that  the  garrison  was  by  no 
means  entirely  with  us  at  that  time.  There  were 
among  it  units  which  still  hesitated,  were  still 
undecided  and  passive.  But  apart  from  the 
ensigns,  there  was  not  a  single  unit  among  the 
garrison,  which  was  willing  to  fight  against  us 
in  defence  of  the  Government  or  the  leading 

27 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

parties  in  the  Soviet.  It  was  from  the  front  that 
troops  had  to  be  fetched.  The  entire  strategy 
of  Tsereteli,  Tchernoff,  and  others,  during  those 
July  days  was  to  gain  time  so  as  to  enable 
Kerensky  to  draw  "  reliable  "  troops  into  Petro- 
grad.  Delegation  after  delegation  entered  the 
Taurida  Palace,  which  was  surrounded  by  a  huge 
armed  crowd,  and  demanded  a  complete  break 
with  the  bourgeoisie,  energetic  measures  of  social 
reform,  and  the  commencement  of  peace  negotia- 
tions. We,  Bolsheviks,  met  every  new  detachment 
of  demonstrators,  either  in  the  street  or  in  the 
Palace,  with  harangues,  calling  on  them  to  be  calm, 
and  assuring  them  that  with  the  masses  in  their 
present  mood  the  compromise-mongers  would  be 
unable  to  form  a  new  Coalition  Ministry.  The 
men  of  Kronstadt  were  particularly  determined, 
and  it  was  only  with  difficulty  that  we  could 
keep  them  within  the  bounds  of  a  bare  demon- 
stration. On  July  i /th  the  demonstration 
assumed  a  still  more  formidable  character — this 
time  under  the  direct  leadership  of  our  party. 
The  Soviet  leaders  seemed  to  have  lost  their 
heads*;  their  speeches  were  of  an  evasive 
character  ;  the  answers  given  by  Tchkheidze,  the 
Ulysses,  to  the  delegations  were  bereft  of  all 
political  sense.  It  was  clear  that  the  political 
leaders  were  but  marking  time. 

On  the  night  of  July  1 7th  "  trustworthy  " 
troops  commenced  to  arrive  from  the  front. 
During  the  sitting  of  the  Executive  Committee, 
the  Taurida  Palace  was  suddenly  filled  with  the 
28 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

brass  notes  of  the  "  Marseillaise."  The  faces 
of  the  members  of  the  Presidential  Bureau 
changed  immediately.  Confidence,  which  had 
been  so  conspicuously  lacking  during  the  last 
few  days,  once  more  made  its  appearance.  It 
was  the  Volhynian  Regiment  of  the  Guards  which 
had  arrived,  the  same  regiment  which  a  few 
months  later  marched  at  the  head  of  the  Novem- 
ber Revolution  under  our  banners. 

From  that  moment  everything  changed.  There 
was  no  longer  any  need  to  stand  on  ceremony 
with  the  delegations  of  workers  and  soldiers  or 
the  representatives  of  the  Baltic  Fleet.  Speeches 
were  delivered  from  the  tribune  of  the  Executive 
Committee  about  an  armed  "  rebellion  "  which 
had  now  been  "  suppressed  "  by  the  faithful 
revolutionary  troops.  The  Bolsheviks  were 
declared  to  be  a  counter-revolutionary  party. 

The  fright  which  the  bourgeoisie  had  under- 
gone during  the  two  days  of  armed  demonstra- 
tion now  became  transformed  into  a  raging  hate 
which  was  displayed  not  only  in  the  columns  of 
their  papers,  but  also  in  the  streets  of  Petrograd, 
especially  on  the  Nevsky  Prospekt,  where  indi- 
vidual workers  and  soldiers  were  mercilessly 
beaten  when  caught  carrying  on  their  "  criminal  " 
agitation.  Ensigns,  officers,  members  of  shock 
battalions,  Knights  of  St.  George,  became  masters 
of  the  situation,  and  rabid  counter-revolutionaries 
placed  themselves  at  their  head.  A  ruthless  sup- 
pression of  workers'  organizations  and  of  insti- 
tutions of  our  party  was  carried  out  throughout 

29 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

the  city.  There  were  arrests,  raids,  physical  ill- 
treatment,  and  individual  murders.  In  the  night 
of  July  i/th-iSth  the  then  Minister  of  Justice, 
Pereverzeff,  issued  to  the  Press  "  documents  " 
purporting  to  prove  that  at  the  head  of  the 
Bolshevik  party  there  stood  paid  agents  of 
Germany. 

The  leaders  of  the  Socialist  Revolutionary  and 
Menshevik  parties  had  known  us  too  long  and 
too  well  to  believe  this  accusation,  but  at  the  same 
time  they  were  too  closely  interested  in  its  success 
against  us  to  protest  against  it  publicly.  Even 
now  one  cannot  recall,  without  disgust,  the  orgy 
of  lies  poured  forth  in  the  columns  of  all  the 
bourgeois  and  Coalitionist  Press.  Our  papers  were 
suppressed.  Revolutionary  Petrograd  then  felt 
that  the  provinces  and  the  army  were  as  yet 
far  from  being  with  it.  For  a  brief  moment 
the  workers  were  stricken  with  dismay.  In  the 
Petrograd  garrison  the  disbanded  regiments  were 
sternly  repressed,  and  individual  units  were  dis- 
armed. All  this  time  the  Soviet  leaders  were 
busy  fabricating  a  new  Ministry  to  include  third- 
rate  middle-class  groups  which,  without  in  any 
way  strengthening  the  Government,  only  deprived 
it  of  the  last  vestiges  of  revolutionary  initiative. 

In  the  meantime,  events  at  the  front  were 
taking  their  course.  The  whole  army  had  been 
shaken  to  its  foundation.  The  soldiers  saw  that 
the  vast  majority  of  the  officers  who  had 
camouflaged  themselves  at  the  beginning  of  the 
Revolution  were,  in  reality,  deeply  hostile  to  the 
30 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

new  regime.  At  the  Main  Headquarters  there 
was  now  going  on  quite  openly  a  selection  of 
counter-revolutionary  elements.  The  Bolshevik 
publications  were  ruthlessly  persecuted.  The 
offensive  had  long  ago  given  way  to  a  tragic 
retreat.  The  bourgeois  Press  was  savagely 
slandering  the  army,  and  although  on  the  eve 
of  the  offensive  the  governing  parties  had  declared 
that  we  were  an  insignificant  handful,  that  the 
army  knew  nothing  of  us  and  cared  less,  now 
that  their  adventure  of  the  offensive  had  ended 
so  tragically,  these  same  people  and  parties  were 
throwing  the  whole  responsibility  for  the  failure 
on  us.  The  prisons  were  packed  to  overflowing 
with  revolutionary  soldiers  and  workers.  For 
the  investigation  of  the  affair  of  July  1 6th -i  8th 
all  the  old  wolves  of  Tsarist  judiciary  were  re- 
called ;  yet  the  Socialist  Revolutionaries  and 
Mensheviks  dared  demand  of  Lenin,  Zinovieff,  and 
other  comrades  that  they  should  voluntarily  give 
themselves  up  to  "  justice  "  ! 

AFTER  THE  JULY  DAYS. 

The  feeling  of  dismay  in  the  workers'  quarters 
soon  passed,  and  gave  way  to  a  new  wave  of 
revolutionary  enthusiasm,  not  only  among  the 
proletariat,  but  even  among  the  Petrograd 
garrison.  The  Coalitionists  were  losing  all  in- 
fluence, and  the  wave  of  Bolshevism  commenced 
to  spread  throughout  the  country  and  penetrated, 
in  spite  of  all  obstacles,  even  into  the  army. 

The  new  Coalition  Ministry,  with  Kerensky  at 

31 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

its  head,  now  openly  entered  on  the  path  of 
repressions.  The  Ministry  re-established  the 
death  penalty  for  soldiers,  our  papers  were  put 
down  and  our  propagandists  were  arrested.  But 
all  this  only  increased  our  influence.  In  spite  of 
all  hindrances  placed  in  the  way  of  re-elections 
to  the  Petrograd  Soviet,  the  relative  strength  of 
the  parties  had  altered  to  such  an  extent  that 
on  many  important  questions  we  were  already  in 
a  majority.  Exactly  the  same  happened  in  the 
Moscow  Soviet.  At  that  time,  in  company  with 
many  other  comrades,  I  was  already  in  prison 
at  Kresty,  having  been  arrested  for  taking  part 
in  the  agitation  and  organization  of  the  armed 
rising  of  July  1 6th- 1 8th  in  agreement  with  the 
German  Government  and  with  the  object  of  aiding 
the  military  plans  of  the  Hohenzollerns.  The 
well-known  examining  magistrate  of  the  Tsarist 
regime,  Alexandroff,  who  had  conducted  several 
prosecutions  against  revolutionaries,  now  received 
the  mission  to  protect  the  Republic  against  the 
counter-revolutionary  Bolsheviks.  Under  the  old 
regime  prisoners  used  to  be  divided  into  political 
and  criminal  ;  now  a  new  terminology  was  intro- 
duced: criminals  and  Bolsheviks.  Amongst  the 
arrested  soldiers  bitter  perplexity  reigned.  Young 
men  from  the  villages  who  had  never  before 
taken  part  in  politics,  but  who  had  thought  that 
the  Revolution  had  made  them  free  once  for  all, 
now  stared  with  amazement  at  the  bolted  doors 
and  the  grated  windows.  During  our  walks  in 
the  courtyard  they  anxiously  asked  me  each  time 
82 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

what  it  all  meant  and  how  it  would  all  end.  I 
comforted  them  by  saying  that  we  should  come 
out  victorious  in  the  end. 

KORNILOFF'S  RISING. 

The  end  of  August  was  marked  by  the  rising 
of  General  Korniloff.  It  was  the  immediate 
result  of  the  mobilisation  of  the  counter-revolu- 
tionary forces,  to  which  the  offensive  of  July  had 
given  a  great  impetus.  At  the  celebrated  State 
Conference  at  Moscow  in  the  latter  half  of  August, 
Kerensky  tried  to  take  up  a  position  midway 
between  the  propertied  classes  and  lower  middle - 
class  democrats.  The  Bolsheviks  were  regarded 
as  standing  altogether  outside  the  law.  Kerensky 
threatened  them  with  "  blood  and  iron  "  amidst 
a  storm  of  applause  from  the  propertied  sections 
of  the  Conference  and  the  traitorous  silence  of 
the  lower  middle-class  democrats.  But  Keren- 
sky's  hysterical  cries  and  threats  did  not  satisfy 
the  leaders  of  the  counter-revolutionary  cause. 
They  saw  only  too  well  the  revolutionary  wave 
that  was  spreading  throughout  the  country,  en- 
veloping the  workers,  the  peasants,  and  the  army, 
and  they  considered  it  imperative  to  employ  im- 
mediately the  most  extreme  measures  in  order  to 
teach  the  masses  an  unforgettable  lesson.  In 
agreement  with  the  propertied  bourgeoisie,  which 
saw  in  him  its  hero,  Korniloff  took  this  risky 
matter  on  his  shoulders.  Kerensky,  Savinkoff, 
Filonenko,  and  other  Socialist  Revolutionaries  in 
or  about  office  took  part  in  his  plot,  but  all  of 

C  33 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

them  betrayed  Korniloff  as  soon  as  they  saw 
that  if  he  should  come  out  victorious  they  them- 
selves would  be  thrown  overboard.  I  lived 
through  the  episode  in  prison  and  followed  it  up 
in  the  papers:  free  access  to  the  papers  was 
the  only  important  difference  between  Kerensky's 
prison  regime  and  the  old  one.  The  adventure 
of  the  Cossack  General  fell  through »;  in  six 
months  of  the  Revolution  the  masses  had 
developed  sufficient  spirit  and  strength  of  organ- 
ization to  repel  any  open  counter-revolutionary 
attack.  The  Coalitionist  Soviet  parties  were 
frightened  to  the  last  degree  by  the  possible 
developments  of  the  Korniloff  plot,  which 
threatened  to  sweep  away  not  only  the  Bolshe- 
viks, but  the  whole  of  the  Revolution,  together 
with  its  leading  parties.  The  Socialist  Revolu- 
tionaries and  the  Mensheviks  then  set  out  to 
"  legalize "  the  position  of  the  Bolsheviks,  but 
only  by  half  and  with  numerous  reservations, 
scenting  possible  dangers  in  the  future.  The 
same  Kronstadt  sailors  who,  after  the  July 
occurrence,  had  been  branded  as  hooligans  and 
counter-revolutionaries,  were  now  summoned  to 
Petrograd  to  defend  the  Revolution  against  the 
Korniloff  danger.  They  came  without  demur, 
without  taunts,  without  any  reminders  of  the  past, 
and  took  up  the  most  responsible  positions.  I 
had  then  a  perfect  right  to  remind  Tsereteli  of 
the  words  I  had  thrown  at  him  in  May  when  he 
was  abusing  the  men  of  Kronstadt :  "  .When  a 
counter-revolutionary  general  tries  to  tie  a  knot 
34 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

round  the  throat  of  the  Revolution,  the  Cadets 
will  be  soaping  the  rope  and  the  Kronstadt 
sailors  will  come  to  help  us  and  to  die  with  us." 

The  Soviet  organizations  displayed  everywhere 
at  the  rear  and  at  the  front  their  vitality  and 
strength  in  the  fight  against  the  Korniloff  rising. 
Scarcely  anywhere  did  matters  come  to  actual 
fighting.  The  revolutionary  masses  simply  para- 
lysed the  General's  plot.  Just  as  in  July  the 
Coalitionists  could  find  no  soldiers  to  fight  against 
us  among  the  Petrograd  garrison,  so  now  I£or- 
niloff  could  find  no  soldiers  at  the  front  to  fight 
against  the  Revolution.  He  could  only  act  at  all 
by  deceit,  and  the  efforts  of  the  propagandists 
soon  put  an  end  to  his  designs. 

Judging  by  the  papers,  I  hoped  for  a  very 
rapid  developmen^  of  events  and  for  an  early 
passing  of  the  Government  authority  into  the 
hands  of  the  Soviets.  The  growth  of  the  in- 
fluence and  strength  of  the  Bolsheviks  was  un- 
doubted, and  it  had  now  received  an  irresistible 
impetus.  The  Bolsheviks  had  warned  against 
the  Coalition,  against  the  July  offensive,  and  had 
foretold  the  Korniloff  rebellion.  The  popular 
masses  could  now  see  that  we  had  been  right. 
At  the  most  anxious  moments  of  the  Korniloff 
plot,  when  the  Caucasian  "  Savage  "  Division  was 
marching  on  Petrograd,  the  Petrograd  Soviet, 
with  the  unwilling  connivance  of  the  Gpvern- 
ment,  had,  armed  the  workers.  The  regiments 
which  had  been  summoned  against  us  had  long 
ago  become  transformed  in  the  hot  atmosphere 

35 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

of  Petrograd,  and  were  now  entirely  on  our 
side.  The  Korniloff  attempt  was  bound  finally 
to  open  the  eyes  of  the  army  to  the  inadmissi- 
bility  of  any  further  understanding  with  the 
bourgeois  counter-revolutionaries.  One  might, 
therefore,  well  have  expected  that  the  suppression 
of  the  Korniloff  attempt  would  be  followed  by 
an  immediate  effort  of  the  revolutionary  forces, 
guided  by  our  party,  to  obtain  power.  But  events 
developed  more  slowly.  In  spite  of  the  intensity 
of  revolutionary  feeling,  the  masses  had  become 
more  wary  since  the  severe  lesson  of  the  July 
days,  and  forswore  all  spontaneous  action,  wait- 
ing for  a  direct  call  and  guidance  from  their 
leaders.  But  the  leaders  of  our  party,  too,  were 
in  a  waiting  mood.  In  these  circumstances  the 
winding  up  of  the  Korniloff  adventure,  although 
it  had  fundamentally  altered  the  correlation  of 
forces  in  our  favour,  did  not  lead  to  any  imme- 
diate political  changes. 

THE  STRUGGLE  WITHIN  THE  SOVIETS. 

By  that  time  the  predominance  of  our  party 
in  the  Petrograd  Soviet  became  definite.  This 
was  made  evident  in  a  dramatic  form  in  connec- 
tion with  the  question  of  the  constitution  of  the 
Presidential  Bureau.  At  the  time  when  the 
Socialist  Revolutionaries  and  the  Mensheviks 
reigned  supreme  in  the  Soviets,  they  tried  all 
they  could  to  isolate  the  Bolsheviks.  Even 
when  we  had  at  least  one -third  of  the  total 
seats  on  the  Petrograd  Soviet,  they  would  not 
86 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

admit  a  single  representative  of  our  party  to 
the  Presidential  Bureau.  After  the  Petrograd 
Soviet  had  passed  a  resolution  in  favour  of  a 
purely  Soviet  Government  by  a  somewhat  pre- 
carious majority,  our  group  demanded  the  con- 
stitution of  a  Coalition  Presidency  on  the  basis 
of  proportional  representation.  The  old  Bureau, 
which  included  Tchkheidze,  Tsereteli,  Kerensky, 
Skobeleff,  and  Tchernoff,  would  not  hear  of  this. 
It  is  worth  while  remembering  this  just  now,  when 
the  other  parties  talk  of  the  need  of  a  "  united 
democratic  front  "  and  accuse  us  of  exclusive - 
ness.  A  special  meeting  of  the  Petrograd  Soviet 
was  called  to  decide  the  constitution  of  the 
Bureau.  Both  sides  mobilized  all  their  forces 
and  reserves  for  this  struggle.  Tsereteli  came 
out  with  a  programmatic  speech  and  argued  that 
the  question  of  the  Presidential  Bureau  was  really 
a  question  of  policy.  We  thought  we  should  get 
a  little  less  than  half  of  the  votes,  and  were 
prepared  to  consider  this  as  a  success.  To 
our  own  great  surprise  the  voting  by  roll-call 
showed  more  than  a  hundred  majority  in  our 
favour.  "  During  six  months,"  said  Tsereteli, 
"  we  stood  at  the  head  of  the  Petrograd  Soviet 
and  led  it  from  victory  to  victory.  We  hope 
that  you  will  at  least  remain  half  that  time  at 
the  posts  you  are  about  to  take  up."  A  similar 
change  of  the  directing  parties  took  place  in  the 
Moscow  Soviet.  The  provincial  Soviets,  too, 
passed  one  after  the  other  into  the  hands  of  the 
Bolsheviks.  The  time  was  getting  near  for  the 

87 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

summoning  of  an  All-Russian  Congress  of 
Soviets.  But  the  leading  group  of  the  Central 
Executive  Committee  was  trying  all  it  could  to 
put  the  Congress  off  to  the  dim  and  distant  future, 
in  the  hope  of  making  it  altogether  impossible. 
It  was  evident  that  the  new  Congress  would  give 
our  party  a  majority,  would  elect  a  new  Central 
Executive  Committee  corresponding  to  the  new 
orientation  of  the  parties,  and  would  rob  the 
Coalitionists  of  their  most  important  strong- 
hold. The  struggle  for  the  calling  together 
of  the  All-Russian  Congress  of  the  Soviets 
thus  became  a  matter  of  the  greatest  importance 
to  us. 

As  against  this,  the  Mensheviks  and  Socialist 
Revolutionaries  made  a  proposal  for  the  calling 
together  of  a  Democratic  Conference.  This  body, 
they  thought,  they  would  be  able  to  play  off 
both  against  us  and  against  Kerensky. 

The  head  of  the  Government  had  by  this  time 
taken  up  quite  an  independent  and  irresponsible 
position.  He  had  been  raised  to  power  in  the 
first  period  of  the  Revolution  by  the  Petrograd 
Soviet.  Kerensky  had  entered  the  Ministry  in 
the  first  instance  without  any  provisional  decision 
of  the  Soviet,  but  the  latter  subsequently  ap- 
proved of  the  step.  After  the  first  Congress  of 
the  Soviets  the  Socialist  Ministers  were  considered 
to  be  responsible  to  the  Central  Executive  Com- 
mittee. Their  Cadet  allies  were  only  answerable 
to  their  own  party.  After  the  July  days  the 
Central  Executive  Committee,  meeting  the  wishes 
38 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

of  the  bourgeoisie,  freed  the  Socialist  Ministers 
from  their  responsibility  to  the  Soviets,  for  the 
purpose,  as  it  was  alleged  at  the  time,  of  creating 
a  revolutionary  dictatorship.  This  also  is  worth 
while  remembering  just  now,  when  the  very  same 
people  who  were  concocting  the  dictatorship  of 
a  small  circle  are  now  hurling1  charges  and 
slanders  against  the  dictatorship  of  a  class. 

The  Moscow  State  Conference,  at  which  the 
artificially  selected  propertied  and  democratic 
representatives  balanced  one  another,  had  had 
for  its  chief  aim  the  consolidation  of  Kerensky's 
power  over  the  classes  and  parties.  This  aim  had 
only  been  attained  in  appearance.  In  reality  the 
Moscow  Conference  only  revealed  Kerensky's 
complete  impotence,  for  he  was  almost  equally 
a  stranger  to  the  propertied  elements  and  to  the 
lower  middle -class  democracy.  But  as  the 
Liberals  and  the  Conservatives  applauded  his 
tirades  against  the  democracy,  while  the  Coali- 
tionists gave  him  a  great  ovation  when  he  very 
guardedly  disowned  the  counter-revolutionaries, 
he  gained  the  impression  that  he  was  supported 
by  both  sides  and  disposed  of  unlimited  authority. 
He  threatened  the  workers  and  the  revolutionary 
soldiers  with  blood  and  iron.  His  policy  went 
still  further .  along  the  road  of  conspiracies  with 
Korniloff,  which  compromised  him  in  the  eyes  of 
the  Coalitionists.  Tsereteli,  in  his  characteris- 
tically vague  diplomatic  phrases,  spoke  of  "  per- 
sonal "  factors  in  politics  and  the  necessity  of 
circumscribing  them.  It  was  this  task  that  the 

39 


THE     RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

Democratic  Conference  had  to  discharge,  com- 
posed as  it  was  of  representatives  of  the  Soviets, 
Municipal  Councils,  Zemstvos,  trade  unions  and 
co-operative  societies — all  selected  in  an  arbi- 
trary manner.  The  chief  problem,  however, 
was  to  provide  for  a  sufficiently  Conservative 
complexion  of  the  Conference,  to  dissolve  the 
Soviets  once  for  all  in  the  amorphous  mass  of 
democracy,  and  to  consolidate  their  own  power 
by  means  of  this  new  organization  against  the 
tide  of  Bolshevism. 

It  will  not  be  out  of  place  here  to  note  in  a 
few  words  the  difference  between  the  political 
r61e  of  the  Soviets  and  the  democratic  organs  of 
self-government.  Philistines  have  more  than 
once  pointed  out  to  us  that  the  new  Municipal 
Councils  and  Zemstvos  elected  by  universal 
suffrage  are  incomparably  more  democratic  than 
the  Soviets,  and  possess  a  more  valid  right  to 
represent  the  whole  population.  This  formal 
democratic  criterion,  however,  has  no  real  mean- 
ing in  revolutionary  times.  Revolution  is  dis- 
tinguished by  this :  that  the  consciousness  of 
the  masses  undergoes  rapid  changes.  New 
sections  of  the  population  constantly  gain  ex- 
perience, revise  their  views  of  yesterday,  work  out 
new  ones,  reject  old  leaders,  follow  others,  and 
press  ever  forward.  In  times  of  Revolution  the 
(formally)  democratic  organizations,  based  on 
the  ponderous  mechanism  of  universal  suffrage, 
inevitably  lag  behind  the  development  of  the 
political  views  of  the  masses.  Not  so  the  Soviets. 
40 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

They  depend  directly  on  organic  groups,  such 
as  workshops,  factories,  mines,  companies,  regi- 
ments, etc.  In  these  cases,  of  course,  there 
are  no  such  legal  guarantees  for  the  perfect 
accuracy  of  the  elections  as  in  those  to 
Municipal  Councils  and  Zemstvos,  but  there  is 
the  far  more  important  guarantee  of  the  direct 
and  immediate  contact  of  the  deputy  with  his 
electors.  The  member  of  the  Town  Council 
or  Zemstvo  depends  on  an  amorphous  mass  of 
electors  who  invest  him  with  authority  for  one 
year,  and  then  dissolve.  The  Soviet  electors, 
on  the  other  hand,  remain  in  permanent  contact 
with  one  another  by  the  very  conditions  of  their 
life  and  work?;  their  deputy  is  always  under 
their  direct  observation  and  may  at  any  moment 
be  given  new  instructions,  and,  if  necessary,  may 
be  censured,  recalled,  and  replaced  by  some- 
body else. 

As  the  general  political  evolution  of  the  pre- 
ceding months  of  the  Revolution  had  been  marked 
by  the  growing  influence  of  the  Bolsheviks  at  the 
expense  of  the  Coalitionist  parties,  it  was  quite 
natural  that  this  process  should  have  been  re- 
flected most  clearly  and  fully  on  the  Soviets*; 
the  Town  Councils  and  Zemstvos,  in  spite  of 
all  their  formal  democratic  character,  expressing 
not  so  much  the  sentiments  of  the  masses  to- 
day as  those  of  yesterday.  This  explains  the 
gravitation  towards  the  Town  Councils  and 
Zemstvos  on  the  part  of  those  parties  which 
have  been  losing  ever  more  and  more  their  foot- 

41 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

ing  in  the  revolutionary  class.  This  question 
will  again  crop  up,  only  on  a  larger  scale,  when 
we  come  to  the  Constituent  Assembly. 

THE  DEMOCRATIC  CONFERENCE. 

The  Democratic  Conference,  called  together 
by  Tsereteli  and  his  coadjutors  towards  the  end 
of  September,  was  of  an  entirely  artificial 
character,  consisting,  as  it  did,  of  a  combination 
of  representatives  of  Soviets  with  those  of  the 
organs  of  local  self-government  in  such  a  pro- 
portion as  to  give  a  preponderance  to  the  Coali- 
tionist parties.  The  offspring  of  helplessness  and 
confusion,  the  Conference  ended  in  a  pitiful 
fiasco.  The  propertied  bourgeoisie  regarded  it 
with  the  greatest  animosity,  seeing  in  it  an  attempt 
to  drive  it  from  the  position  to  which  it  had 
advanced  at  the  Moscow  gathering.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  revolutionary  working  class  and 
the  masses  of  the  peasantry  and  soldiers  had 
condemned  in  advance  the  methods  of  adultera- 
tion used  in  calling  the  Conference  together. 
The  immediate  task  of  the  Coalitionists  was  to 
form  a  "  responsible  "  Ministry.  But  even  this 
was  not  attained.  Kerensky  did  not  want  and 
would  not  allow  any  principle  of  responsibility, 
because  the  bourgeoisie  at  his  back  would  not 
allow  it.  N  on -responsibility  before  the  organs 
of  the  so-called  democracy  meant,  in  effect,  re- 
sponsibility before  the  Cadets  and  the  Allied 
Embassies.  For  the  present  this  was  sufficient 
for  the  bourgeoisie.  On  the  question  of  coalition, 
42 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

the  Conference  revealed  its  complete  insolvency. 
The  number  of  votes  cast  for  the  principle  of  a 
coalition  with  the  bourgeoisie  was  only  little 
more  than  that  cast  against  all  coalitions,  and  a 
majority  of  votes  was  cast  against  a  coalition 
with  the  Cadets.  But  with  the  exception  of  the 
latter,  there  were  no  parties  among  the  bourgeoisie 
worth  mentioning  with  whom  a  coalition  could 
be  entered  into.  Tsereteli  fully  explained  this 
to  the  assembly.  If  the  assembly  did  not  under- 
stand this,  so  much  the  worse  for  it  J  And  so 
behind  the  back  of  the  Conference  pourparlers 
were  carried  on  unabashed  with  the  very  Cadets 
whom  it  had  rejected,  it  having  been  decided  that 
the  Cadets  should  be  treated  not  as  Cadets,  but  as 
— public  men  !  Pressed  from  the  right  and  from 
the  left,  the  lower  middle-class  democrats  sub- 
mitted to  all  this  mockery  of  themselves  and 
thereby  demonstrated  their  complete  political 
impotence. 

A  Council  was  elected  from  the  Democratic 
Conference,  which  it  was  decided  should  be  com- 
pleted by  the  addition  of  some  representatives 
of  the  propertied  classes-;  and  this  "  Provisional 
Parliament  "  was  to  fill  the  gap  until  the  meeting 
of  the  Constituent  Assembly.  The  new  Coalition 
Ministry,  contrary  to  Tsereteli's  original  plan, 
but  in  entire  accordance  with  the  plans  of  the 
bourgeoisie,  was  to  maintain  its  formal  inde- 
pendence as  against  the  Provisional  Parliament. 
The  whole  proceeding*  gave  the  impression  of 
a  pitiful  and  impotent  product  of  a  mind  divorced 

48 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

from  life,  behind  which  could  clearly  be  seen  the 
complete  capitulation  of  the  lower  middle -class 
democrats  to  that  same  propertied  Liberal  bour- 
geoisie which  only  a  month  before  had  openly 
supported  Korniloff's  attempt  against  the  Revo- 
lution. The  whole  thing,  then,  amounted  prac- 
tically to  the  re -establishment  and  the  perpetua- 
tion of  the  coalition  with  the  Liberal  bourgeoisie. 
There  could  no  longer  be  any  doubt  that,  quite 
independent  of  the  composition  of  the  future 
Constituent  Assembly,  the  Government  power 
would  be  in  the  hands  of  the  bourgeoisie,  since 
the  Coalitionist  parties,  in  spite  of  all  the  prepon- 
derance secured  to  them  by  the  popular  masses, 
were  unalterably  bent  on  a  coalition  with  the 
Cadets,  considering  it  impossible  to  form  any 
Government  without  the  aid  of  the  bourgeoisie. 
The  popular  masses  regarded  Miliukoff's  party 
with  the  greatest  hostility.  At  all  elections  in 
the  course  of  the  Revolution  the  Cadets  invari- 
ably suffered  severe  defeatsi;  yet  the  very  same 
parties,  the  Socialist  Revolutionaries  and  Men- 
sheviks,  who  smote  the  Cadet  party  at  the 
elections  hip  and  thigh,  would,  after  the  elections, 
invariably  reserve  for  them  a  place  of  honour  in 
the  Coalition  Cabinet.  It  was  natural  in  these 
circumstances  that  the  masses  began  to  perceive 
more  and  more  clearly  that  the  Coalitionist  parties 
were  in  reality  playing  the  role  of  bailiffs  and 
office-holders  for  the  Liberal  bourgeoisie. 


44 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

DIFFICULTIES  AT  THE  FRONT  AND  THE  REAR. 

Meanwhile  the  internal  situation  was  deteri- 
orating and  becoming  more  and  more  com- 
plicated. The  war  was  dragging  along  without 
aim,  without  sense,  without  any  perspective.  The 
Government  was  taking  no  steps  to  extricate  itself 
from  the  vicious  circle.  The  ridiculous  plan  was 
put  forward  of  sending  Skobeleff  to  Paris  in 
order  to  influence  the  Allied  Imperialists,  but 
no  sensible  person  attached  to  it  any  serious  im- 
portance. Korniloff  surrendered  Riga  to  the 
Germans  in  order  to  terrorize  public  opinion  and 
so  to  gain  a  favourable  opportunity  for  estab- 
lishing an  iron  discipline  in  the  army.  Petrograd 
was  threatened,  and  the  middle-class  elements 
were  welcoming  the  danger  with  evident 
malignancy.  Rodzianko,  the  former  President 
of  the  Duma,  openly  said  that  the  surrender  of 
demoralized  Petrograd  to  the  Germans  would 
constitute  no  great  misfortune.  He  referred  to 
the  case  of  Riga,  where,  following  upon  the  entry 
of  the  Germans,  the  Soviets  were  dissolved  and 
strict  order  was  established  with  the  help  of  the 
old  police.  True,  the  Baltic  Fleet  would  be  lostr; 
but  the  fleet  had  been  demoralized  by  revolu- 
tionary propaganda,  and  the  loss  would,  therefore, 
not  be  so  very  great.  This  cynicism  of  the 
garrulous  grand  seigneur  expressed  the  secret 
thoughts  of  wide  circles  of  the  bourgeoisie.  The 
handing  over  of  Petrograd  to  the  Germans  would 
not  really  mean  its  final  loss.  By  the  peace  treaty 

45 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

Petrograd  would  be  returned,  but  it  would  in  the 
interval  have  been  disciplined  by  German  mili- 
tarism. The  Revolution  in  the  meantime  would 
be  decapitated,  and  could  therefore  be  more  easily 
grappled  with.  Kerensky's  Government  had,  in 
fact,  no  serious  intention  of  defending  the  capital, 
and  public  opinion  was  being  prepared  for  its 
possible  surrender.  Government  offices  were 
being  transferred  from  Petrograd  to  Moscow  and 
other  towns. 

It  was  in  such  circumstances  that  the  Soldiers' 
Section  of  the  Petrograd  Soviet  met  at  a  full 
session.  The  general  feeling  was  tense  and 
agitated.  If  the  Government  was  unable  to 
defend  Petrograd,  let  it  conclude  peace.  And  if 
it  was  incapable  of  concluding  peace,  let  it  clear 
out.  This  was  how  the  Soldiers'  Section  ex- 
pressed their  views  of  the  condition  of  affairs. 
This  was  the  first  signal  of  the  coming  November 
Revolution. 

At  the  front  the  position  of  affairs  was  going 
from  bad  to  worse.  A  cold  aqtumn,  wet  and 
muddy,  was  drawing  near.  There  was  the 
prospect  of  a  fourth  winter  campaign.  The  food 
supply  was  becoming  worse  every  day.  In  the 
rear  they  had  forgotten  about  the  front.  There 
were  no  reljefs,  no  reinforcements,  and  no  warm 
clothing.  The  number  of  deserters  was  increas- 
ing daily.  The  old  army  committees,  elected 
at  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution,  still  re- 
mained in  their  places  and  supported  Kerensky's 
policy.  Re-elections  were  prohibited.  An  abyss 
46 


was  formed  between  the  army  committees  and 
the  masses  of  the  army,  and  finally  the  soldiers 
began  to  detest  the  committees.  Again  and  again 
delegates  from  the  trenches  would  arrive  at  Petro- 
grad  and  ask  point-blank,  at  the  sittings  of  the 
Soviet  :  "  What  are  we  to  do  now?  Who  will 
end  the  war,  and  how  shall  it  be  done?  Why 
is  the  Petrograd  Soviet  silent?  " 

THE  INEVITABLE  STRUGGLE  FOR  POWER. 

The  Petrograd  Soviet  was  not  silent.  It 
demanded  the  immediate  assumption  of  authority 
by  the  central  and  local  Soviets,  the  immediate 
transference  of  the  land  to  the  peasants,  the 
establishment  of  control  by  the  workers  over 
industry,  and  the  immediate  initiation  of  peace 
negotiations.  So  long  as  we  had  been  in  oppo- 
sition, the  cry  "  All  power  to  the  Soviets  !  "  was 
a  battle-cry  of  propaganda,  but  since  we  became 
a  majority  on  all  the  chief  Soviets  it  imposed  upon 
us  the  duty  of  taking  up  an  immediate  and 
direct  struggle  for  power. 

In  the  villages  the  position  of  affairs  had 
become  complicated  and  confused  to  the  last 
degree.  The  Revolution  had  promised  the 
land  to  the  peasants,  but  had  forbidden  the 
latter  to  touch  the  land  till  the  meeting  of  the 
Constituent  Assembly.  The  peasants  at  first 
waited  patiently;  but  when  they  began  to  lose 
patience  the  Coalition  Government  resorted  to 
measures  of  repression.  In  the  meantime  the 
prospect  of  the  meeting  of  the  Constituent 

47 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

Assembly   was   becoming   dimmer   and   dimmer. 
.The  bourgeoisie  was  insisting  that  the  Constituent 
Assembly   should  not   be   summoned  until   after 
the   conclusion   of   peace.      The   peasant   masses, 
on    the   other   hand,    were    becoming    more    and 
more  impatient,  and  what  we  had  predicted  at 
the  beginning  of  the  Revolution  was  now  coming 
true.      The   peasant   masses   began   to   grab   the 
land  on  their  own  authority.     Reprisals  became 
more     frequent    and    severe,    and     the    revolu- 
tionary   land   committees   began   to   be   arrested 
— here   and   there.      In  some   districts   Kerensky 
even   proclaimed   martial   law.      Delegates   from 
the  villages  began  to  stream  to  Petrograd,  and 
complained     to     the     Soviet     that     they     were 
being  arrested  while  trying  to  carry  out  the  pro- 
gramme   of   the    Soviets   and   handing    over   the 
estates  of  the  private  landowners  to  the  peasants' 
committees.      The   peasants   demanded   our   pro- 
tection.    We  replied  that  we  could  only  help  them 
if  the  government  power  were  in  our  hands.    Hence 
it  followed  that  if  the  Soviets  did  not  want  to  be- 
come mere  talking-shops  they  were  bound  to  make 
an  effort  to  get  the  power  into  their  own  hands. 
It  was  absurd  to  fight  for  the  authority  of  the 
Soviets   six   or  eight  weeks   before  the   meeting 
of  the  Constituent  Assembly — so  we  were  told  by 
the  friends  on  the  Right.     But  we  were  not  in 
the  least  infected  by  this  fetichism  of  the  Con- 
stituent Assembly.     In  the  first  place,  there  were 
no  guarantees  that  it  would  really  be  summoned. 
The  break-up  of  the  army,  the  wholesale  deser- 
48 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

tions,  the  disorganization  of  the  food  supply,  the 
agrarian  revolution — all  went  to  create  an  atmo- 
sphere but  little  favourable  to  the  holding  of 
elections  to  the  Assembly.  Moreover,  the  pos- 
sible surrender  of  Petrograd  to  the  Germans 
threatened  to  make  such  elections  altogether  im- 
possible. In  the  second  place,  even  if  the 
Constituent  Assembly  were  to  be  summoned  under 
the  direction  of  the  old  parties,  on  the  old  party 
lists,  it  could  only  become  a  protection  for,  and 
a  confirmation  of,  the  coalition  principle  of 
government.  Neither  the  Socialist  Revolution- 
aries nor  the  Mensheviks  were  capable  of  assum- 
ing authority  without  the  help  of  the  bourgeoisie. 
Only  a  revolutionary  class  could  break  the  vicious 
circle  in  which  the  Revolution  was  floundering 
and  disintegrating.  It  was  essential  that  the 
authority  should  be  snatched'  from  the  hands 
of  those  elements  which  directly  or  indirectly 
were  serving  the  interests  of  the  bourgeoisie 
and  used  the  Government  machinery  for 
obstructing  the  revolutionary  demands  of  the 
people. 

THE   STRUGGLE   FOR  THE  SOVIET  CONGRESS. 

All  power  to  the  Soviets :  such  was  the  demand 
of  our  party.  In  the  preceding  period  this  meant, 
in  terms  of  party  divisions,  complete  authority 
for  the  Socialist  Revolutionaries  and  Mensheviks 
as  against  the  coalition  with  the  Liberal  bour- 
geoisie. Now,  however,  in  November  1917,  this 
demand  meant  the  complete  supremacy  of  the 

D  40 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

revolu.tipjia.ry  proletariat,  headed  now  by  the  Bol- 
shevik party.  The  question  at  issue  was  the 
dictatorship  of  the  working  class,  which  was  lead- 
ing, or,  to  be  more  correct,  was  capable  of 
leading,  the  millions  of  the  poorest  peasantry. 
This  was  the  historical  meaning  of  the  November 
rising. 

^Everything  conspired  to  lead  the  party  along 
this  path.  From  the  very  first  days  of  the 
Revolution  we  had  insisted  on  the  need  and  the 
inevitability  of  the  assumption  of  the  entire 
government  authority  by  the  Soviets.  The 
majority  of  the  Soviets,  after  an  intense  internal 
struggle,  adopted  our  standpoint  and  took  up  this 
demand.  We  were  getting  ready  for  the  second 
All-Russian  Congress  of  the  Soviets,  at  wh,ich 
we  expected  a  complete  victory  for  our  party. 
The  Central  Executive  Committee,  on  the  other 
hand,  under  the  direction  of  Dan  (the  cautious 
Tshkheidze  left  for  the  Caucasus  in  good  time) 
did  everything  possible  to  hinder  the  meeting 
of  the  Soviet  Congress.  After  great  efforts, 
supported  by  the  Soviet  group  at  the  Democratic 
Conference,  we  at  last  obtained  the  fixing  of  a 
definite  date  for  the  Congress  :  November  7th. 
This  date  has  now  become  the  greatest  date  in 
Russian  history.  As  a  preliminary,  we  called 
together  in  Petrograd  a  conference  of  the  Soviets 
of  the  Northern  Provinces,  including  also  the 
Baltic  Fleet  and  the  Moscow  Soviet.  We  had 
a  definite  majority  at  this  conference.  We  also, 
obtained  some  protection  on  the  right  flank  from 
50 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

the  left  wing  of  the  Socialist  Revolutionaries,  and 
laid  the  foundation  for  the  business-like  organiza- 
tion of  the  November  rising. 

THE  CONFLICT  OVER  THE  PETROGRAD 
GARRISON. 

But  even  before  that,  before  the  conference 
of  the  Northern  Soviets,  something  happened 
which  was  destined  to  play  a  most  important 
part  in  the  coming  political  struggle. 

In  the  middle  of  October  there  appeared  at 
a  sitting  of  the  Executive  Committee  the  Soviet 
representative  attached  to  the  staff  of  the  Petro- 
grad  military  district,  who  informed  us  that  the 
Main  Headquarters  were  demanding  the  despatch 
of  two -thirds  of  the  Petrograd  garrison  to  the 
front.  .What  for?  For  the  defence  of  Petro,- 
grad  J  The  despatch  was  not  to  take  place  im- 
mediately, but  it  was  necessary  to  get  ready  for 
it  at  once.  The  Staff  asked  the  Petrograd 
Soviet  to  approve  of  this  plan.  We  pricked  up 
our  ears.  Already  at  the  end  of  August  five 
revolutionary  regiments  had  been,  wholly  or  in 
part,  removed  from  Petrograd.  This  had  been 
done  on  the  demand  of  the  then  Commander-in- 
Chief,  Korniloff,  who  at  that  very  time  was 
preparing  to  throw  the  Caucasian  "  Savage " 
Division  against  Petrograd  with  the  object  of 
settling  with  the  revolutionary  capital  once  and 
for  all.  We  had  thus  already  had  the  experience 
of  a  purely  political  redistribution  of  troops, 
carried  out  on  the  pretext  of  military  operations. 

51 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

It  may  be  noted  here,  by  way  of  anticipation,  that 
documents  which  fell  into  our  hands  after  the 
November  Revolution  showed,  without  any  pos- 
sibility of  doubt,  that  the  proposed  evacuation 
of  the  Petrograd  garrison  in  reality  had  abso- 
lutely nothing  to  do  with  military  operations, 
and  was  forced  on  the  Commander -in -Chief, 
Dukhonin,  against  his  will  by  no  other  than 
Kerensky  himself,  who  was  anxious  to  clear 
Petrograd  of  the  most  revolutionary  soldiers, 
that  is,  of  those  most  hostile  to  himself. 

But  this  was  not  known  in  the  middle  of 
October,  and  our  suspicions  were  met  by  a  storm 
of  patriotic  indignation.  The  military  Staff  tried 
to  hurry  us  on,  and  Kerensky  was  impatient,  as 
the  ground  beneath  his  feet  was  fast  becoming 
too  hot  for  him.  We,  however,  did  not  hurry 
to  answer.  Certainly,  Petrograd  was  in  danger, 
and  the  terrible  question  of  the  defence  of  the 
capital  exercised  us  greatly.  But  after  the  ex- 
perience of  the  Korniloff  days,  after  Rodzianko's 
words  regarding  salvation  by  a  German  occupa- 
tion of  Petrograd,  how  could  we  be  assured  that 
Petrograd  would  not  be  wilfully  surrendered 
to  the  Germans  as  a  punishment  for  its  rebellious 
spirit?  The  Executive  Committee  refused  to  give 
its  signature  to  the  demand  for  the  removal  of 
two-thirds  of  the  Petrograd  garrison  without 
examination.  .We  declared  that  we  must  have 
proof  of  the  reality  of  the  military  need  which 
dictated  the  demand,  and  for  that  purpose  some 
organization  to  examine  the  question  must  be 
52 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

created.  Thus  arose  the  idea  of  establishing, 
side  by  side  with  the  Soldiers'  Section  of  the 
Soviets,  that  is,  with  the  political  representation 
of  the  garrison,  a  purely  operative  organ  in  the 
form  of  the  Military  Revolutionary  Committee 
which  ultimately  acquired  enormous  power  and 
became  practically  the  instrument  of  the 
November  Revolution. 

Undoubtedly,  already  at  that  time,  when  we 
were  proposing  the  creation  of  an  organ  to  con- 
centrate in  its  hands  all  the  threads  of  the 
purely  military  direction  of  the  Petrograd  gar- 
rison, we  were  clearly  realizing  that  this  organ 
might  become  an  invaluable  revolutionary 
weapon.  We  were  already  at  that  time  deliber- 
ately and  openly  steering  for  a  rising  and 
organizing  ourselves  for  it.  The  opening  of  the 
All-Russian  Congress  of  Soviets  was  fixed,  as 
we  said  before,  for  November  7th,  and  there 
could  be  no  longer  any  doubt  that  it  would 
declare  in  favour  of  the  assumption  of  supreme 
authority  by  the  Soviets.  But  such  a  decision 
would  have  to  be  carried  out  at  once,  otherwise 
it  would  simply  become  a  worthless  platonic 
demonstration.  It  would  have  been  in  accord 
with  the  logic  of  the  situation  if  we  had  fixed 
our  rising  for  November  7th.  The  bourgeois 
Press,  indeed,  took  this  for  granted.  But  the 
fate  of  the  Congress  depended,  in  the  first  instance, 
on  the  Petrograd  garrison.  Would  it  allow 
Kerensky  to  surround  the  Congress  and  to  break 
it  up  with  the  help  of  a  few  hundreds  or  thousands 

58 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

of  ensigns,  cadets,  and  members  of  shock  bat- 
talions? The  very  attempt  to  get  the  garrison 
out  of  Petrograd — did  it  not  signify  that  the 
Government  was  preparing  to  break  up  the  Con- 
gress of  the  Soviets?  It  would  have  been  strange 
indeed  if  it  were  not,  seeing  that  we  were 
mobilizing  quite  openly,  in  face  of  the  whole 
country,  all  the  strength  of  the  Soviets  for  the 
purpose  of  dealing  the  Coalition  Government  a 
mortal  blow. 

And  so  the  whole  conflict  in  Petrograd  was 
coming  to  an  issue  over  the  question  of  the  fate 
of  its  garrison.  In  the  first  place,  of  course,  it 
affected  the  soldiers,  but  the  workers,  too,  evinced 
the  liveliest  interest  in  it,  as  they  feared  that  on 
the  removal  of  the  troops  they  might  be  crushed 
by  the  military  cadets  and  Cossacks.  The  con- 
flict was  thus  assuming  a  very  acute  character, 
and  the  question  over  which  it  was  tending  to 
an  issue  was  very  unfavourable  to  the  Kerensky 
Government. 

Parallel  with  this  struggle  over  the  garrison 
was  also  going  on  the  previously  mentioned 
struggle  for  the  summoning  of  the  Soviet 
Congress,  in  connection  with  which  we  were  pro- 
claiming openly,  in  the  name  of  the  Petrograd 
Soviet  and  the  conference  of  the  Soviets  of  the 
Northern  District,  that  the  second  Soviet  Con- 
gress must  dismiss  the  Kerensky  Government  and 
become  the  real  master  of  Russia.  Practically 
the  rising  was  already  proceeding,  and  was 
developing  in  the  face  of  the  whole  country. 
54 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

During  October  the  question  of  the  rising 
played  also  an  important  part  in  the  infernal  life 
of  our  party.  Lenin,  who  was  in  hiding1  in  Fin- 
land, wrote  numerous  letters  insisting  On"  more 
energetic  tactics.  Amongst  the  rank  arid  file 
there  was  great  fermentation  and  growing  dis- 
content, because  the  Bolshevik  Party,  fiow  rrf  a 
majority  in  the  Soviets,  was  not  putting  its  own 
battle-cries  into  practice.  Ort  Octobef  28th  a 
secret  meeting  of  the  Central  Committee  of  our 
party  took  place,  at  which  Leriin  was  present.  On 
the  order  of  the  day  was  the  question1  of  the 
rising.  With  only  two  dissentients1  it  was  uii&tii- 
fnously  decided  that  the  orrly  rriea'ris  of  saving 
the  Revolution  and  the  country  from  complete 
destruction  was  an  armed  rising,  which  must  have 
for  its  object  the  conquest  of  supreme  govfefnrnent 
authority  by  the  Soviets. 

THE  DEMOCRATIC  COUNCIL  AND  THE 
PROVISIONAL  PARLIAMENT. 

The  Democratic  Council  which  arose  tftit  of 
the  Democratic  Conference  inherited  all  trie  irri- 
potence  of  the  latttef .  The  old  Soviet  parties,  the 
Socialist  Revolutionaries  and  the  Mensheviks,  had 
secured  for  themselves  an  artificial  majority  6n 
the  Council,  apparently  for  the  purpose  of  ex- 
posing still  more  thoroughly  their  entire  political 
prostration.  Behind  the  scenes  Tsereteli  was 
carrying  on  intricate  negotiations  with1  Kerensky 
and  the  representatives  of  the  "  propertied  ele- 
ments," as  they  began  terming  them'  irf  the 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

Council  in  order  to  avoid  the  "  insulting  "  term 
"  bourgeoisie."  Tsereteli's  report  on  the  pro- 
gress and  results  of  these  negotiations  sounded 
very  much  like  a  funeral  oration  over  the  grave 
of  a  whole  revolutionary  period.  It  turned  out 
that  neither  Kerensky  nor  the  propertied  elements 
would  agree  to  the  principle  of  Ministerial  respon- 
sibility to  the  new  semi-representative  body.  On 
the  other  hand;  it  was  impossible  to  find  "  busi- 
ness-like "  public  men  outside  the  Cadet  Party. 
The  organizers  of  the  business  had  to  give  in  on 
both  points,  which  capitulation  was  so  much  the 
more  delightful  as  the  Democratic  Conference 
had  been  called  together  specially  for  the  purpose 
of  putting  an  end  to  the  irresponsible  regime, 
the  Conference,  moreover,  explicitly  rejecting  all 
coalition  with  the  Cadets.  At  the  last  few  meet- 
ings of  the  Democratic  Council  before  the 
new  Revolution  there  was  a  general  atmosphere 
of  great  tension  and  practical  impotence.  The 
Council  reflected  not  the  progress  of  the  Revo- 
lution, but  the  dissolution  of  parties  whom  the 
Revolution  had  left  far  behind. 

Already  during  the  session  of  the  Democratic 
Conference  I  had  raised  the  question  in  our  party 
of  making  a  demonstrative  exit  from  the  Con- 
ference and  of  boycotting  the  Democratic 
Council.  It  was  necessary  to  demonstrate  to  the 
masses  by  our  action  that  the  Coalitionists  had 
brought  the  Revolution  into  an  impasse.  The 
struggle  for  the  formation  of  a  Soviet  Govern- 
ment could  only  be  carried  on  by  revolutionary 
56 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

methods.  It  was  imperative  to  wrest  the 
authority  from  the  hands  of  those  who  had  proved 
themselves  incapable  for  good  and  who  were 
fast  losing  all  capability  even  for  active  harm. 
It  was  necessary  to  oppose  our  political  method 
through  the  mobilization  of  all  forces  around 
the  Soviets,  through  the  All-Russian  Congress 
of  the  Soviets,  through  a  rising,  to  their  method 
of  action  through  an  artificially  selected  "  Pro- 
visional Parliament  "  and  a  problematic  Con- 
stituent Assembly.  This  could  only  be  accom- 
plished by  an  open  and  public  break  with  the 
body  created  by  Tsereteli  and  his  friends,  and 
by  concentrating  all  the  attention  and  strength  of 
the  working  class  on  the  Soviet  organizations. 
It  was  for  these  reasons  that  I  proposed  a 
demonstrative  exit  from  the  Democratic  Con- 
ference and  a  revolutionary  agitation  in  the 
factories  and  among  the  troops  against  the 
attempt  to  adulterate  the  will  of  the  Revolution 
and  again  to  direct  its  further  course  into  the 
groove  of  co-operation  with  the  bourgeoisie. 
Lenin  expressed  himself  in  the  same  sense  in  a 
letter  which  we  received  a  few  days  later.  But 
among  the  leaders  of  the  party  there  was  still 
considerable  hesitation.  The  July  days  had  left 
a  very  deep  impression  on  the  party.  The  masses 
of  workers  and  soldiers  had  shaken  off  the  im- 
pression made  by  the  July  reprisals  much  more 
rapidly  than  many  of  our  leading  comrades  who 
feared  the  break-up  of  the  Revolution  by  another 
premature  attempt  on  the  part  of  the  masses.  In 

57 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

our  group  at  the  Democratic  Conference  I 
obtained  fifty  votes  for  my  proposal  against 
seventy  cast  in  favour  6f  participating  in  the 
Democratic  Council.  But  our  experience  on  that 
Council  very  soon  strengthened  the  left  wing 
of  the  party.  It  became  only  too  evident  that 
the  method  of  compromises  bordering  on  mere 
swindles,  which  had  for  its  aim  to  secure  the 
leadership  of  the  Revolution  for  the  propertied 
classes  assisted  by  the  Coalitionists  who  had 
lost  all  footing  amongst  the  wide  masses,  was  not 
the  way  out  of  the  impasse  into  which  the  flabby 
middle -class  democrats  had  brought  the  Revolu- 
tion1. By  the  time  when  the  Democratic  Council, 
supplemented  by  representatives  of  the  propertied 
classes,  became  transformed  into  a  "  Provisional 
Parliament,"  the  psychological  readiness  of  our 
party  to  break  away  from  this  body  was  already 
ripe. 

1* HE  SOCIALIST  REVOLUTIONARIES  AND  THE 
MENSHEVIKS. 

The  question  before  us  at  the  time  was  whether 
the  Socialist  Revolutionaries  of  the  Left  would 
follow  us  along  this  path.  This  group  was  then 
in  the  process  of  formation,  which  from  our 
party  point  of  view  was  much  too  slow  and 
hesitating.  At  the  beginning  of  the  Revolution, 
the  Socialist  Revolutionary  Party  became  by  far 
the  strongest  in  the  whole  political  field.  The 
peasants,  soldiers,  arid  even  the  masses  of  the 
workers  voted  for  the  Socialist  Revolutionaries. 
58 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

They  themselves  had  not  expected  anything  ol 
the  kind,  and  more  than  once  it  had  seemed  sts 
though  there  was  a  danger  that  the  party  might 
choke  in  the  Waves  of  its  own  success.  With 
the  exception  of  the  purely  capitalist  and  land- 
owning classes  and  the  well-to-do  intellectuals, 
all  and  everybody  flocked  to  the  banners  of  the 
Socialist  Revolutionaries.  Arid  this  entirely  cor- 
responded to  the  first  stage  in  the  Revolution, 
when  the  class  boundaries  had  riot  yet  had  time 
to  make  themselves  visible,  when  the  yearning 
after  a  united  revolutionary  front  found  expres- 
sion in  the  nebulous  programme  of  a  party  which' 
was  ready  to  shelter  alike  the  workers  afraid  of 
losing  contact  with  the  peasantry,  the  J)easants 
seeking  land  and  freedom,  the  intellectuals 
anxious  to  guide  both  these  classes,  and  the 
official  trying  to  adapt  himself  to  the  new  order 
of  things.  When  Kerensky,  who,  under  the 
Tsarist  Government,  had  belonged  to  the  "  Group 
Of  Toil,"  joined  the  Socialist  Revolutionaries 
after  the  victory  of  the  Revolution,  the  popu- 
larity of  this  party  began  to  grow  in  corre- 
spondence with  trie  advance  of  Kererisky  himself 
along  the  road  of  power.  Many  colonels  and 
generals,  out  of  respect — not  always  platoriic — 
for  the  War  Minister,  hastened  to  inscribe  their 
names  in  the  rolls  of  the  party  of  the  erstwhile 
terrorists.  The  old  Socialist  Revolutionaries, 
belonging  to  the  old  revolutionary  school,  were 
already  at  that  time  regarding  somewhat  un- 
easily the  ever-growing  nufnber  of  "  Match " 

59 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

Socialist  Revolutionaries,  that  is  to  say,  those 
members  who  had  only  found  their  revolutionary 
souls  in  March,  after  the  Revolution  had  over- 
thrown the  old  regime  and  had  raised  the 
Socialist  Revolutionaries  to  power.  In  this  way 
the  party  contained  in  its  amorphousness  not 
only  the  internal  contradictions  of  the  develop- 
ing Revolution,  but  also  all  the  prejudices  of 
the  backward  peasant  masses  and  all  the  sen- 
timentalism,  instability,  and  ambitions  of  the 
intellectual  sections  of  the  population.  It  was 
quite  evident  that  the  party  could  not  exist 
long  in  such  a  form.  In  point  of  ideas  it  proved 
to  be  impotent  from  the  very  beginning.  It 
was  the  Mensheviks  who  played  the  leading 
political  r61e  in  the  first  stages  of  the  Revolution. 
They  had  passed  through  the  Marxian  school, 
and  had  derived  from  it  certain  methods  and 
habits  which  had  helped  them  to  find  their  way 
sufficiently  in  the  political  situation  to  adulterate 
"  scientifically  "  the  real  meaning  of  the  present 
class  struggle  and  to  secure,  in  the  highest  degree 
possible  under  the  given  conditions,  the  supremacy 
of  the  Liberal  bourgeoisie.  This  is  the  reason 
why  the  Mensheviks,  who  were  the  direct  advo- 
cates of  the  right  of  the  bourgeoisie  to  power,  so 
quickly  spent  themselves  and  were,  by  the  time 
of  the  November  Revolution,  finally  reduced 
almost  to  a  cipher. 

The  Socialist  Revolutionaries  were  also  losing 
their  influence  more  and  more,  first  among  the 
workers,  then  in  the  army,  and  finally  also  in 
60 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

the  villages.  Nevertheless,  at  the  time  of  the 
November  Revolution  they  were  still  numerically 
a  very  powerful  party.  But  class  antagonisms 
were  undermining  it  from  within.  As  against 
its  right  wing,  which  in  the  persons  of  its 
most  chauvinist  elements,  such  as  Avksentieff, 
Breshko-Breshkovskaya,  Savinkoff  and  others, 
finally  went  over  to  the  counter-revolutionaries, 
a  left  wing  was  in  process  of  formation,  which 
tried  to  maintain  a  contact  with  the  labouring 
masses.  If  we  bear  in  mind  the  fact  that  the 
Socialist  Revolutionary  Avksentieff,  in  his 
capacity  as  Minister  of  the  Interior,  was  arresting 
the  peasant  land  committees  consisting  almost 
entirely  of  Socialist  Revolutionaries,  for  their 
grappling  with  the  agrarian  question  on  their 
own  authority,  the  amplitude  of  disagreements 
within  this  party  will  become  sufficiently 
clear. 

In  the  centre  stood  the  traditional  leader  of 
the  party,  Tchernoff.  An  experienced  writer, 
well  read  in  Socialist  literature,  an  old  hand  in 
party  struggles,  he  was  the  invariable  leader  of 
the  party  at  the  time  when  the  party's  life  con- 
centrated in  refugees'  circles  abroad.  The 
Revolution,  which,  in  its  first  indiscriminate 
onward  rush,  had  raised  the  Socialist  Revolu- 
tionaries to  a  tremendous  height,  automatically 
also  raised  Tchernoff,  but  only  to  show  his  com- 
plete incapability  even  among  the  leading  political 
personages  of  the  first  period.  Those  minor 
qualifications  which  secured  for  Tchernoff  a  pre- 
61 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

ponderance  in  the  foreign  circles  of  the  party 
proved  to  be  far  too  light  in  the  scales  of  the 
Revolution.  He  confined  himself  to  abstaining 
from  all  responsible  decisions,  to  avoiding  and 
evading  all  critical  issues,  to  waiting  upon 
events,  and  to  refraining  from  all  positive 
activity.  Such  tactics  secured  to  him,  for  the 
time  being,  the  position  of  a  centre  between 
the  two  flanks  of  the  party,  the  distance 
between  which  was  growing  ever  wider  and 
wider.  But  the  unity  of  the  party  could  no 
longer  be  maintained.  Savinkoff,  the  erstwhile 
terrorist,  had  taken  part  in  the  Korniloff  plot, 
was  on  most  cordial  terms  with  the  counter- 
revolutionary circles  of  the  Cossack  officers,  and 
was  preparing  a  crushing  blow  for  the  Petro- 
grad  workers  and  soldiers,  amongst  whom  were 
not  a  few  Socialist  Revolutionaries  of  the  Left. 
As  a  sop  to  this  left  wing,  the  Centre  expelled 
Savinkoff  from  the  party,  but  it  dared  not  raise 
its  hand  against  Kerensky. 

In  the  Provisional  Parliament  the  party  showed 
itself  to  be  hopelessly  divided.  The  three  groups 
acted  independently  of  one  another,  although  all 
were  marching  under  the  same  party  banner.  At 
the  same  time  none  of  these  groups  had  any  clear 
idea  as  to  what  it  wanted.  The  formal  pre- 
dominance of  this  party  in  the  Constituent 
Assembly  would  only  have  meant  the  con- 
tinuation of  the  same  political  sterility  and 
impotence. 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 


THE  VOICE  OF  THE 

Before  leaving  the  Provisional  Parliament, 
where,  according  to  the  political  statistics  of 
Kerensky  and  Tsereteli,  we  only  had  about  fifty 
seats,  we  organized  a  meeting  with  the  Left 
Socialist  Revolutionary  group.  They,  however, 
refused  to  follow  us,  on  the  ground  that  it  was 
necessary  for  them  to  prove  to  the  peasantry 
by  a  practical  experiment  the  hopelessness  of 
that  Parliament.  "  We  think  it  our  duty  to 
warn  you,"  said  one  of  their  leaders,  "  that  if 
you  mean  to  leave  the  Provisional  Parliament 
with  the  object  of  immediately  descending  into 
the  street  for  an  open  struggle,  we  shall  not 
follow  you."  The  bourgeois  and  Coalitionist 
Press  accused  us  of  aiming  at  a  break-up  of  the 
Provisional  Parliament  for  the  sole  purpose  of 
creating  a  revolutionary  situation.  Our  group  in 
the  Provisional  Parliament  decided  not  to  wait  for 
the  Left  Socialist  Revolutionaries,  but  to  act  in- 
dependently. The  declaration  of  our  party,  read 
from  the  rostrum  of  the  Provisional  Parliament 
and  explaining  our  reason  for  breaking  away 
from  this  institution,  was  met  with  a  howl  of 
execration  and  impotent  rage  from  the  majority 
groups.  -In  the  Petrograd  Soviet,  where  our 
action  was  approved  by  an  overwhelming 
majority,  the  leader  of  the  small  group  of 
"  Internationalist  "  Mensheviks,  Martoif,  argued 
with  us  that  our  exit  from  the  Provisional  Coun- 
cil of  the  Republic  (such  was  the  official  designa- 

63 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

tion  of  this  disreputable  institution)  would  only 
then  have  any  sense  if  we  intended  to  pass  im- 
mediately to  an  open  offensive  against  the  present 
Government.  But  that  was  just  what  we  did 
intend  doing.  The  agents  of  the  Liberal  bour- 
geoisie were  quite  right  when  they  accused  us 
of  desiring  to  create  a  revolutionary  situation. 
We  saw  that  the  only  way  out  of  the  hopeless 
state  of  affairs  was  by  means  of  an  open  rising 
and  a  direct  seizure  of  power. 

Again,  as  during  the  July  days,  the  Press  and 
all  other  organs  of  so-called  public  opinion  were 
set  in  motion  against  us.  The  most  poisonous 
weapons  were  once  more  got  out  of  the  arsenals 
of  the  July  days,  where  they  had  been  deposited 
after  the  Korniloff  rising.  Vain  efforts  !  The 
masses  flocked  to  us  irresistibly,  and  their  spirit 
rose  hourly  higher  and  higher.  Delegates  would 
arrive  from  the  trenches  and  ask  us,  at  the  sittings 
of  the  Petrograd  Soviet:  "  How  long  will  this 
unbearable  situation  last?  The  soldiers  have 
authorized  us  to  tell  you  that  if  by  the  i  5th  of 
November  no  decisive  steps  are  taken  towards 
peace,  the  trenches  will  be  evacuated,  and  the 
whole  army  will  march  back  to  the  rear  !  "  Such 
a  resolve  had  really  spread  all  along  the  front. 
The  soldiers  were  distributing  from  one  sector  to 
the  other  proclamations  drawn  up  by  them- 
selves, calling  on  all  soldiers  not  to  remain  in 
the  trenches  after  the  first  snow.  "  You  have 
forgotten  all  about  us,"  the  trench  delegates 
would  exclaim  at  the  sittings  of  the  Soviet*;  "  if 
64 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

you  do  not  find  some  way  out,  we  shall  come  here 
ourselves  and  scatter  our  enemies  with  our 
bayonets,  but  you,  too,  together  with  them." 
Within  a  few  weeks  the  Petrograd  Soviet  became 
the  centre  of  attraction  for  the  whole  army. 
After  the  change  of  its  policy  and  the  new  election 
of  its  Presidential  Bureau,  its  resolutions  had 
been  infusing  into  the  exhausted  and  despairing 
troops  new  hopes  that  a  way  out  of  the  impossible 
situation  might  at  length  be  found  on  the  lines 
laid  down  by  the  Bolsheviks,  namely,  by  the 
publication  of  the  secret  treaties  and  the  im- 
mediate proposal  of  an  armistice  on  all  fronts. 
14  You  say  that  full  authority  should  pass  into 
the  hands  of  the  Soviets?  Then  take  it.  Are 
you  afraid  that  the  front  may  not  support  you? 
Cast  aside  all  doubt.;  the  overwhelming  mass  of 
the  soldiers  are  entirely  on  your  side." 

In  the  meantime  the  conflict  regarding  the 
evacuation  of  the  Petrograd  garrison  was  pro- 
ceeding apace.  There  were  almost  daily  meet- 
ings of  the  garrison,  consisting  of  company,  regi- 
mental, and  other  committees.  The  influence  of 
our  party  in  the  garrison  became  absolute  and 
quite  undivided.  The  Staff  of  the  Petrograd 
military  district  was  in  a  state  of  extreme  con- 
fusion. At  one  time  they  would  try  to  enter 
into  regular  relations  with  us/;  at  other  times, 
urged  on  by  the  leaders  of  the  Central  Execu- 
tive Committee,  they  would  threaten  us  with 
repression. 

E  65 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

THE  COMMISSIONERS  OF  THE  MILITARY 
REVOLUTIONARY  COMMITTEE. 

We  have  already  mentioned  the  formation  of 
a  special  Military  Revolutionary  Committee 
attached  to  the  Petrograd  Soviet,  which  was  in- 
tended by  us  as  a  sort  of  Soviet  Staff  of  the 
Petrograd  garrison,  by  way  of  a  counter-weight 
to  Kerensky's  Staff.  "  But  the  existence  of  two 
Staffs  cannot  be  tolerated,"  urged  the  doctrin- 
aire representatives  of  the  Coalitionist  parties. 
"  Is,  however,"  we  replied,  "  a  state  of  things 
tolerable  in  which  the  garrison  has  no  confidence 
in  the  official  Staff  and  fears  that  the  removal 
of  troops  from  Petrograd  may  be  dictated  by 
some  new  counter-revolutionary  design?  "  "  But 
the  creation  of  a  new  Staff  means  an  insur- 
rection," argued  the  Righte;  "  your  Military 
Revolutionary  Committee  will  have  for  its  aim 
not  so  much  the  examination  of  the  military 
intentions  and  orders  of  the  military  authorities, 
as  the  preparation  and  execution  of  a  revolt 
against  the  present  Government."  This  argument 
was  perfectly  just,  but  for  this  very  reason  it 
did  not  frighten  any  of  us.  The  necessity  of 
overthrowing  the  Coalition  Government  was 
recognized  by  the  overwhelming  majority  of  the 
Soviet.  The  more  convincingly  the  Mensheviks 
and  Socialist  Revolutionaries  were  demonstrating 
that  the  Military  Revolutionary  Committee  would 
inevitably  become  an  instrument  of  revolt,  the 
66 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

more  readily  did  the  Petrograd  Soviet  support 
this  new  militant  organ. 

The  first  business  of  the  Military  Revolutionary 
Committee  was  to  appoint  Commissioners  to  all 
sections  of  the  Petrograd  garrison  and  to  all  the 
most  important  institutions  of  the  capital  and 
suburbs.  We  received,  intelligence  from  various 
quarters  that  the  Government,  or,  rather,  the 
Government  parties,  were  busily  organizing  and 
arming  their  forces.  From  different  stores, 
Government  and  private,  they  were  removing 
rifles,  revolvers,  machine  guns  and  cartridges  for 
the  purpose  of  arming  the  cadets,  students,  and, 
generally,  the  young  bourgeoisie.  It  was  essential 
to  take  some  preventive  measures  at  once. 
Commissioners  were  appointed  to,  all  stores  and 
depots  of  arms,  and  they  became  masters  of  the 
situation  practically  without  opposition.  True, 
the  commandants  and  proprietors  of  the  stores 
tried  to  refuse  them  recognition,  but  it  was  suf- 
ficient for  the  Commissioners  to  appeal  to  the 
soldiers'  committee  or  to  the  employees  of  the 
particular  store  in  order  to  break  down  the 
opposition  almost  immediately.  Henceforth  arms 
were  only  issued  under  direct  orders  from  our 
Commissioners. 

The  regiments  of  the  Petrograd  garrison,  in- 
deed, had  had  their  Commissioners  before  this, 
but  they  used  to  be  appointed  by  the  Central 
Executive  Committee.  We  have  already  men- 
tioned that  after  the  June  Congress  of  the  Soviets, 
and  particularly  after  the  demonstration  of 


THE    RUSSI.AN    REVOLUTION 

July  ist,  which  showed  the  growing  strength 
of  the  Bolsheviks,  the  Coalitionist  parties  had 
almost  entirely  shut  out  the  Petrograd  Soviet  from 
all  practical  influence  on  the  course  of  events 
in  the  revolutionary  capital.  The  direction  of 
the  affairs  of  the  Petrograd  garrison  was  con- 
centrated in  the  hands  of  the  Central  Executive 
Committee.  Now  the  question  was  how  to  install 
Soviet  Commissioners  everywhere.  This  was  only 
accomplished  thanks  to  the  energetic  co-operation 
of  the  masses  of  the  soldiers.  Regiment  after 
regiment  would  declare,  at  the  end  of  meetings 
addressed  by  speakers  from  various  parties,  that 
they  would  only  recognize  the  Commissioners 
appointed  by  the  Petrograd  Soviet,  and  would 
do  nothing  without  their  sanction. 

In  the  appointment  of  these  Commissioners  the 
military  organization  of  the  Bolsheviks  played 
a  very  important  part.  Already  before  the  July 
days  this  organization  had  done  a  great  deal  of 
propaganda  work.  On  July  i8th  the  cycling 
battalion,  brought  into  Petrograd  by  Kerensky, 
had  sacked  the  villa  of  Mile.  Krzeszinska,  where 
the  military  organization  of  our  party  was  located. 
The  majority  of  its  leaders  and  many  of  the  rank 
and  file  were  arrested,  the  papers  were  suppressed, 
and  the  printing  machinery  was  destroyed.  Only 
very  slowly  did  the  party  again  set  up  its  press, 
but  this  time  "  underground."  Its  military 
organization  embraced  only  a  few  hundred  men 
of  the  Petrograd  garrison,  but  they  included  many 
determined  and  absolutely  devoted  revolutionary 
08 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

soldiers,  young  officers,  and,  principally,  ensigns 
who  had  been  imprisoned  by  Kerensky  during 
July  and  August.  All  these  now  placed  them- 
selves at  the  disposal  of  the  Military  Revolu- 
tionary Committee  and  were  'appointed  to  the 
most  responsible  militant  posts. 

It  will  not  be  out  of  place,  however,  to  note 
here  that  it  was  exactly  the  members  of  the 
military  organization  of  our  party  who,  in  Novem- 
ber, adopted  an  attitude  of  extreme  caution  and 
even  of  some  scepticism  towards  the  idea  of  an 
immediate  rising.  The  exclusive  character  of 
the  organization  and  its  avowedly  military 
character  involuntarily  inclined  its  leaders  to 
overestimate  the  importance  of  the  purely 
technical  means  of  an  insurrection,  and  from 
this  point  o£  view  we  were  undoubtedly  very 
weak.  Our  strength  lay  in  the  revolutionary 
spirit  of  the  masses  and  in  their  readiness  to 
fight  under  our  banner. 

THE  SWELLING  TIDE. 

Side  by  side  with  the  work  of  organization 
a  raging  and  tearing  agitation  was  being  carried 
on.  It  was  a  period  of  incessant  meetings  at 
factories,  in  the  "  Modern "  and  Ciniselli  Cir- 
cuses, in  the  clubs  and  barracks.  The  atmo- 
sphere at  all  these  meetings  was  decidedly 
electric.  Every  mention  of  an  insurrection  was 
met  with  a  storm  of  applause  and  cries  of 
approval.  The  bourgeois  Press  only  intensified 
the  general  state  of  alarm.  My  order  to  the 

69 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

Sestroretski  Small  Arms  Factory  about  the  issue 
of  5,000  rifles  to  the  Red  Guard  called  forth 
an  indescribable  panic  in  bourgeois  circles.  They 
talked  and  wrote  constantly  about  a  general 
massacre  that  was  being  prepared.  This,  of 
course,  did  not  in  the  least  prevent  the  workers 
of  the  Sestroretski  Factory  from  issuing  arms 
to  the  Red  Guards.  The  more  furiously  the 
bourgeois  Press  slandered  and  execrated  us,  the 
more  ardently  did  the  masses  respond  to  our 
call.  It  became  more  and  more  evident  to  both 
sides  that  the  crisis  was  bound  to  come  to  a 
head  in  the  course  of  the  next  few  days.  The 
Socialist  Revolutionary  and  Menshevik  Press  were 
frantically  agitated :  "  The  Revolution  is  in  the 
greatest  danger  I  A  repetition  of  the  July  days 
is  being  prepared  on  an  immensely  greater  scale 
and  will  therefore  be  bound  to  have  still  more 
ruinous  results." 

Gorki,  in  his  paper  Novaya  Zhizn  ("  New 
Life  "),  daily  prophesied  the  coming  collapse  of 
the  whole  cultural  life  of  the  country.  In  general, 
the  Socialist  red  paint  was  vanishing  with 
astonishing  rapidly  from  the  bourgeois  intel- 
lectuals as  the  stern  reign  of  the  working-class 
dictatorship  drew  nearer.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  soldiers,  even  of  the  more  backward  regi- 
ments, were  greeting  the  Commissioners  of 
the  Military  Revolutionary  Committee  with  en- 
thusiasm. Delegates  were  arriving  from  Cossack 
troops  and  from  the  Socialist  minority  amongst 
the  cadets,  promising,  in  case  of  an  open 
70 


THE 


RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 


collision,  to  secure,  at  least,  the  neutrality  of 
their  men.  It  was  evident  that  Kerensky's  Govern- 
ment was  simply  hanging  in  the  air,  without  any 
firm  ground  under  its  feet. 

The  Military  Staff  of  the  district  entered  into 
negotiations  with  us  and  proposed  a  compromise. 
In  order  to  get  an  idea  of  the  strength  of  resist- 
ance of  our  foe  we  entered  into  pourparlers.  But 
the  nerves  of  the  Staff  were  all  on  edge.  Now 
they  would  admonish,  then  they  would  threaten 
us,  and  even  declared  that  our  Commissioners 
were  illegal— which  ban,  of  course,  did  not  in  the 
least  interfere  with  their  work.  The  Central 
Executive  Committee,  in  agreement  with  the 
Military  Staff,  appointed  Staff  Captain  Malev- 
sky  to  be  Chief  Commissioner  for  the  Petrograd 
military  district,  and  generously  consented  to 
recognize  our  Commissioners,  provided  they  were 
subordinated  to  their  Chief  Commissioner.  This 
proposal  was  rejected  and  the  negotiations  were 
broken  off. 

Prominent  Mensheviks  and  Socialist  Revolu- 
tionaries would  come  to  us  as  mediators,  reason 
with  and  threaten  us,  foretelling  our  doom  and 
the  doom  of  the  Revolution. 

THE  PETROGRAD  SOVIET  DAY. 

The  building  of  the  Smolny  Institute  was  at 
that  time  already  in  the  hands  of  the  Petrograd 
Soviet  and  of  our  party.  The  Mensheviks  and 
the  Right  Socialist  Revolutionaries  had  moved  to 
Marie  Palace,  where  the  scarcely  born  Pro- 

71 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

visional  Parliament  was  almost  breathing  its  last. 
Kerensky  made  a  great  speech  in  the  Provisional 
Parliament,  in  which,  accompanied  by  the  stormy 
applause  of  the  bourgeois  section,  he  attempted 
to  conceal  his  impotence  behind  hysterical 
threats.  The  Military  Staff  made  a  last  attempt 
at  resistance.  It  sent  an  invitation  to  various 
units  of  the  garrison,  asking  them  to  appoint  two 
delegates  from  each  unit  to  discuss  the  question 
of  the  evacuation  of  troops  from  the  capital. 
The  conference  was  fixed  for  one  o'clock, 
November  4th.  The  regiments  immediately  in- 
formed us  of  this  invitation,  and  we  at  once 
called  a  meeting  of  the  garrison  over  the  tele- 
phone for  eleven  o'clock  in  the  morning.  Some 
of  the  delegates,  however,  found  their  way  to  the 
Staff,  but  only  to  declare  that  without  the  per- 
mission of  the  Petrograd  Soviet  they  would  not 
go  an  inch  anywhere.  The  garrison  meeting 
almost  unanimously  reaffirmed  its  loyalty  to  the 
Military  Revolutionary  Committee.  Opposition 
came  only  from  the  official  representatives  of 
the  former  Soviet  parties,  but  it  found  no  sup- 
port whatever  among  the  delegates  of  the  regi- 
ments. The  attempt  of  the  Military  Staff  only 
showed  the  more  clearly  that  the  ground  beneath 
our  feet  was  firm.  In  the  front  ranks  stood  the 
Volhynian  Regiment — the  same  one  which,  on 
the  night  of  July  1 6th- 1 7th,  had  marched  to 
the  strains  of  its  band  into  the  Taurida  Palace 
for  the  purpose  of  putting  down  the  Bolsheviks. 

The    Central    Executive    Committee,    as    was 
72 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

stated  above,  held  possession  of  the  funds  and 
the  Press  of  the  Petrograd  Soviet.  All  efforts 
to  obtain  possession  even  of  one  of  these  papers 
had  proved  of  no  avail.  Hence  about  the  middle 
of  October  steps  had  been  taken  to  establish 
an  independent  paper  for  the  Petrograd  Soviet. 
But  all  the  printing  establishments  were  occupied, 
and  their  owners  boycotted  us,  with  the  con- 
nivance of  the  Central  Executive  Committee.  It 
was,  therefore,  decided  to  organize  a  Petrograd 
Soviet  Day  for  the  purpose  of  promoting  an 
extended  propaganda  and  collecting  money  for 
the  establishment  of  a  paper.  This  day  had 
been  fixed  a  fortnight  previously  for  Novem- 
ber 4th,  and  thus  coincided  with  the  date  when 
the  insurrection  was  publicly  coming  to  view. 
The  hostile  Press  was  announcing  it  as  an  estab- 
lished fact  that  in  November  there  would  be  an 
armed  rising  of  the  Bolsheviks  in  the  streets 
of  Petrograd.  No  one  doubted  that  there  would 
be  a  revolt.  The  only  question  was  when. 
Efforts  were  made  to  guess  and  to  predict,  in 
order  to  elicit  from  us  either  a  denial  or  an 
admission.  All  in  vain.  The  Soviet  calmly  and 
confidently  was  forging  ahead,  paying  no  heed 
to  the  howl  of  bourgeois  public  opinion. 

November  4th  became  the  day  of  the  review 
of  the  forces  of  the  proletarian  army.  It  went 
off  splendidly  in  all  respects.  In  spite  of  the 
warnings  emanating  from  the  Right  that  rivers 
of  blood  would  flow  in  the  streets  of  Petrograd 
on  that  day,  the  masses  of  the  people  poured  out 

78 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

into  the  streets  in  huge  waves  to  take  part  in 
the  meetings  of  the  Soviet.  All  our  oratorical 
strength  was  made  full  use  of,;  all  public  places 
were  packed*;  meetings  went  on  continuously 
for  hours.  These  were  addressed  by  speakers 
from  our  party/;  by  delegates  who  had  come 
from  different  parts  of  the  country  to  take  part 
in  the  Congress  of  Soviets  -.;  by  speakers  from 
the  front,  from  the  Left  Socialist  Revolution- 
aries, and  from  the  Anarchists.  The  halls 
were  simply  overwhelmed  by  the  masses  of 
workers  and  soldiers.  There  had  been  few 
such  meetings  in  Petrograd  even  during  the 
Revolution. 

A  considerable  section  of  the  lower  middle 
class  was  greatly  disturbed — not  so  much  actually 
frightened  as  made  uneasy  by  the  warnings  and 
slanders  of  the  bourgeois  Press.  Tens  of 
thousands  of  people  beat  in  huge  waves  against 
the  walls  of  the  People's  Palace,  overflowed  into 
the  corridors,  and  rilled  the  halls.  From  the 
columns  enormous  garlands  of  human  heads, 
hands,  and  feet  were  hanging  down  like  bunches 
of  grapes.  The  air  seemed  impregnated  with 
an  electric  current,  such  as  is  felt  at  the  most 
critical  moments  of  a  revolution.  "  Down  with 
Kerensky's  Government  I  "  "  Down  with  the 
war  1  "  "  All  authority  to  the  Soviets  !  "  Not 
one  of  the  representatives  of  the  former  Soviet 
parties  dared  step  forward  before  this  colossal 
gathering  with  a  word  of  opposition.  The 
triumph  of  the  Petrograd  Soviet  was  unique  and 
74 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

undivided.  The  campaign  was  in  reality  already 
won.  All  that  remained  was  to  deal  the  phantom 
Government  a  final  military  blow. 

THE   GAINING  OVER   OF  THE  WAVERING 
UNITS. 

The  more  cautious  elements  in  our  own  midst, 
however,  warned  us  that  there  were  still  some 
units  of  troops  which  were  not  with  us — the 
Cossacks,  the  Cavalry  Regiment,  the  SemenofT 
Guards,  and  the  Cyclist  Regiment.  Propagan- 
dists and  Commissioners  were  appointed  to  these 
units.  Their  reports  seemed  perfectly  satis- 
factory. The  heated  atmosphere  was  affecting 
every  one  and  everything,  and  even  the  most 
conservative  elements  of  the  army  were  unable 
to  withstand  the  general  tendency  of  the  Petro- 
grad  garrison. 

I  went  to  an  open-air  meeting  of  the  Semenoff 
regiment  which  was  considered  to  be  the  chief 
support  of  the  Kerensky  Government.  The  best- 
known  speakers  of  the  Right  wing  were  there. 
They  clung  to  the  conservative  regiment  of  the 
Guards  as  to  the  last  prop  of  the  Coalition 
Ministry.  But  it  was  of  no  avail.  The  regi- 
ment declared  in  our  favour  by  an  overwhelming 
majority,  and  did  not  even  allow  the  former 
Ministers  to  finish  their  speeches.  Those  groups 
which  still  opposed  the  demands  of  the  Soviet 
consisted  mainly  of  officers,  volunteers,  and, 
generally,  of  the  middle-class  intellectuals  and 
semi-intellectuals.  The  workers  and  peasant 

75 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

masses  were  wholly  on  our  side.  The  cleavage 
was  pretty  well  along  a  straight  social  line. 

The  central  military  basis  of  Petrograd  is  the 
Peter  and  Paul  Fortress.  We  appointed  as  its 
commandant  a  young  ensign  who  soon  proved 
himself  to  be  almost  born  for  the  place  and  in 
a  few  hours  became  complete  master  of  the 
situation.  The  "  lawful  "  military  authorities 
stepped  aside  to  wait  and  see  what  might 
happen. 

For  reasons  given  above,  the  Cyclist  Regiment 
was  considered  by  us  a  very  unreliable  unit. 
On  November  5th  I  went  to  the  fortress  at  about 
two  o'clock  in  the  afternoon.  In  the  courtyard 
a  meeting  was  being  held.  The  speakers  of 
the  Right  wing  were  most  cautious  and  evasive, 
carefully  avoiding  any  question  about  Kerensky, 
whose  name,  even  in  soldiers'  circles,  always 
gave  rise  to  cries  of  protest  and  indignation. 
They,  however,  listened  to  us  and  adhered  to 
us.  At  four  o'clock  the  cyclists  held  a  bat- 
talion meeting  in  a  neighbouring  place,  in  the 
Modern  Circus.  Amongst  the  speakers  was 
the  Quartermaster-General  Paradeloff.  He,  too, 
spoke  very,  very  cautiously.  Far  gone  were  the 
days  when  the  official  and  semi-official  orators 
never  spoke  of  the  workers'  party  otherwise  than 
as  a  band  of  traitors  and  hirelings  of  the 
German  Kaiser.  The  Assistant-Chief  of  the 
Staff  came  up  to  me  and  said:  "Let  us,  for 
goodness'  sake,  come  to  some  understanding." 
But  it  was  now  too  late.  Against  only  thirty 
76 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

votes,  the  battalion  declared  itself,  after  a  debate, 
in  favour  of  the  assumption  of  authority  by  the 
Soviets. 

THE  BEGINNING  OF  THE  INSURRECTION. 

The  Kerensky  Government  was  casting  about 
for  help  from  one  quarter  to  another.  It  recalled 
two  new  cyclist  battalions  from  the  front  and 
a  mortar  battery,  and  tried  to  call  out  some 
cavalry.  The  cyclists,  when  on  their  way,  sent 
a  telegram  to  the  Petrograd  Soviet :  "  We  are 
being  taken  to  Petrograd.  We  do  not  know 
for  what  purpose.  Kindly  explain."  We  asked 
them  to  stop  and  to  send  a  delegation  to  us. 
When  the  latter  arrived,  they  declared  at  the 
meeting  of  the  Soviet  that  the  battalion  was 
entirely  on  our  side.  This  aroused  a  new  storm 
of  enthusiasm.  The  battalion  was  ordered  to 
enter  the  town  immediately. 

The  number  of  delegates  from  the  front  in- 
creased day  by  day.  They  came  for  informa- 
tion on  the  position  of  affairs.  They  took  our 
literature  and  went  back  to  the  front  in  order  to 
spread  the  news  that  the  Petrograd  Soviet  was 
carrying  on  a  struggle  for  the  assumption  of 
authority  by  the  workers,  soldiers,  and  peasants. 
"  The  trenches  will  support  you,"  they  told  us. 
The  old  army  committees,  on  the  other  hand, 
which  had  not  been  re-elected  for  the  last  four 
or  five  months,  were  sending  us  threatening 
telegrams.  But  these  frightened  no  one.  We 
knew  perfectly  well  that  the  committees  were 

77 


quite  out  of  touch  with  the  masses  of  the 
soldiers,  as  was  the  Central  Executive  Committee 
in  regard  to  the  local  Soviets. 

The  Military  Revolutionary  Committee  ap- 
pointed Commissioners  to  all  the  railway  stations. 
They  Jtept  all  in -coming  and  out-going  trains 
under  close  observation,  and  particularly  watched 
all  movements  of  troops.  A  continuous  tele- 
phonic and  motor  connection  was  set  up  with  all 
neighbouring  towns  and  their  garrisons.  It  was 
the  duty  of  all  the  Soviets  in  agreement  with  the 
Petrograd  Soviet  to  see  to  it  that  no  counter- 
revolutionary troops,  or  rather  troops  deceived 
by  the  Government,  entered  Petrograd.  The 
lower  ranks  of  the  railway  servants  at  the 
stations  and  railway  workers  gave  ready  recog- 
nition to  our  Commissioners. 

On  November  6th  a  difficulty  arose  at  the 
Telephone  Exchange.  We  were  refused  con- 
nection. The  cadets  had  entrenched  themselves 
at  the  Central  Telephone  Exchange,  and  under 
their  protection  the  telephone  girls  came  out  in 
opposition  to  the  Soviet.  This  was  the  first 
manifestation  of  the  future  sabotage  of  the 
officials  and  civil  servants.  The  Military 
Revolutionary  Committee  sent  a  detachment  to 
the  Telephone  Exchange  and  put  two  small  guns 
at  the  entrance.  So  began  the  seizure  of  the 
administrative  offices.  Sailors  and  Red  Guards 
were  stationed  in  small  detachments  at  the  Tele- 
graph Office,  at  the  Post  Office,  and  other  public 
offices,  and  measures  were  taken  to  gain  pos- 
78 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

session  of  the  State  Bank.  The  Soviet  Centre, 
the  Smolny  Institute,  was  converted  into  a 
fortress.  In  the  attic  there  we  still  had,  as  a 
legacy  from  the  Central  Executive  Committee, 
a  score  or  so  of  machine  guns,  but  they  had 
been  neglected,  and  the  men  in  charge  of  them 
had  lost  all  discipline.  We  summoned  to  the 
Smolny  an  additional  machine-gun  detachment, 
and  early  in  the  morning  the  soldiers  were  loudly 
wheeling  their  machine  guns  along1  the  long  stone 
corridors  of  the  Smolny  Institute.  Some  Men- 
sheviks  and  Socialist  Revolutionaries,  who  were 
still  at  the  Institute,  would  now  and  then  put 
their  heads  out  of  the  doors  with  astonished 
or  frightened  faces.  The  Soviet  and  also  the 
garrison  held  daily  meetings  at  the  Institute. 

On  the  third  floor,  in  a  small  corner  room, 
the  Military  Revolutionary  Committee  was  in  per- 
manent session.  Hither  flowed  all  information 
regarding  the  movements  of  troops,  the  frame  o£ 
mind  of  soldiers  and  workers,  the  progress  of 
propaganda  in  the  barracks,  the  doings  of  the 
hooligans,  the  conferences  held  by  the  bour- 
geois politicians,  life  in  the  Winter  Palace,  and 
the  intentions  of  the  former  Soviet  parties.  Our 
informants  came  from  every  quarter,  and  in- 
cluded workers,  officers,  house  porters,  Socialist 
cadets,  servants,  and  fashionable  ladies.  Many 
brought  only  ridiculous  nonsense  ;  others,  how- 
ever, gave  us  very  valuable  information.  The 
decisive  moment  was  drawing1  near.  It  was 
clear  that  there  could  be  no  turning'  back. 

^* 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

On   November  6th,  in  the  evening',  Kerensky 
came  to  the  Provisional  Parliament  and  demanded 
its   approval  of   repressive   measures   against   the 
Bolsheviks.     But  the  Provisional  Parliament  was 
in    a    pitiful    state    of    confusion    and    well-nigh 
dissolution.     The  Cadets  were  urging  the  Right 
Socialist    Revolutionaries    to    accept    a    vote    of 
confidence  ;     the   Right   Socialist   Revolutionaries 
were  exerting  pressure  on  the  Centre  ;   the  Centre 
waveredi;    and  the  Left  Socialist  Revolutionaries 
were    carrying    on    a    policy    of    Parliamentary 
opposition.     After  a  number  of  conferences,  dis- 
cussions and  hesitations,  the  resolution  of  the  Left 
wing    was    adopted,    condemning    the    seditious 
movement  of  the  Soviet,  but  placing  the  responsi- 
bility for  this  on  the  anti-democratic  policy  of 
the   Government.      At   the   same   time,   we  were 
daily   receiving  by  post   letters   informing  us  of 
the   numberless   death    sentences    passed   on   us, 
of  infernal  machines,   of  the  imminent   blowing 
up  of  the  Smolny  Institute,  etc.     The  bourgeois 
Press  was  savage  with  hatred  and  fear.     Gorki, 
completely    forgetting    his    own    "  Song    of    the 
Falcon,"    continued    to    prophesy    in    his    paper, 
the  Novaya  Zhizn,  the  coming  end  of  the  world. 
The   members   of   the   Military   Revolutionary 
Committee  had  not  left  the  Smolny  Institute  for 
the  last  week.     They  slept  in  snatches  on  sofas, 
constantly  wakened  by  couriers,  scouts,  cyclists, 
telegraphists,    and    telephone    bells.      The    most 
anxious   night  was   that  of   November   6th- 7th. 
•We  were  informed  from  Pavlovsk  by  telephone 
80 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

that  the  Government  was  summoning  the  artil- 
lerists from  there  and  the  ensigns  from  the 
Peterhoff  School.  Kerensky  had  collected  in  the 
Winter  Palace  cadets,  officers,  and  "  shockers." 
We  ordered,  by  telephone,  detachments  of  trust- 
worthy military  guards  to  bar  all  entrances  to 
Petrograd  and  to  send  agitators  to  meet  the 
detachments  summoned  by  the  Government.  If 
they  could  not  be  kept  back  by  reason,  then  arms 
were  to  be  employed.  All  our  conversations 
were  carried  on  perfectly  openly  over  the  tele- 
phone, and  were,  therefore,  accessible  to  the 
Government's  agents. 

Our  Commissioners  informed  us  that  our 
friends  were  keeping  watch  over  all  entrances 
to  Petrograd.  A  portion  of  the  Oranienbaum 
cadets  did,  however,  get  past  our  barriers  in 
the  night,  and  we  followed  up  their  further 
movements  by  telephone.  \Ve  strengthened  the 
outside  guards  of  the  Smolny  by  summoning 
another  company.  We  maintained  a  continuous 
connection  with  all  parts  of  the  garrison. 
Squads  on  duty  kept  watch  in  all  regiments. 
Delegates  from  every  unit  were  constantly,  day 
and  night,  at  the  disposal  of  the  Military  Revolu- 
tionary Committee.  An  order  was  issued  to  put 
down  ruthlessly  every  Black  Hundred  agitation, 
to  use  arms  at  the  first  attempts  at  street  pogroms, 
and  to  act,  if  necessary,  without  mercy.  During 
this  decisive  night  all  the  most  important  points 
in  the  city  passed  into  our  hands  almost  without 
resistance,  without  fighting,  without  victims.  The 

F  81 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

State  Bank  was  guarded  by  Government  sentries 
and  an  armoured  car.  The  building  was  sur- 
rounded from  all  sides  by  our  detachments,  the 
armoured  car  was  seized  unawares,  and  the  Bank 
passed  into  the  hands  of  the  Military  Revolu- 
tionary Committee  without  a  single  shot. 

On  the  Neva,  below  the  Franco -Russian 
Works,  stood  the  cruiser  Aurora  undergoing 
repair.  Her  crew  consisted  entirely  of  sailors 
wholeheartedly  devoted  to  the  Revolution.  When, 
at  the  end  of  August,  KornilofT  was  threatening 
Petrograd,  the  sailors  of  the  Aurora  were  sum- 
moned to  protect  the  Winter  Palace.  And 
although  they  were  already  extremely  hostile  to 
Kerensky's  Government,  they  knew  that  their 
duty  was  to  repel  the  attempt  of  the  counter- 
revolutionaries, and  they  took  up  their  positions 
without  a  word.  When  the  danger  passed,  they 
were  again  pushed  aside.  Now,  in  these  days  of 
the  November  insurrection,  they  were  too,  dan- 
gerous. The  Ministry  of  the  Marine  gave  orders 
to  the  Aurora  to  get  under  way  and  leave  Petro- 
grad waters.  The  crew  immediately  informed 
us  of  this  fact.  We  countermanded  the  order, 
and  the  cruiser  remained  ready,  at  any  moment, 
to  use  all  her  forces  on  behalf  of  the  Soviet 
authority. 

THE  DECISIVE  DAY. 

At  the  dawn  of  November  7th  the  men  and 
women  employed  at  the  party's  printing  works 
came  to  the  Smolny  and  informed  us  that  the 
82 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

Government  had  stopped  our  chief  party  paper 
and  also  the  new  organ  of  the  Petrograd  Soviet. 
The  printing  works  had  had  their  doors  sealed 
up  by  some  Government  agents.  The  Military 
Revolutionary  Committee  at  once  counter- 
manded the  order,  took  both  papers  under  its 
protection,  and  placed  the  high  honour  of  pro- 
tecting the  freedom  of  the  Socialist  Press  from 
counter-revolutionary  attempts  on  the  valiant 
Volhynian  Regiment.  After  this,  work  was 
resumed  and  went  on  continuously  at  the  printing 
office,  and  both  papers  came  out  at  the  appointed 
hour. 

The  Government  was  still  in  session  in  the 
Winter  Palace,  but  it  had  already  become  a 
mere  shadow  of  its  former  self.  It  had  ceased 
to  exist  politically.  In  the  course  of  Novem- 
ber /th  the  Winter  Palace  was  gradually  sur- 
rounded from  all  sides  by  our  troops.  At  one 
o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  in  the  name  of  the 
Military  Revolutionary  Committee,  I  announced 
at  the  sitting  of  the  Petrograd  Soviet  that 
Kerensky's  Government  no  longer  existed,  and 
that,  pending  the  decision  of  the  All-Russian 
Congress  of  Soviets,  the  Government  authority 
would  be  assumed  by  the  Military  Revolutionary 
Committee. 

Lenin  had  left  Finland  some  days  pre- 
viously and  was  living  in  hiding  in  a  working- 
class  quarter  in  a  suburb.  On  November  7th 
he  came  secretly  to  the  Smolny.  Judging  by 
the  newspapers,  he  had  gained  the  impression 

83 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

that  we  were  coming  to  a  compromise  with  the 
Kerensky  Government.  The  bourgeois  Press  had 
shrieked  so  much  about  the  coming  revolt,  the 
march  of  armed  soldiers  in  the  streets,  the  pillage, 
and  the  inevitable  rivers  of  blood,  that  it  did 
not  perceive  the  insurrection  which,  in  reality, 
was  now  taking  place,  and  accepted  the  nego- 
tiations between  ourselves  and  the  Military  Staff 
at  their  face  value.  All  this  time,  quietly,  with- 
out any  street  fighting,  without  firing  or  blood- 
shed, one  Government  institution  after  another 
was  being  seized  by  highly  disciplined  detach- 
ments of  soldiers,  sailors,  and  Red  Guards,  in 
accordance  with  the  exact  telephone  instructions 
emanating  from  the  little  room  on  the  third 
floor  of  the  Smolny  Institute. 

In  the  evening,  the  second  All -Russian  Con- 
gress of  the  Soviets  held  a  preliminary  meeting. 

The  report  of  the  Central  Executive  Com- 
mittee was  submitted  by  Dan.  He  delivered  an 
indictment  against  the  rebels,  the  usurpers,  and 
sedition -mongers,  and  tried  to  frighten  the  meet- 
ing by  predicting  the  inevitable  collapse  of  the 
insurrection,  which  in  a  day  or  two,  he  said, 
would  be  suppressed  by  troops  from  the  front. 
His  speech  sounded,  exceedingly  unconvincing 
and  very  much  out  of  place  in  a  hall  in  which 
the  overwhelming  majority  of  delegates  were 
following  with  the  greatest  enthusiasm  the  vic- 
torious march  of  the  Petrograd  rising. 

By  this  time  the  Winter  Palace  was  sur- 
rounded, though  not  yet  taken.  From  time  to 
84 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

time  shots  were  fired  from  the  windows  at  the 
besiegers  who  were  slowly  and  very  carefully 
closing  in  upon  the  building.  From  the  Peter 
and  Paul  Fortress  a  few  shells  were  fired  at 
the  Palace,  their  distant  sounds  reaching  the 
Smolny.  Martoff,  with  impotent  indignation,  was 
speaking  from  the  rostrum  of  civil  war,  and 
particularly  of  the  siege  of  the  Winter  Palace 
where,  among  the  other  Ministers,  there  were — 
oh,  horror  of  horrors  1 — members  of  the  Men- 
shevik  Party.  Two  sailors,  who  had  come  to 
give  news  from  the  scenes  of  struggle,  took 
the  platform  against  him.  They  reminded  our 
accusers  of  the  July  offensive,  of  the  whole  per- 
fidious policy  of  the  old  Government,  of  the 
re -establishment  of  the  death  penalty  for  soldiers, 
of  the  arrests,  of  the  sacking  of  revolutionary 
organizations,  and  vowed  that  they  would  either 
conquer  or  die.  They  it  was  who  brought  us 
the  news  of  the  first  victims  on  our  side  on  the 
Palace  Square. 

Every  one  rose  as  though  moved  by  some 
invisible  signal,  and  with  a  unanimity  which  is 
only  provoked  by  a  deep  moral  intensity  of  feel- 
ing sung  a  Funeral  March.  He  who  lived 
through  this  moment  will  never  forget  it.  The 
meeting  came  to  an  abrupt  end.  It  was 
impossible  to  sit  there,  calmly  discussing  the 
theoretical  question  as  to  the  method  of  con- 
structing the  Government,  with  the  echo  reach- 
ing our  ears  of  the  fighting  and  firing  at  the 
walls  of  the  Winter  Palace,  where,  as  a  matter 

85 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

of  fact,  the  fate  of  this  very  Government  was 
already  being  decided. 

The  taking  of  the  Palace,  however,  was  a 
protracted  business,  and  this  caused  some  waver- 
ing amongst  the  less  determined  elements  of  the 
Congress.  The  Right  wing,  through  its  spokes- 
men, prophesied  our  early  doom.  All  were  wait- 
ing anxiously  for  news  from  the  Winter  Palace. 
After  some  time,  Antonoff,  who  had  been  direct- 
ing the  operations,  arrived.  At  once  there  was 
dead  silence  in  the  hall.  The  Winter  Palace 
had  been  taken.  Kerensky  had  taken  flight. 
The  other  Ministers  had  been  arrested  and  con- 
veyed to  the  Peter  and  Paul  Fortress.  The  first 
chapter  of  the  November  Revolution  was  at 
an  end. 

The  Right  Socialist  Revolutionaries  and  the 
Mensheviks,  numbering  altogether  about  sixty 
persons,  that  is,  about  one-tenth  of  the  Congress, 
left  the  meeting  under  protest.  As  they  could 
do  nothing  else,  they  "  threw  the  whole  respon- 
sibility "  for  whatever  might  now  happen  on  the 
Bolsheviks  and  the  Left  Socialist  Revolutionaries. 
The  latter  were  still  wavering.  Their  past  bound 
them  closely  to  Tchernoff's  party.  The  Right 
wing  of  this  party  had  now  shifted  entirely 
towards  the  lower  middle  class  and  their  intel- 
lectuals, to  the  well-to-do  peasants  in  the  villages'; 
in  all  decisive  questions  it  was  marching  hand 
in  hand  with  the  Liberal  bourgeoisie  against  us. 
The  more  revolutionary  elements  of  the  party, 
reflecting  the  Radicalism-  of  the  social  aspira- 
86 


tions  of  the  poorest  peasantry,  gravitated  to  the 
proletariat  and  its  party.  They  were  afraid, 
however,  to  cut  the  umbilical  cord  which  bound 
them  with  the  old  party.  When  we  were  about 
to  leave  the  Provisional  Parliament,  they  refused 
to  follow  us  and  warned  us  against  "  adventures." 
But  the  insurrection  forced  them  to  choose  either 
for  or  against  the  Soviet.  Not  without  hesitation, 
they  were  concentrating  their  forces  on  the  same 
side  of  the  barricade  where  we  stood. 

THE  FORMATION  OF  THE  COUNCIL  OF 
PEOPLE'S  COMMISSIONERS. 

The  victory  at  Petrograd  was  complete.  The 
Military  Revolutionary  Committee  had  the  reins 
of  power  completely  in  its  hands.  We  issued  our 
first  decrees  abolishing  the  death  penalty,  order- 
ing new  elections  to  the  army  committees,  and 
so  on.  But  here  we  discovered  that  we  were 
cut  off  from  the  provinces.  The  superior  officials 
at  the  railways  and  in  the  post  and  telegraph 
administration  were  against  us.  The  old  army 
committees,  the  Town  Councils,  and  Zemstvos 
continued  to  bombard  the  Smolny  Institute  with 
minatory  telegrams,  proclaiming  war  against  us 
and  promising  to  sweep  away  the  rebels  in  a 
very  short  time.  Our  telegrams,  decrees,  and 
explanations  could  not  reach  the  provinces,  as 
the  Petrograd  Telegraph  Agency  refused  to  serve 
us.  The  capital  being  thus  isolated  from  the 
rest  of  the  country,  there  readily  spread  very  per- 
turbing and  fantastic  rumours. 

87 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

On  perceiving  that  the  Soviet  had  really 
assumed  power,  that  the  members  of  the  old 
Government  had  been  arrested,  and  that  in  the 
streets  of  Petrograd  armed  soldiers  were  masters 
of  the  situation,  the  bourgeois  and  Coalitionist 
Press  raised  a  frenzied  campaign  against  us,  the 
like  of  which  had  never  been  known  before. 
Scarcely  a  lie  or  calumny  existed  which  they 
did  not  hurl  against  the  Military  Revolutionary 
Committee,  its  directors  and  Commissioners. 

On  November  8th  a  meeting  of  the  Petro- 
grad Soviet  took  place,  at  which  were  also  present 
the  delegates  of  the  All-Russian  Congress  of 
the  Soviets,  the  members  of  the  garrison  con- 
ference, and  numerous  members  of  the  party. 
Here,  for  the  first  time  after  an  interval  of 
four  months,  Lenin  and  Zinovieff  took  the 
platform  amidst  a  most  enthusiastic  ovation.  But 
mixed  with  the  joy  of  our  victory  was  some 
uneasiness  as  to  how  the  country  would  receive 
the  news  of  the  insurrection,  and  whether  the 
Soviets  would  be  able  to  maintain  their  power. 

In  the  evening  of  the  same  day  a  meeting  of 
the  Congress  of  the  Soviets  took  place,  which 
was  of  prime  importance.  Lenin  introduced  two 
decrees,  on  peace  and  on  the  land.  Both  were 
adopted  unanimously  after  a  short  discussion. 
At  this  meeting,  too,  a  new  central  authority 
was  formed — the  Council  of  People's  Com- 
missioners. 

The  Central  Committee  of  our  party  made 
an  effort  to  come  to  an  agreement  with  the  Left 
88 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

Socialist  Revolutionaries.  They  were  invited  to 
take  part  in  the  formation  of  a  Soviet  Govern- 
ment. But  they  were  undecided:  they  thought 
that  the  new  Government  ought  to  be  formed 
from  all  the  parties  in  the  Soviet,  on  the  basis 
of  a  coalition.  The  Mensheviks  and  the  Right 
Socialist  Revolutionaries,  however,  had  broken 
off  relations  with  the  Congress  of  the  Soviets, 
considering  imperative  a  coalition  with  anti-Soviet 
parties.  We  could  do  nothing  else  than  suggest 
that  the  Left  Socialist  Revolutionaries  should  en- 
deavour to  get  their  neighbours  on  the  right 
to  rejoin  the  revolutionary  fold.  And  whilst 
they  were  busying  themselves  with  this  hopeless 
task,  we  considered  ourselves  bound  to  take  the 
whole  responsibility  of  government  on  our  own 
shoulders.  The  list  of  People's  Commissioners 
was  consequently  made  up  exclusively  of  Bol- 
sheviks. There  was  undoubtedly  a  certain 
amount  of  political  danger  in  this.  The  trans- 
formation was  really  a  bit  too  sudden.  Just 
to  think  of  it:  the  leaders  of  this  party  had  but 
yesterday  lain  under  an  accusation  provided  by 
Article  108  of  the  Code,  that  is  to  say,  accused 
of  high  treason  !  But  there  was  no  other  choice 
for  us.  The  other  Soviet  groups  hesitated  and 
refused,  preferring  to  wait  upon  events  before 
committing  themselves.  And,  after  all,  we  had 
no  doubt  that  our  party  alone  was  capable  of 
producing  a  really  revolutionary  Government. 


89 


THE  FIRST  DAYS  OF  THE  NEW  REGIME. 

The  decrees  regarding  land  and  peace,  con- 
firmed by  the  Soviet  Congress,  were  printed  in 
vast  numbers  of  copies  and  distributed  through- 
out the  length  and  breadth  of  the  country  by 
delegates  from  the  front,  by  peasant  messengers 
coming  from  the  villages,  and  by  propagandists 
whom  we  sent  to  the  provinces  and  trenches.  At 
the  same  time  we  continued  the  organization  and 
arming  of  the  Red  Guard,  who,  together  with 
the  old  garrison  and  sailors,  were  performing 
the  arduous  guard  duties.  The  Council  of 
People's  Commissioners  was  taking  over  one 
Government  institution  after  another,  but  every- 
where were  meeting  with  the  passive  resistance 
of  the  higher  and  middle  officials.  The  former 
Soviet  parties  did  everything  they  could  to  get 
support  from  these  classes  and  thus  to  organize 
a  sabotage  of  the  new  authority.  Our  enemies 
were  quite  certain  that  the  whole  business  was 
a  mere  episode,  that  it  was  only  a  question  of 
a  day  or  two,  perhaps  of  a  week,  and  the  Soviet 
Government  would  be  overthrown.  ...  At  the 
Smolny,  the  first  foreign  Consuls  and  members 
of  the  Embassies  put  in  their  appearance,  im- 
pelled as  much  by  business  motives  as  by 
curiosity.  Newspaper  correspondents  also  hur- 
ried thither  with  their  notebooks  and  cameras. 
All  hastened  to  get  a  glimpse  of  the  new  Govern- 
ment, certain  that  in  a  day  or  two  it  would  be 
too  late. 
90 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

In  the  city  complete  order  reigned.  The 
sailors,  soldiers,  and  Red  Guards  behaved  in 
these  first  days  with  exemplary  discipline  and 
maintained  stern  revolutionary  order. 

Among  our  enemies  there  was  a  growing  fear 
lest  the  "  episode "  should  continue  too  long,?; 
and  very  soon  they  began  to  organize  the  first 
attack  against  the  new  Government.  The  initi- 
ative emanated  from  the  Socialist  Revolution- 
aries and  Mensheviks.  In  the  previous  phases 
of  the  Revolution,  they  had  not  been  anxious, 
and  indeed  had  not  dared,  to  take  the  entire 
power  into  their  hands.  In  correspondence  with 
their  political  position  as  go-betweens,  they  con- 
tented themselves  with  serving  in  the  Coalition 
Government  in  the  capacity  of  assistants,  critics, 
friendly  opponents,  and  apologists  for  the  bour- 
geoisie. At  all  elections  they  conscientiously  cast 
anathemas  on  the  Liberal  bourgeoisie,  but  in 
the  Government  they  as  regularly  united  with  it. 
Thanks  to  these  tactics,  they  succeeded  in  the 
course  of  the  first  six  months  of  the  Revolution 
in  completely  forfeiting  the  confidence  of  the 
popular  masses  and  of  the  army,  and  now  the 
November  Revolution  had  finally  hurled  them 
from  power.  Yet  only  yesterday  they  had  still 
considered  themselves  masters  of  the  situation. 
The  leaders  of  the  Bolsheviks  whom  they  per- 
secuted had  been  obliged  to  live  "  illegally " 
and  in  hiding,  just  as  under  the  Tsardom.  To- 
day, however,  the  Bolsheviks  were  in  power, 
and  the  former  Ministers  and  the  Coalitionists 

91 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

and  their  coadjutors  were  swept  aside  and  left 
without  any  influence  on  the  further  course  of 
events.  They  did  not  want  and  could  not 
believe  that  this  sudden  transformation  signified 
the  beginning  of  a  new  epoch.  They  wanted 
and  forced  themselves  to  think  that  it  was  all 
a  mere  accident,  a  misunderstanding,  which  could 
be  righted  by  a  few  energetic  speeches  and  in- 
dicting articles,  but  at  every  turn  they  stumbled 
upon  ever  increasing  and  irresistible  obstacles. 
Hence  their  blind  and  truly  savage  hatred 
towards  us. 

The  bourgeois  politicians  would  not,  of  course, 
make  up  their  minds  to  go  into  the  fire  them- 
selves. Instead,  they  were  pushing  forward  the 
Socialist  Revolutionaries  and  Mensheviks,  who 
in  their  struggle  against  us  had  acquired  all 
that  energy  which  they  had  so  sadly  lacked  when 
they  were  in  semi-power.  Their  organs  were 
spreading  the  most  fantastic  rumours  and 
slanders.  In  their  name  appeared  proclamations 
containing  direct  appeals  to  the  people  to  destroy 
the  new  Government.  They,  too,  organized 
the  officials  for  sabotage  and  the  cadets  for 
military  action  against  us.  Throughout  Novem- 
ber 9th  and  loth  we  continued  to  receive 
constant  threats  by  telegram  from  the  army 
committees,  Town  Councils,  Zemstvos,  and  the 
managing  committee  of  the  railway  union.  The 
Nevsky  Prospekt,  the  chief  artery  of  the  bour- 
geoisie of  the  capital,  became  more  and  more 
animated.  The  bourgeois  youth  were  awaken - 
92 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

ing  from  their  torpor,  and,  urged  on  by  the 
Press,  were  unfolding  at  the  Nevsky  Prospekt  an 
energetic  agitation  against  the  Soviet  Govern- 
ment. Helped  by  crowds  of  bourgeois  cadets, 
they  were  disarming  individual  Red  Guardsmen, 
and  in  side  streets  were  shooting  down  sailors 
and  Red  Guards.  A  group  of  cadets  seized 
the  Telephone  Exchange.  They  also  made 
attempts  to  seize  the  Telegraph  and  Post  Office. 
Finally,  we  were  informed  that  three  armoured 
cars  had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  some  unknown 
military  organization  hostile  to  us.  The  bour- 
geois elements  were  evidently  raising  their 
heads.  The  Press  was  announcing  that  we  were 
fast  approaching  our  last  hour.  Our  people 
intercepted  some  secret  orders  from  which  it 
was  clear  that  a  military  organization  had  been 
formed  against  the  Petrograd  Soviet  at  the  head 
of  which  stood  a  so-called  "  Committee  for  the 
Defence  of  the  Revolution  "  created  by  the  City 
Council  and  the  old  Central  Executive  Com- 
mittee. Both  in  the  latter  and  in  the  City 
Council,  the  Right  Socialist  Revolutionaries  and 
the  Mensheviks  were  the  leading  parties.  This 
Committee  had  at  its  disposal  cadets,  students, 
and  many  counter-revolutionary  officers,  who, 
behind  the  backs  of  the  Coalitionists,  were  hoping 
to  deliver  a  death-blow  to  the  Soviets. 

THE  CADET  RISING  OF  NOVEMBER  i  ITH. 

The  chief  basis  for  the  counter-revolutionary 
organizations    was  the    Cadet    and   Engineering 

98 


Schools,  where  a  considerable  quantity  of  arms 
and  munitions  were  stored  and  from  which  raids 
were  carried  out  against  the  institutions  of  the 
Revolutionary  Government. 

Detachments  of  Red  Guards  and  sailors  sur- 
rounded the  Cadet  School  and  sent  parlementaires 
to  demand  the  surrender  of  arms.  The  besieged 
replied  with  bullets.  The  besiegers  were  mark- 
ing time,  and  a  crowd  collected  round  them. 
Now  and  again  a  stray  shot  from  within  would 
hit  a  passer-by.  The  skirmish  seemed  to  be 
getting  prolonged  indefinitely  and  was  threaten- 
ing to  have  a  demoralizing  effect  on  the  revolu- 
tionary detachments.  It  was  imperative  to  resort 
to  drastic  measures.  The  duty  of  disarming 
the  cadets  was  then  placed  on  the  commander 

of   the  Peter  and   Paul  Fortress,  Ensign  B , 

who  closely  surrounded  the  Cadet  School, 
brought  up  some  armoured  cars  and  artillery, 
and  delivered  an  ultimatum  to  the  cadets  to 
surrender  in  ten  minutes.  They  answered  with 
renewed  fire  from  the  windows.  At  the  end 
of  the  ten  minutes,  B commanded  the  artil- 
lery to  open  fire.  The  first  shots  made  a  wide 
gaping  breach  in  the  walls,  and  the  cadets  sur- 
rendered, although  many  of  them  tried  to  escape 
and,  in  so  doing,  continued  firing  at  their  pur- 
suers. The  exasperation  and  bitterness  accom- 
panying every  civil  war  was  soon  engendered. 
The  sailors  undoubtedly  committed  cruelties  on  in- 
dividual cadets.  The  bourgeois  Press  afterwards 
accused  the  sailors  and  the  Soviet  Government  of 
94 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

inhumanity  and  savagery.  But  it  was  silent  on 
one  point  :  that  the  Revolution  of  November 
7th- 8th  had  been  accomplished  without  a  single 
shot  and  without  a  single  victim,  and  that  it 
was  only  the  counter-revolutionary  plot  which 
had  been  organized  by  the  bourgeoisie  and  which 
threw  its  young  men  into  the  cauldron  of  a 
civil  war  against  the  workers,  soldiers,  and 
sailors  that  led  to  inevitable  atrocities  and 
victims.  The  events  of  November  iith  effected 
a  radical  change  in  the  temper  of  the  Petrograd 
people.  The  struggle  took  on  a  more  tragic 
aspect.  At  the  same  time  our  enemies  at  length 
realized  that  the  position  of  affairs  was  much 
more  serious  than  they  had  thought,  and  that 
the  Soviet  by  no  means  intended  to  give  up  the 
power  it  had  just  won,  merely  at  the  bidding 
of  the  capitalist  Press  and  cadets. 

The  clearance  of  PetrogracJ  of  all  counter- 
revolutionary hotbeds  went  on  with  great  in- 
tensity. The  cadets  were  disarmed  almost 
entirely,  and  those  who  took  part  in  the  rising 
were  arrested  and  imprisoned  in  the  Peter  and 
Paul  Fortress,  or  taken  to  Kronstadt.  Those 
papers  which  had  been  openly  calling  for  a  rising 
against  the  Soviet  authority  were  suppressed.  An 
order  was  also  issued  for  the  arrest  of  some 
of  the  leaders  of  the  former  Soviet  parties  whose 
names  appeared  in  the  intercepted  counter- 
revolutionary correspondence.  With  this,  all 
military  resistance  to  the  new  authority  was  finally 
broken  in  the  capital. 

Si 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

Then  followed  a  prolonged  and  exhausting 
struggle  with  the  "  Italian  "  strike  of  officials, 
technical  staffs,  employees  of  Government  de- 
partments, etc.  These  individuals,  although 
belonging  for  the  most  part,  in  point  of  pay, 
to  the  oppressed  class,  adhere  by  their  mode  of 
life  and  their  psychology  to  the  bourgeoisie. 
They  had  faithfully  served  the  State  when  Tsarism 
stood  at  its  head,  and  they  continued  to  serve 
it  faithfully  when  authority  passed  into  the  hands 
of  the  Imperialist  bourgeoisie.  Afterwards,  in 
the  next  period  of  the  Revolution,  they  passed 
over  with  all  their  knowledge  and  their  technical 
skill  to  the  service  of  the  Coalition  Government. 
When,  however,  the  insurgent  workers,  soldiers, 
and  peasants  hurled  the  exploiting  classes  from 
the  helm  of  the  State  and  tried  to  take  the  direc- 
tion of  affairs  into  their  own  hands,  the  officials 
and  employees  revolted  and  absolutely  refused 
to  support  the  new  Government  in  any  way 
whatever.  As  time  went  on,  this  sabotage 
spread  more  and  more,  its  organizers  being,  in 
the  main,  Socialist  Revolutionaries  and  Men- 
sheviks,  and  its  financial  support  being  derived 
from  the  banks  of  the  Entente  Embassies. 

KERENSKY'S  ADVANCE   ON   PETROGRAD. 

The  growing  stability  of  the  Soviet's  power 
in  Petrograd  made  the  middle-class  groups 
transfer  all  their  hopes  to  military  help  from 
outside.  The  Petrograd  Telegraph  Agency,  the 
Railway  Telegraph,  and  the  Radio -Telegraph 
96 


Station  of  Tsarskoye  Selo  were  sending  wire 
after  wire  reporting  that  great  military  forces 
were  moving  on  Petrograd  with  the  object  of 
suppressing  the  rebels  and  establishing  order. 
Kerensky  had  fled  to  the  front,  and  the  papers 
of  the  bourgeois  parties  were  announcing  that 
he  was  leading  numberless  troops  against  the 
Bolsheviks.  We  were  cut  off  from  the  rest  of 
the  country,  as  the  telegraph  stations  refused  to 
send  our  messages.  But  the  soldiers  who,  by 
tens  and  hundreds,  were  daily  coming  to  see 
us  to  bring  messages  from  their  regiments, 
divisions,  and  corps,  all  kept  on  saying  to  us: 
"  Don't  be  afraid  of  the  front  ;  the  whole 
front  is  entirely  on  your  side  ;  give  your  orders 
and  we  are  ready  at  a  moment's  notice  to  send 
a  division  or  a  corps  to  assist  you."  The  army 
was  in  the  same  state  as  all  the  rest  ;  the  rank 
and  file  were  on  our  side,  the  upper  ten  against 
us.  Of  course,  the  upper  ten  had  the  technical 
military  machinery  in  their  hands.  Various 
sections  of  our  million -headed  army  found  them- 
selves isolated  from  one  another.  We,  on  our 
part,  were  'isolated  from  the  army  and  from  the 
country.  Nevertheless,  the  news  of  the  Soviet's 
power  at  Petrograd  and  of  its  decrees  was,  in 
spite  of  all  obstacles,  spreading  all  over  the 
country,  and  stirred  the  provincial  Soviets  to 
revolt  against  the  old  authority. 

The  news  of  Kerensky's  march  on  Petrograd 
at  the  head  of  troops  was  soon  confirmed  and 
took  a  more  definite  shape.  We  were  informed 

G  97 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

from  Tsarskoye  Selo  of  the  approach  of 
Cossack  echelons  who  had  passed  through  Luga. 
A  proclamation  was  distributed  in  the  capital, 
signed  by  Kerensky  and  General  Krasnoff,  invit- 
ing the  whole  garrision  to  join  the  Government's 
troops  who  in  a  few  hours'  time  would  occupy 
Petrograd.  The  rebellion  of  the  cadets  on 
November  iith  was  undoubtedly  connected  with 
Kerensky's  enterprise,  but  it  burst  out  too  soon, 
owing  to  our  energetic  action.  An  order  was 
issued  to  the  garrison  of  Tsarskoye  Selo  to  call 
upon  the  advancing  Cossacks'  echelons  to  submit 
to  the  authority  of  the  Soviet,  and,  in  case  of 
refusal,  to  disarm  them.  But  the  garrison  of 
Tsarskoye  Selo  was  ill-adapted  for  military 
operations.  It  had  no  artillery  and  no  leaders, 
as  the  officers  were  hostile  to  the  Soviet.  The 
Cossacks  seized  the  radio-telegraph  station  of 
Tsarskoye  Selo,  the  most  powerful  of  its  kind 
in  the  country,  and  continued  to  advance.  The 
garrisons  of  Peterhoff,  Krasnoye  Selo,  and 
Gatchina  showed  no  initiative  and  no  resolution. 
After  an  almost  bloodless  victory  at  Petro- 
grad, the  soldiers  were  convinced  that,  in  future, 
things  would  continue  the  same  course:  it  would 
be  sufficient  to  send  an  able  agitator  to  the 
Cossacks  to  explain  to  them  the  objects  of  the 
workers'  revolution,  and  the  Cossacks  would  lay 
down  their  arms.  It  was  by  means  of  speeches 
and  fraternization  that  the  KornilofT  counter- 
revolutionary rebellion  had  been  overpowered. 
It  was  by  means  of  agitation  and  the  cleverly 
98 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

planned  seizure  of  offices  that  Kerensky's  Govern- 
ment had  been  deposed  without  any  fighting. 
The  same  methods  were  now  being  applied  by 
the  leaders  of  the  Tsarskoye  Selo,  Krasnoye  Selo, 
and  Gatchina  Soviets  against  the  Cossacks  of 
General  KrasnofT,  but  this  time  without  success. 
The  Cossacks  did  not  manifest  any  great  en- 
thusiasm or  resolve,  and  continued  to  advance. 
Some  of  the  Cossacks'  detached  sections  reached 
Gatchina  and  Krasnoye  Selo,  a  few  skirmishes 
between  them  and  the  local  garrisons  took  place, 
and  some  of  the  garrison  troops  were  disarmed. 
We,  at  first,  had  no  idea  of  the  size  of  Kerensky's 
forces.  Some  asserted  that  General  KrasnofT 
was  at  the  head  of  ten  thousand  men,  others 
estimated  that  he  could  not  have  more  than  one 
thousand,  while  the  papers  and  manifestoes  of 
the  hostile  parties  were  announcing  in  huge 
letters  that  two  corps  were  concentrated  near 
Tsarskoye  Selo. 

A  state  of  uncertainty  also  reigned  in  the 
Petrograd  garrison.  Scarcely  had  they  won  one 
bloodless  victory  than  they  had  to  come  out 
against  an  enemy  whose  strength  was  unknown, 
and  wage  battles  the  issue  of  which  was  un- 
certain. The  plan  of  sending  fresh  agitators 
and  proclamations  to  the  Cossacks  was  being 
constantly  discussed  at  garrison  conferences,  since 
it  seemed  inconceivable  to  the  soldiers  that  the 
Cossacks  could  refuse  to  adopt  the  standpoint 
which  the  Petrograd  garrison  had  fought  to 
assert.  Meanwhile,  the  advance  sections  of  the 

99 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

Cossacks  were  approaching  Petrograd,  and  we 
expected  that  the  decisive  struggle  would  take 
place  in  the  streets  of  the  capital. 

The  greatest  determination  was  shown  by  the 
soldiers  of  the  Red  Guard.  They  demanded 
arms,  munitions,  and  leaders.  But  the  whole 
of  the  military  machine  was  in  a  state  of  com- 
plete disorganization,  partly  from  neglect  and 
partly  from  malice.  The  officers  had  gone,  many 
of  them  had  fled  ;  rifles  were  in  one  place, 
munitions  in  another.  Our  artillery  was  in  a 
still  worse  condition.  Guns,  gun-carriages,  shells 
were  scattered  here  and  there,  and  had  to  be 
searched  for  in  all  sorts  of  places.  The  regi- 
ments were  short  of  engineering  tools  and  field 
telephones.  The  revolutionary  Staff,  which  tried 
hard  to  restore  order  from  above,  stumbled 
against  insurmountable  obstacles,  chiefly  in  the 
shape  of  the  sabotage  organized  by  the  military 
technical  personnel. 

We  then  decided  to  make  a  direct  appeal  tcx 
the  working  classes.  We  explained  to  them  that 
all  the  conquests  of  the  Revolution  were  at  stake, 
and  that  only  their  energy,  initiative,  and  self- 
sacrifice  could  save  them  and  consolidate  the 
new  regime  of  the  Workers  and  Peasants' 
Government.  This  appeal  was  crowned  almost 
instantly  with  great  practical  success.  Thousands 
of  workmen  came  out  and  moved  towards  the 
positions  occupied  by  Kerensky's  troops  and 
began  to  dig  trenches.  The  workmen  in  the 
gun  factories  took  in  hand  the  fitting  up  of 
100 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

guns,  the  supply  of  munitions  from  the  military 
stores,  the  requisition  of  horses  ;  they  placed 
the  guns  in  position,  organized  the  commissariat 
department,  obtained  engines,  motors,  and  cars, 
requisitioned  the  stocks  of  provisions  and  fodder, 
arranged  sanitary  columns — in  a  word,  they  built 
up  and  prepared  for  battle  that  military  machine 
which  we  had  in  vain  tried  to  create  from  above 
by  the  authority  of  the  revolutionary  General 
Staff. 

When  dozens  of  guns  appeared  in  position,  the 
spirit  of  our  soldiers  changed  at  once.  Under 
cover  of  artillery  they  were  ready  to  resist  the 
attack  of  the  Cossacks.  The  first  line  consisted 
of  sailors  and  Red  Guards.  A  few  officers, 
whose  political  ideas  were  not  ours,  but  who 
were  honestly  devoted  to  their  regiments,  led 
their  soldiers  to  their  positions  and  super- 
intended their  activities  against  Ktasnoff's 
Cossacks. 

THE  COLLAPSE  OF  KERENSKY'S  ADVENTURE. 

Meantime  the  telegraph  here  and  abroad  was 
busy  spreading  news  according  to  which  the 
Bolsheviks'  adventure  was  at  an  end.  Kerensky 
had  entered  Petrograd,  and  order  had  been 
restored  by  his  iron  hand.  At  the  same  time, 
the  bourgeois  Press  of  Petrograd,  comforted  by 
the  proximity  of  Kerensky 's  troops,  was  telling 
its  readers  about  the  complete  demoralization  of 
the  Petrograd  garrison,  about  the  Cossacks'  irre- 
sistible advance  and  their  numerous  artillery,  and 

101 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

was  predicting  the  coming  doom  of  the  Sinolny. 
Our  greatest  difficulty,  as  already  stated,  con- 
sisted in  the  absence  of  an  efficient  technical 
apparatus  and  of  men  able  to  direct  the  military 
activities.  Even  those  officers  who  had  con- 
scientiously accompanied  their  soldiers  to  the 
positions  declined  to  accept  the  post  of  Com- 
mander-in-Chief. 

After  various  attempts  to  solve  the  problem 
we  selected  the  following  combination:  a  gar- 
rison meeting  elected  a  committee  of  five  persons 
who  were  charged  with  supreme  control  over 
all  operations  against  the  counter-revolutionary 
troops  advancing  on  Petrograd.  This  committee 
then  came  to  an  agreement  with  the  Colonel 
of  the  General  Staff,  Muravieff,  who  during 
Kerensky's  regime  had  been  in  opposition,  and 
now,  on  his  own  initiative^  had  offered  his  ser- 
vices to  the  Soviet  Government. 

On  November  1 2th,  in  the  night  which  was 
very  cold,  Muravieff  and  I  motored  to  the  mili- 
tary positions.  Carts  loaded  with  provisions, 
fodder,  guns,  and  munitions,  were  moving  all 
along  the  road  in  the  same  direction.  All  that 
had  been  organized  by  the  workers  of  various 
factories.  Pickets  of  R.ed  Guards  stopped  our 
car  several  times  in  order  to  verify  our  pass. 
Since  the  first  days  of  the  November  Revolution 
all  the  cars  of  the  city  had  been  commandeered, 
and  without  a  pass  from  Smolny  no  car  was 
allowed  to  move  in  the  streets  or  suburbs  of 
the  capital.  The  vigilance  of  the  Red  Guard 
102 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

was  beyond  all  praise.  Armed  with  rifles,  they 
had  been  standing  round  the  small  bonfires  for 
hours  and  hours,  and  the  sight  of  these  young 
armed  workmen  standing  in  the  snow  in  the 
light  of  bonfires  was  the  best  symbol  of  the 
proletariat  Revolution. 

We  found  a  good  number  of  guns  at  the 
positions,  and  there  was  no  lack  of  munitions. 
The  decisive  action  took  place  on  that  very  day, 
between  Krasnoye  Selo  and  Tsarskoye  Selo. 
After  a  fierce  artillery  bombardment,  the 
Cossacks,  who  had  advanced  as  long  as  they 
met  with  no  serious  resistance,  hastily  fell  back. 
They  had  all  along  been  misled  by  tales  about 
the  atrocities  of  the  Bolsheviks  who  intended  to 
sell  Russia  to  the  Kaiser.  They  had  been  made 
to  believe  that  the  whole  garrison  of  Petrograd 
was  impatiently  expecting  them  as  liberators. 
The  first  serious  resistance  made  havoc  in  their 
lines  and  doomed  the  whole  of  Kerensky's 
adventure. 

The  retreat  of  General  Krasnoff's  Cossacks 
gave  us  a  chance  of  retaking  the  radio  station 
of  Tsarskoye  Selo,  and  I  at  once  wired  the  news 
of  the  victory  over  Kerensky's  troops.1 

1  Here  is  the  text  of  the  wire  : — 

PULKOVO  VILLAGE  STAFF,  2.10  a.m. 

The  night  of  November  I2th-i3th  will  become  historical. 
The  attempt  of  Kerensky  to  lead  counter-revolutionary 
troops  against  the  capital,  the  seat  of  the  Revolution, 
has  met  with  a  decisive  repulse.  Kerensky  is  in  retreat ; 

103 


THE     RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

We  subsequently  leamt  from  our  friends  abroad 
that  the  German  wireless  stations  had  received  an 
order  from  the  High  Command  not  to  intercept 
this  message.  Thus  the  first  action  of  the  Ger- 
man Government,  in  respect  of  the  November 

we  are  advancing.  Soldiers,  sailors,  and  workmen  of 
Petrograd  have  shown  that  they  are  anxious  to,  and  know 
how  to,  assert  the  will  and  power  of  the  workers'  democ- 
racy with  their  arms.  The  bourgeoisie  strove  to  isolate 
the  revolutionary  army  ;  Kerensky  attempted  to  crush 
it  under  the  Cossack's  heel.  Both  attempts  have  proved 
a  miserable  failure. 

The  great  idea  of  the  supreme  power  of  the  workers 
and  peasants'  democracy  has  consolidated  the  ranks  of 
our  army  and  steeled  its  will.  The  whole  country  will 
now  perceive  that  the  power  of  the  Soviets  is  not  a  passing 
event,  but  an  irrefutable  fact  of  the  rule  of  workers,  soldiers, 
and  peasants.  The  repulse  of  Kerensky  is  a  repulse  of 
the  bourgeoisie,  the  landlords,  and  the  Kornilovites.  The 
repulse  of  Kerensky  is  the  establishment  of  the  people's 
right  to  a  peaceful  and  free  life,  to  land,  bread,  and  power. 
The  Pulkovo  detachment  has,  by  its  valiant  deeds,  con- 
solidated the  cause  of  the  Workers  and  Peasants'  Revo- 
lution. A  return  to  the  past  is  impossible.  There  are 
still  struggle,  obstacles,  and  sacrifices  in  front  of  us.  But 
the  road  is  open  and  victory  is  certain. 

Revolutionary  Russia  and  the  Soviet  Government 
have  a  right  to  be  proud  of  their  Pulkovo  detachment 
and  its  Commander,  Colonel  Walden. 

Eternal  memory  to  the  fallen  !  Glory  to  the  warriors 
of  the  Revolution,  soldiers  and  officers  faithful  to  the 
people  ! 

Long  live  revolutionary,  popular,  Socialist  Russia  ! 

On  behalf  of  the  Council  of  the  People's  Commissioners, 

L.  TROTSKY. 

November  13,  1917. 
104 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

events,  betrayed  the  fear  lest  they  should  cause 
a  fermentation  in  Germany  itself.  Austria- 
Hungary  intercepted  a  portion  of  our  message, 
and,  as  far  as  we  know,  it  became  the  source 
of  information  from  which  all  Europe  learned 
that  Kerensky's  luckless  attempt  to  regain  power 
had  ended  in  a  miserable  failure.  Signs  of 
fermentation  were  now  apparent  among 
KrasnofT's  Cossacks.  They  began  sending 
scouts  to  Petrograd  and  even  official  delegates 
to  the  Smolny.  There  they  were  able  to  see 
for  themselves  that  perfect  order  reigned  at 
Petrograd,  maintained  by  the  garrison  which 
was  supporting  the  Soviet  Government.  The 
disorganization  among  the  Cossacks  became  the 
greater  as  they  soon  realized  the  absurdity  of 
the  idea  of  capturing  Petrograd  by  means  of 
a  thousand  or  so  cavalrymen,  since  the  promised 
support  from  the  front  was  not  forthcoming. 

Krasnoff,  with  his  Cossacks,  retreated  towards 
Gatchina,  and  when  we  reached  there  the  follow- 
ing day,  the  members  of  his  staff  were  already 
practically  prisoners  in  the  hands  of  the  Cossacks 
themselves.  Our  garrison  at  Gatchina  was  in 
occupation  of  all  the  most  important  positions. 
The  Cossacks,  although  not  disarmed,'  were 
absolutely  incapable  of  further  resistance.  They 
desired  one  thing  only,  viz.  to  be  allowed  to 
return  to  the  Don  as  soon  as  possible,  or  at 
least  to  the  front. 

The  Gatchina  Palace  was  a  curious  sight.  All 
the  entrances  were  guarded  by  strong  pickets. 

105 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

At  the  gates  were  artillery  and  armoured  cars. 
The  spacious  rooms  of  the  Palace,  the  walls  of 
which  were  covered  with  valuable  paintings,  were 
crowded  with  soldiers  and  sailors  and  Red 
Guardsmen.  On  the  tables  of  costly  wood  were 
scattered  soldiers'  clothes,  pipes,;  and  sardine 
boxes.  One  of  the  rooms  was  occupied  by  the 
staff  of  General  Krasnoff.  The  floor  was  covered 
with  mattresses,  soldiers'  coats,  and  caps.  The 
representative  of  the  Military  Revolutionary  Com- 
mittee who  accompanied  me  entered  the  room 
occupied  by  the  staff,  lowered  his  rifle  upside 
down  with  a  clang,  and,  leaning  on  it,  declared  : 
"  General  Krasnoff,  you  and  your  staff  are 
prisoners  of  the  Soviet."  Armed  Red  Guardsmen 
immediately  took  up  posts  at  both  doors  of  the 
room.  Kerensky  was  not  there  ;  he  had  fled, 
as  he  fled  previously  from  the  Winter  Palace. 
General  Krasnoff  described  the  circumstances  of 
his  escape  in  his  written  evidence  handed  in 
on  November  i4th.  I  publish  here  this  curious 
document  verbatim :  — 

November  14,  1917,  6  p.m. 

It  was  about  3  p.m.  when  I  was  summoned 
by  the  Commander-in-Chief  [Kerensky] .  He 
was  very  agitated  and  nervous. 

"  General,"  said  he,  "you  have  betrayed  me  : 
your  own  Cossacks  here  definitely  say  that 
they  will  arrest  me  and  hand  me  over  to  the 
sailors." 

"  Yes,"  said  I,  "  they  talk  a  good  deal  about 
106 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

it,   and  I   know  that  there  is  no  sym'pathy  with 
you  anywhere." 

"  Do  the  officers  say  the  same?  " 

"  Yes-;  the  officers  are  exactly  those  who  are 
the  most  discontented  with  you." 

"  What  shall  I  do?  I  shall  have  to  take 
my  life." 

"If  you  are  an  honest  man  you  will  go  at 
once  with  a  white  flag  to  Petrograd  and  appear 
before  the  Revolutionary  Committee  and  talk  the 
matter  over  as  the  head  of  the  Government." 

"  Yes,  I  will  do  that,  General  1  " 

"  I  will  give  you  a  guard  and  I  will  get  a 
sailor  to  go  with  you." 

"  No  ;  any  one  but  a  sailor.  You  know 
Dybenko  is  here." 

"  I  do  not  know  who  Dybenko  is." 

"He  is  my  enemy." 

"  Well,  nothing  is  to  be  done.  You  have 
engaged  in  a  big  game  and  you  must  take 
risks." 

"  Very  well  ;    I  will  go  to-night." 

"  Why  in  the  night?  That  would  be  a  flight. 
Go  openly  and  calmly,;  let  everybody  see  that 
you  are  not  trying  to  escape." 

"  Very  well.  Only  give  me  a  convoy  which 
I  can  trust." 

"  Agreed." 

I  went  out,  called  a  Cossack  of  the  loth  Don 
Cossacks'  Regiment,  Russkoff,  and  ordered  him 
to  appoint  eight  Cossacks  to  form  a  bodyguard 
for  the  Commander-in-Chief. 

107 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

Half  an  hour  later  the  Cossacks  came  in  to 
tell  me  that  they  could  not  find  Kerensky  any- 
where— that  he  had  fled.  I  raised  the  alarm  and 
ordered  a  search  to  be  made  for  him  ;  I  am 
inclined  to  think  that  he  could  not  have  fled 
from  Gatchina  and  is  still  hiding  somewhere 
here. 

MAJOR-GENERAL  KRASNOFF, 

Commander  of  the   i  ith  Corps. 

Such  was  the  end  of  this  business. 

Nevertheless,  our  opponents  did  not  want  to 
surrender  or  to  admit  that  the  question  of  govern- 
ment authority  had  been  settled.  They  still 
nourished  hopes  of  help  from  the  front.  The 
leaders  of  the  ex-Soviet  parties — Tchernoff, 
Tsereteli,  Avksentieff,  Gotz,  and  others,  one 
after  another,  went  to  the  front  to  negotiate  with 
the  old  army  committees  gathered  at  Dukhonin's 
headquarters,  tried  to  incite  him  to  resist,  and, 
according  to  the  Press,  even  attempted  to  form 
at  his  quarters  a  new  Ministry.  But  nothing 
came  of  it.  The  old  army  committees  had  lost 
all  their  influence,  and  the  front  was  feverishly 
busy  calling  together  conferences  for  the  new 
elections  to  all  the  army  organizations  at  the 
front.  At  these  re-elections  the  Soviets'  regime 
was  everywhere  victorious. 

Meanwhile  our  detachments  were  moving  by 
rail  further  from  Gatchina  towards  Luga  and 
Pskoff.  There  they  met  several  trains  with 
"  shockers  "  and  Cossacks,  who  had  either  been 
108 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

summoned  by  Kerensky  or  despatched  by  various 
generals.  An  armed  conflict  occurred  between 
our  troops  and  one  of  these  Cossack  echelons. 
But  the  majority  of  the  soldiers  sent  from  the 
front  to  Petrograd,  on  meeting  with  the  repre- 
sentatives of  the  Soviet  troops,  immediately 
declared  that  they  had  been  deceived  and  that 
they  would  not  raise  their  arms  against  the 
authority  of  the  workers  and  soldiers. 

INTERNAL  FRICTIONS. 

In  the  meantime  the  struggle  for  the  estab- 
lishment of  the  Soviet  regime  was  spreading  all 
over  the  country.  In  Moscow  this  struggle  was 
particularly  protracted  and  bloody.  Perhaps  this 
was  due  not  the  least  to  the  fact  that  the  leaders 
of  the  Revolution  did  not  act  at  once  with  all 
the  determination  needed  in  offensive  operations. 
In  a  civil  war,  more  than  in  any  other,  victory 
can  be  secured  only  by  a  prompt  and  continuous 
offensive.  Hesitation  is  dangerous,  negotiations 
are  risky,  the  policy  of  marking  time  is 
ruinous.  One  must  always  remember  that  the 
masses  of  the  people  have  never  been  in  posses- 
sion of  power,  that  they  have  always  been  under 
the  heel  of  other  classes,  and  that  therefore  they 
lack  political  self-confidence.  Any  hesitation 
shown  in  the  revolutionary  centres  has  an  im- 
mediate deteriorating  effect  on  them.  Only  when 
the  revolutionary  party  firmly  and  unflinchingly 
speeds  to  its  goal  can  it  help  the  working  masses 
to  overcome  all  the  slavish  instincts  inherited 

109 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

from  centuries  and  lead  the  masses  to  victory. 
Only  a  resolute  offensive  secures  victory  with  a 
minimum  expenditure  of  strength  and  with  the 
least  losses. 

But  the  attainment  of  resolute  and  firm  tactics 
is  just  the  difficulty.  The  lack  of  confidence 
of  the  masses  in  their  own  strength,  the  lack  of 
experience  of  power,  are  reflected  also  in  the 
leaders  who,  besides,  are  all  the  time  under  the 
powerful  pressure  of  bourgeois  public  opinion. 

The  bare  idea  of  the  possibility  of  the  estab- 
lishment of  a  Workers'  Government  filled  our 
bourgeois  Liberals  with  hatred  and  spite.  These 
feelings  they  expressed  in  the  numberless  papers 
they  had  at  their  disposal.  Next  came  our 
"  intellectuals,"  who,  with  all  their  profession  of 
Radicalism  and  the  socialistic  colouring  of  their 
thought,  were  yet  harbouring  in  the  depth  of 
their  consciousness  a  most  slavish  admission  of 
the  bourgeoisie's  might  and  its  art  of  ruling. 
All  these  intellectuals,  with  their  socialistic 
plumage,  at  once  shifted  towards  the  Right,  re- 
garding the  consolidation  of  the  power  of  the 
Soviets  as  the  beginning  of  the  end.  Following 
on  the  heels  of  the  representatives  of  Liberal 
professions  walked  the  old  bureaucracy,  the  ad- 
ministrative and  technical  personnel,  all  those  ele- 
ments who,  morally  and  materially,  live  on  the 
crumbs  falling  from  the  table  of  the  bourgeoisie. 
The  opposition  of  all  these  classes  was  mostly 
of  a  passive  character,  especially  after  the  sup- 
pression of  the  cadet  rebellion,  but  for  that 
110 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

very  reason  it  often  seemed  insurmountable.     At 
every    step    we    were    refused    assistance.     The 
officials  would  either  leave  the  Government  offices 
or,  remaining  there,  refused  point-blank  to  work 
for   us.      They   would   not   surrender   the   books 
or   funds.     The  telephone  exchanges   refused  to 
connect  us.     The  telegraph  offices  would  mutilate 
or  delay  our  messages.     We  could  not  find  trans- 
lators, stenographers,  or  even  copyists,  etc.     All 
that  created  such  an  atmosphere  that  some  among 
us,    even    some    of    those    at    the    head    of    our 
party,    began    to     doubt    whether    the    working 
masses  would  be  able,  in  face  of  such  resistance 
on   the  part  of  the  bourgeois  classes,   to  set   in 
order  the  machinery  of  Government  and  remain 
in   power.      Here   and   there   were   heard  voices 
advising  an  agreement.     But  with  whom?     With 
the   bourgeois  Liberals?       Such   a   coalition  had 
been  already  tried,  and  it  drove  the  Revolution 
into  a  terrible  bog.     The  insurrection  of  Novem- 
ber  /th  was  an  act  of  self-preservation  on  the 
part  of  the  masses,  after  a  period  of  impotence 
and  treason  on  the  part  of  the  Coalition  Govern- 
ment.    The  only  coalition  which  still  remained  to 
be   tried  was  the  coalition  within   the  ranks   of 
the    so-called   revolutionary   democracy,    that   is, 
of  all  Soviet  parties.     Such  a  coalition  we  had 
virtually    proposed    from    the    very    beginning, 
at  the  sitting  of  the  second  All-Russian  Congress 
on   November  yth.      The   Kerensky  Government 
had  just  been  overturned  and  we  had   proposed 
to  the  Soviet  Congress  to  take  over  the  govern- 
Ill 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

ment  authority.  But  the  parties  of  the  Right  had 
left  us  and  banged  the  door  behind  them.  And 
it  was  the  very  best  they  could  have  done.  They 
represented  but  an  insignificant  section  at  the 
Congress.  They  were  no  longer  supported  by 
the  masses,  since  even  those  sections  of  the  people 
who,  by  their  apathy,  were  still  supporting  them, 
were  gradually  drifting  over  to  our  side.  The 
coalition  with  the  Right  wing  of  the  Socialist 
Revolutionaries  and  Mensheviks  would  not  have 
broadened  the  social  basis  of  the  Soviet  Govern- 
ment,; at  the  same  time  it  would  have  intro- 
duced into  its  personnel  elements  demoralized 
through  and  through  by  political  scepticism  and 
by  worship  of  bourgeois  Liberalism.  All  the 
strength  of  the  new  authority  -lay  in  the  radicalism 
of  its  programme,  in  the  determination  with  which 
it  acted.  To  tie  oneself  to  the  groups  of  Tcher- 
noff  and  Tsereteli  would  have  meant  to  put 
shackles  on  the  arms  and  legs  of  the  new 
authority  and  to  cause  the  masses  to  lose  con- 
fidence in  it  in  no  time. 

Our  nearest  neighbours  on  the  right  were  the 
so-called  "  Left  "  Socialist  Revolutionaries.  On 
the  whole  they  were  quite  ready  to  support  us, 
but  at  the  same  time  they  desired  to  form  a 
Coalition  Socialist  Government.  The  Central 
Committee  of  the  Railway  Union,  the  Central 
Committee  of  the  Post  and  Telegraph  Employees, 
the  Union  of  Government  Officials— all  these 
organizations  were  against  us.  At  the  head  of 
our  own  party  some  were  urging  the  need  of 
112 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

coming  to  an  agreement  with  these  organiza- 
tions in  some  way  or  other.  But  on  what  basis? 
All  those  above-mentioned  leading  organizations 
of  the  past  regime  had  already  outlived  them- 
selves. Their  relationship  to  the  lower  officials 
was  roughly  the  same  as  that  of  the  old  army 
committees  to  the  soldier  masses  in  the  trenches. 
History  had  drawn  a  deep  line  of  demarcation 
between  the  higher  and  lower  strata.  An  un- 
principled alliance  with  these  worn-out  leading 
organizations  of  yesterday  was  doomed  to  an 
inevitable  collapse.  In  order  to  overpower  the 
sabotage  and  the  aristocratic  pretensions  of  those 
above,  it  was  necessary  to  lean  for  support 
firmly  and  resolutely  on  the  rank  and  file.  We 
left  to  the  Socialist  Revolutionaries  the  task  of 
continuing  the  hopeless  attempts  to  effect  a  com- 
promise. Our  own  policy  was,  on  the  contrary, 
to  mobilize  those  who  laboured  at  the  bottom  of 
the  scale  against  all  those  representative  bodies 
which  had  supported  the  Kerensky  regime.  This 
uncompromising  policy  caused  friction  and  even 
a  split  amongst  the  leaders  of  our  own  party. 
At  the  Central  Executive  Committee,  the  Left 
Socialist  Revolutionaries  protested  against  the 
severity  of  the  measures  adopted  by  the  new 
Government,  and  insisted  on  the  necessity  of 
compromises.  The  protest  was  supported  by  a 
section  of  the  Bolsheviks,  and  three  People's 
Commissioners  resigned  and  left  the  Govern- 
ment. Some  other  active  members  of  the  party 
expressed  their  fundamental  solidarity  with  those 

H  118 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

who  had  resigned.  This  made  a  tremendous 
impression  in  various  bourgeois  and  intellectual 
circles:  it  was  now  evident  that  the  Bolshe- 
viks, whom  the  cadets  and  the  Cossacks  of 
General  KrasnofT  had  failed  to  crush,  were  bound 
to  perish,  together  with  the  Soviet  regime,  as 
a  result  of  internal  dissolution.  However,  the 
masses  never  noticed  the  split  at  all,  and  unani- 
mously supported  the  Council  of  the  People's 
Commissioners  not  only  against  the  counter- 
revolutionary plotters  and  the  saboteurs,  but  also 
against  all  compromise-mongers  and  sceptics. 

THE  FATE  OF  THE  CONSTITUENT  ASSEMBLY. 

When,  after  KornilofFs  adventure,  the  para- 
mount parties  on  the  Soviets  made  an  attempt 
to  make  amends  for  their  previous  attitude  of 
indulgence  towards  the  counter-revolutionary 
bourgeoisie,  they  demanded  the  speedy  convo- 
cation of  the  Constituent  Assembly.  Kerensky, 
who  had  just  been  saved  by  the  Soviets  from 
the  too  close  embrace  of  his  ally  Korniloff,  was 
obliged  to  give  in.  The  Constituent  Assembly 
was  fixed  for  the  end  of  November.  But 
the  circumstances  had  by  that  time  become 
such  that  no  guarantee  whatsoever  was  avail- 
able that  the  Constituent  Assembly  would, 
indeed,  be  called  together.  Complete  dis- 
organization reigned  at  the  front,  the  number 
of  deserters  was  growing  every  day,  and 
the  soldiers  threatened  to  leave  the  trenches 
in  regiments  and  corps  and  to  withdraw  to  the 
114 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

rear,  devastating  everything  on  their  way.  In 
the  country  districts  seizures  of  private  lands 
and  live  stock  were  going  on  in  a  most  hap- 
hazard fashion.  Martial  law  was  in  consequence 
proclaimed  in  many  places.  Meanwhile  the 
German  troops  continued  to  advance,  took  Riga 
and  threatened  Petrograd.  The  Right  wing  of 
the  bourgeoisie  was  openly  rejoicing  over  the 
danger  threatening  the  revolutionary  capital. 
The  Government  offices  had  been  evacuated  from 
Petrograd,  and  Kerensky  intended  to  transfer 
the  seat  of  his  Government  to  Moscow.  All 
that  made  the  possibility  of  the  Constituent 
Assembly  being  called  together  not  only  remote, 
but  well-nigh  unlikely.  From  this  point  of  view 
the  November  coup  d'etat  may  have  been  re- 
garded as  the  salvation  of  the  Constituent 
Assembly  as  well  as  of  the  Revolution  as  a 
whole.  And  when  we  argued  that  the  road  to 
the  Constituent  Assembly  lay  not  through  Tsere- 
teli's  Provisional  Parliament,  but  through  the 
seizure  of  power  by  the  Soviets,  we  were  abso- 
lutely sincere.  But  the  endless  postponements 
of  the  summoning  of  the  Constituent  Assembly 
had  not  been  without  effect  on  it.  Announced 
in  the  first  days  of  the  Revolution,  it  made  its 
appearance  after  eight  or  nine  months  of  a  severe 
struggle  between  classes  and  parties.  It  came 
too  late  to  have  still  a  chance  of  playing  a  con- 
structive role.  Its  intrinsic  futility  had  been 
predetermined  by  one  single  fact  which  at  first 
might  have  appeared  as  of  small  importance, 

115 


THE    RUSSIAN     REVOLUTION 

but  which  later  on  affected  the  fate  of  the  Con- 
stituent   Assembly   tremendously. 

During  the  first  phases  of  the  Revolution  the 
party  of  the  Socialist  Revolutionaries  had  been 
numerically  the  strongest.  I  have  already  men- 
tioned its  amorphous  condition  and  its  mixed 
social  composition.  The  Revolution  had  been 
irresistibly  leading  to  the  internal  differentiation 
among  those  who  were  marching  under  the 
"  Populist  "  banner.  The  left  wing  of  this  party, 
representing  a  portion  of  the  industrial  workers 
and  the  great  masses  of  the  poorer  peasantry, 
was  separating  more  and  more  from  the  rest, 
and  ultimately  found  itself  in  an  irreconcilable 
opposition  to  the  leaders  of  the  Socialist  Revolu- 
tionary Party,  who  represented  the  lower  and 
middle  bourgeoisie.  But  the  inertia  of  the  party 
frame  and  traditions  delayed  the  inevitable  split. 
The  proportional  system  of  elections  rests,  as  is 
well  known,  entirely  on  party  lists.  As  these  lists 
had  been  drawn  up  two  or  three  months  before  the 
November  Revolution,  the  names  of  the  Left  and 
the  Right  Socialist  Revolutionaries  figured  pele- 
mele  in  the  same  list,  under  the  banner  of  the 
same  party.  In  this  way,  by  the  time  of  the 
November  Revolution,  when  the  Right  Socialist 
Revolutionaries  were  already  arresting  members 
of  the  Left  Socialist  Revolutionaries,  and  the 
Left  were  joining  the  Bolsheviks  for  the  over- 
throw of  the  Government  of  the  Socialist  Revolu- 
tionary Kerensky,  the  old  lists  were  still  retaining 
their  validity,  and  peasants  at  the  elections  for 
116 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

the  Constituent  Assembly  were  obliged  to  vote 
for  lists  headed  by  Kerensky's  name  and 
containing  names  of  Left  Socialist-  Revolution- 
aries who  were  taking  part  in  the  conspiracy 
against  him. 

The  months  preceding  the  November  Revolu- 
tion were  marked  by  an  incessant  orientation  of 
the  masses  towards  the  Left  and  a  wholesale 
flow  of  the  workers,  soldiers,  and  peasants  into 
the  ranks  of  the  Bolsheviks.  During  the  same 
period  the  same  process  was  manifesting  itself  in 
the  ranks  of  the  Socialist  Revolutionary  Party 
in  the  shape  of  the  extension  of  the  Left  wing  at 
the  expense  of  the  Right.  Yet  three -fourths 
of  the  names  figuring  ori  the  party  lists  of  the 
Socialist  Revolutionaries  were  those  of  the  old 
leaders  of  the  Right  wing,  whose  revolutionary 
reputation  had  been  forfeited  completely  during 
their  coalition  with  the  Liberal  bourgeoisie. 

To  this  must  be  added  the  fact  that  the 
elections  took  place  during  the  first  weeks  follow- 
ing the  November  Revolution.  The  news  of 
the  change  was  spreading  in  slowly  widening 
circles  from  the  capital  to  the  provinces,  from  the 
towns  to  the  villages.  In  many  places  the  masses 
of  peasantry  had  a  very  vague  idea  of  what  had 
taken  place  in  Petrograd  and  Moscow.  They 
nominally  voted  for  "  Land  and  Liberty,"  for 
their  representatives  on  the  land  committees,  who, 
for  the  most  part,  were  following  the  "  Populist  " 
banner.  In  effect,  they  were  voting  for  Keren - 
sky  and  Avksentieff,  who  were  dissolving  those 

117 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

very  land  committees  and  arresting  their  mem- 
bers. The  result  of  it  all  was  a  most  incredible 
political  paradox:  one  of  the  two  parties  which 
were  to  dissolve  the  Constituent  Assembly,  viz. 
the  Left  Socialist  Revolutionaries,  was  actually 
elected  on  the  same  lists  as  the  party  which  had 
obtained  the  majority  in  the  Constituent  Assem- 
bly. These  facts  show  clearly  what  a  belated 
product  the  Constituent  Assembly  was  in  com- 
parison with  the  actual  progress  of  party  warfare 
and  party  differentiations.  We  must  now 
examine  the  question  also  from  the  point  of 
view  of  principle. 

THE  PRINCIPLES  OF  DEMOCRACY  AND  THE 
DICTATORSHIP  OF  THE   PROLETARIAT. 

As  Marxists,  we  have  never  been  worshippers 
of  formal  democracy.  In  a  society  split  into 
classes,  the  democratic  institutions,  far  from 
abolishing  the  class  struggle,  only  lend  the  class 
interests  a  highly  imperfect  form  of  expression. 
The  possessing  classes  have  always  at  their 
disposal  thousands  of  means  to  pervert  and 
adulterate  the  will  of  the  labouring  masses.  In 
time  of  revolution  democratic  institutions  form 
a  still  less  perfect  apparatus  for  the  expression 
of  the  class  struggle.  Marx  called  Revolution 
"  the  locomotive  of  history."  The  open  and 
direct  struggle  for  power  enables  the  labouring 
masses  to  acquire  in  a  short  time  a  wealth  of 
political  experience  and  thus  rapidly  to  pass  from 
one  stage  to  another  in  the  process  of  their 
118 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

mental  evolution.  The  ponderous  mechanism  of 
democratic  institutions  cannot  keep  pace  with  this 
evolution — and  this  in  proportion  to  the  vastness 
of  the  country  and  the  imperfection  of  the 
technical  apparatus  at  its  disposal. 

The  Right  Socialist  Revolutionaries  were  in 
a  majority  at  the  Constituent  Assembly.  In 
accordance  with  parliamentary  usage,  they 
should  have  formed  the  Government.  But 
the  Right  Socialist  Revolutionaries  had  had 
the  chance  of  forming  such  a  Govern- 
ment during  the  whole  period  of  Revolution 
before  November.  Yet  they  had  refrained  from 
doing  so,  had  handed  over  the  lion's  share 
of  power  to  the  Liberal  bourgeoisie,  and  exactly 
for  that  reason  they  had  lost  the  last  vestige  of 
influence  among  the  most  revolutionary  sections 
of  the  people  by  the  very  time  when  the  numerical 
composition  of  the  Constituent  Assembly  placed 
them  under  the  formal  obligation  to  assume  the 
reins  of  government.  The  working  class,  to- 
gether with  the  Red  Guard,  were  deeply  hostile 
to  the  Right  Socialist  Revolutionaries.  The 
overwhelming  majority  of  the  army  supported 
the  Bolsheviks.  The  revolutionary  elements  in 
the  villages  divided  their  sympathies  between  the 
Left  Socialist  Revolutionaries  and  the  Bolsheviks. 
The  sailors,  who  had  been  so  prominent  in  all 
the  incidents  of  the  Revolution,  were  almost  to 
a  man  with  our  party.  The  Right  Socialist 
Revolutionaries  had,  in  fact,  been  compelled  to 
leave  the  Soviets,  which  had  assumed  power  in 

119 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

November,  that  is,  before  the  Constituent 
Assembly.  On  what  support  could  a  Ministry 
formed  by  such  a  majority  of  the  Constituent 
Assembly  depend?  It  would  have  had  behind 
it  the  rich  of  the  villages,  intellectuals,  and  the 
old  officialdom,  and  perhaps  would  have  found 
support,  for  the  time  being,  among  the  middle 
class.  But  such  a  Government  would  have  been 
completely  deprived  of  the  material  apparatus 
of  power.  In  the  centres  of  political  life,  like 
Petrograd,  it  would  have  met  at  once  with  an 
uncompromising  resistance.  If  the  Soviets  had,  in 
accordance  with  the  formal  logic  of  democratic 
institutions,  handed  over  their  power  to  the  party 
of  Kerensky  and  Tchernoff,  the  new  Government, 
discredited  and  impotent,  would  have  only  suc- 
ceeded in  temporarily  confusing  the  political  life 
of  the  country,  and  would  have  been  overthrown 
by  a  new  rising  within  a  few  weeks.  The  Soviets 
decided  to  reduce  this  belated  historical  experi- 
ment to  a  minimum,  and  dissolved  the  Constituent 
Assembly  on  the  very  day  when  it  assembled. 

On  this  account  our  party  has  been  made  the 
butt  of  most  violent  accusations.  No  doubt  the 
dissolution  of  the  Constituent  Assembly  made 
a  very  unfavourable  impression  in  the  leading 
quarters  of  the  Socialist  parties  of  the  West, 
and  the  politically  unavoidable  and  necessary  act 
was  denounced  there  as  a  piece  of  party  tyranny 
and  sectarian  arbitrariness.  Kautskv,  with  his 
customary  pedantry,  explained  in  a  series  of 
articles  the  mutual  relationship  between  the 
120 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

Socialist  and  Revolutionary  tasks  of  the  pro- 
letariat and  the  regime  of  political  democracy. 
He  endeavoured  to  prove  that  the  observance 
of  the  principle  of  democracy  was  always,  in  the 
last  resort,  advantageous  to  the  working  class. 
Of  course,  in  a  general  way,  and  on  the  whole, 
that  is  true.  But  Kautsky  reduced  this  historical 
truth  to  a  piece  of  professorial  banality.  If 
it  always,  in  the  end,  pays  the  proletariat  to  wage 
its  class  struggle  and  even  to  exercise  its  dictator- 
ship within  the  frame  of  democratic  institutions, 
it  does  not  at  all  follow  that  history  always 
affords  the  chance  of  such  a  combination.  It 
does  not  follow  from  the  Marxian  theory  at  all 
that  history  invariably  creates  conditions  which 
are  the  most  "  advantageous  "  to  the  proletariat. 
It  is  at  present  difficult  to  say  what  course  the 
Revolution  would  have  taken  if  the  Constituent 
Assembly  had  been  summoned  in  its  second  or 
third  month.  Very  probably  the  parties  of  the 
Socialist  Revolutionaries  and  Mensheviks,  which 
then  predominated,  would  have  discredited  them- 
selves, together  with  the  Constituent  Assembly, 
in  the  eyes  not  only  of  the  more  active  elements 
which  were  supporting  the  Soviets,  but  even  in 
those  of  the  backward  popular  masses,  whose 
hopes  would  have  been  bound  up,  not  with  the 
Soviets,  but  with  the  Constituent  Assembly.  In 
such  circumstances  the  dissolution  of  the  Con- 
stituent Assembly  might  have  been  followed  by 
new  elections  from  which  the  parties  of  the  Left 
would  have  emerged  in  a  majority.  But  the 

121 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

course  of  events  went  in  a  different  direction. 
The  elections  to  the  Constituent  Assembly  took 
place  in  the  ninth  month  of  the  Revolution,  and 
by  that  time  the  class  struggle  had  reached  such 
a  degree  of  intensity  that  it  burst,  by  its  internal 
pressure,  the  formal  framework  of  democracy. 

The  proletariat  led  the  army  and  lower  masses 
of  peasantry.  These  classes  were  in  a  state  of 
direct  and  fierce  revolt  against  the  Right 
Socialist  Revolutionaries.  Yet,  thanks  to  the 
cumbrous  machinery  of  democratic  elections,  this 
party  obtained  a  majority  in  the  Constituent 
Assembly,  representing  the  pre-November  phase 
of  the  Revolution.  This  was  a  contradiction 
which  could  not  be  solved  within  the  framework 
of  formal  democracy,  and  only  political  pedants, 
who  do  not  clearly  realize  the  revolutionary  logic 
of  the  relations  of  classes,  can,  in  face  of  the 
situation  resulting  from  the  November  events, 
preach  to  the  proletariat  banal  truths  concern- 
ing the  advantages  of  democracy  for  waging 
the  class  war. 

History  chose  to  put  the  problem  in  a  form 
much  more  concrete  and  acute.  The  Constituent 
Assembly,  by  its  composition,  was  obliged  to  hand 
over  the  reins  of  power  to  the  Tchernoff-Kerensky- 
Tsereteli  group.  Was  this  group  capable  of 
guiding  the  Revolution?  Could  they  find  support 
in  the  class  which  formed  the  backbone  of  the 
Revolution?  No.  The  material  class-contents 
of  the  Revolution  came  into  an  irreconcilable 
conflict  with  its  democratic  forms.  Thereby  the 
122 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

fate  of  the  Constituent  Assembly  was  decided  in 
advance.  Its  dissolution  appeared  as  the  only 
conceivable  surgical  way  out  of  the  contradictory 
situation  which  was  not  of  our  making,  but  had 
been  brought  about  by  the  preceding  course  of 
events. 

THE  PEACE  NEGOTIATIONS. 

At  an  historical  night  sitting,  the  Second 
All-Russian  Congress  of  Soviets  adopted  the 
historical  Peace  Decree.  At  that  time  the 
power  of  the  Soviets  was  still  only  consolidating  in 
the  most  important  centres  of  the  country,  while 
the  number  of  people  abroad  who  had  confidence 
in  it  was  quite  insignificant.  We  carried  the 
decrees  unanimously,  but  to  many  it  appeared 
to  be  merely  a  political  demonstration.  The 
compromise-mongers  kept  repeating  at  every 
street  corner  that  our  resolution  could  not  lead 
to  any  practical  results,  since,  on  the  one  hand, 
the  German  Imperialists  would  not  recognize  and 
would  not  even  condescend  to  talk  with  us,  and. 
on  the  other  hand,  our  allies  would  declare  war 
on  us  for  entering  into  separate  peace  negotia- 
tions. It  was  under  the  shadow  of  these  gloomy 
predictions  that  we  were  making  our  first  steps 
towards  a  universal  democratic  peace.  The 
Decree  was  accepted  on  November  8th,  when 
Kerensky  and  Krasnoff  were  at  the  very  gates 
of  Petrograd,  and  on  November  2Oth  we  com- 
municated over  the  wireless  our  proposals  for 
the  conclusion  of  a  general  peace  both  to 

123 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

our  allies  and  enemies.  By  way  of  reply  the 
Allied  Governments  addressed,  through  their  mili- 
tary agents,  remonstrances  to  General  Dukhonin, 
the  Commander-in-Chief,  stating  that  all  further 
steps  on  our  part  towards  separate  peace  nego- 
tiations would  lead  to  most  serious  results.  We, 
on  our  part,  replied  on  November  24th  to  this 
protest  by  a  manifesto  to  all  workers,  soldiers, 
and  peasants,  declaring  that  under  no  circum- 
stances should  we  allow  our  army  to  shed  its 
blood  by  order  of  any  foreign  bourgeoisie.  We 
brushed  aside  the  threats  of  the  Western  Im- 
perialists and  assumed  full  responsibility  for  our 
peace  policy  before  the  international  working 
class.  First  of  all,  by  way  of  discharging  our 
previous  pledges,  we  published  the  secret  treaties 
and  declared  that  we  repudiated  all  that  was 
opposed  in  them  to  the  interests  of  the  popular 
masses  everywhere.  The  capitalist  Governments 
tried  to  play  off  our  disclosures  against  one 
another,  but  the  popular  masses  everywhere 
understood  us  and  appreciated  our  action.  Not 
a  single  Socialist  patriotic  paper,  as  far  as  we 
know,  dared  protest  against  this  radical  change 
effected  by  the  Government  of  workers  and 
peasants  in  all  traditional  methods  of  diplomacy, 
against  our  repudiation  of  its  evil  and  unscru- 
pulous intrigues.  We  made  it  the  aim  and  pur- 
pose of  our  diplomacy  to  enlighten  the  popular 
masses,  to  open  their  eyes  as  to  the  nature  of 
the  policy  of  their  respective  Governments,  and 
to  fuse  them  in  one  common  struggle  against,  and 
124 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

hatred  of,  the  bourgeois-capitalist  regime.  The 
German  bourgeois  Press  accused  us  of  protract- 
ing the  negotiations,  but  the  peoples  themselves 
eagerly  listened  everywhere  to  the  dialogues  at 
Brest,  and  thereby,  in  the  course  of  the  two  and 
a  half  months  during  which  the  peace  negotia- 
tions proceeded,  a  service  was  rendered  to  the 
cause  of  peace  which  has  been  acknowledged 
even  by  honest  enemies.  For  the  first  time 
the  question  of  peace  was  raised  in  such  a  way 
that  it  could  no  longer  be  distorted  by  any 
machinations  behind  the  scenes. 

On  December  5th  we  signed  the  agreement 
for  the  suspension  of  hostilities  along  the  whole 
front,  from  the  Baltic  to  the  Black  Sea.  We 
again  appealed  to  the  Allies  to  join  us  and  to 
conduct  the  peace  negotiations  together  with  us. 
We  received  no  answer,  although  this  time  our 
allies  did  not  try  to  intimidate  us  by  threats. 
The  peace  negotiations  began  on  December  22nd, 
six  weeks  after  the  adoption  of  the  Peace  Decree. 
This  shows  that  the  accusations  levelled  at  us 
by  the  hireling  and  Socialist  traitor  Press,  that 
we  had  not  tried  to  come  to  an  understanding 
with  the  Allies,  were  nothing  but  lies.  For  six 
weeks  we  kept  on  informing  them  of  every  step 
we  made,  and  constantly  appealed  to  them  to 
join  us  in  the  peace  negotiations.  We  can  face 
the  people  of  France,  Italy,  and  Great  Britain 
with  a  clear  conscience.  We  did  all  we  could 
to  prevail  upon  the  belligerent  nations  to  join 
us  in  the  peace  negotiations.  The  responsi- 

125 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

bility  for  our  separate  peace  negotiations  rests 
not  upon  us,  but  upon  the  Imperialists  of  the 
West,  as  well  as  those  Russian  parties  which 
all  along  had  been  predicting  an  early  death  to 
the  Workers  and  Peasants'  Government  and 
urging  the  Allies  not  to  take  seriously  our  peace 
initiative. 

Anyhow,  on  December  22nd  the  peace  nego- 
tiations were  opened.  Our  delegates  made  a 
declaration  of  principles  defining  the  basis  of  a 
general  democratic  peace  in  the  precise  terms 
of  the  Decree  of  November  8th.  The  other  side 
demanded  an  adjournment  of  the  sittings  ;  but 
their  resumption  was  put  off,  on  Kiihlmann's 
motion,  from  day  to  day.  It  was  obvious  that 
the  delegates  of  the  Quadruple  Alliance  had  con- 
siderable difficulty  in  drawing  up  their  reply  to 
our  declaration.  At  last,  on  December  25th, 
the  reply  came.  The  diplomats  of  the  Quad- 
ruple Alliance  adhered  to  the  democratic  formulas 
of  a  peace  without  annexations  and  contributions 
on  the  principle  of  self-determination  of  nations. 
We  could  see  clearly  that  this  was  merely  a  piece 
of  make-believe.  But  we  did  not  expect  even 
that,  for  is  not  hypocrisy  the  tribute  paid  by 
vice  to  virtue?  The  fact  that  the  German  Im- 
perialists considered  it  necessary  to  pay  this 
tribute  to  our  democratic  principles  was,  in  our 
eyes,  evidence  of  the  rather  serious  internal  con- 
dition of  Germany.  But  although,  on  the  whole, 
we  had  no  illusions  as  to  the  democratic  lean- 
ings of  Kiihlmann  and  Czernin — we  were  only 
126 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

too  well  acquainted  with  the  nature  of  the  German 
and  Austrian  ruling  classes — it  must,  neverthe- 
less, be  candidly  admitted  that  we  did  not  at 
the  time  anticipate  that  the  actual  proposals  of 
the  German  Imperialists  would  be  separated  by 
such  a  wide  gulf  from  the  formulas  presented 
to  us  by  Kiihlmann  on  December  25th  as 
a  sort  of  plagiarism  of  the  Russian  Revolution. 
We,  indeed,  did  not  expect  such  an  acme  of 
impudence. 

The  masses  of  the  working  classes  in  Russia 
were  deeply  impressed  by  Kuhlmann's  reply. 
They  read  in  it  the  fear  of  the  ruling  classes 
of  the  Central  Empires  in  face  of  the  discontent 
and  growing  impatience  of  the  masses  in  Ger- 
many. On  December  28th,  a  gigantic  workers 
and  soldiers'  demonstration  took  place  in  Petro- 
grad  in  favour  of  a  democratic  peace.  But  the 
next  morning  our  delegates  returned  from  Brest- 
Litovsk  and  brought  those  predatory  demands 
which  Kiihlmann  had  presented  on  behalf  of  the 
Central  Empires  by  way  of  interpretation  of  his 
so-called  democratic  formulae. 

At  first  it  may  appear  difficult  to  understand 
what  exactly  were  the  expectations  of  the  German 
diplomacy  when  they  presented  their  democratic 
formulae  in  order,  two  or  three  days  later,  to 
reveal  their  brutal  appetites.  The  theoretical 
debates,  too,  about  those  democratic  formulae — 
for  the  most  part  initiated  by  Kiihlmann 
himself — may  seem  to  have  been  rather  a  risky 
affair.  It  ought  to  have  been  clear  to  them 

127 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

from  the  beginning  that  on  this  battlefield  the 
diplomacy  of  the  Central  Empires  could  scarcely 
gain  any  laurals.  But  the  secret  of  Kiihlmann's 
conduct  of  diplomacy  lay  in  that  he  was  pro- 
foundly convinced  that  we  would  be  ready  to 
play  duets  with  him.  The  trend  of  his  thought 
was  approximately  as  follows:  Russia  must  have 
peace.  The  Bolsheviks  had  obtained  power 
thanks  to  their  fight  for  peace.  The  Bolsheviks 
wanted  to  remain  in  power.  This  was  only 
possible  on  one  condition,  namely,  'the  conclusion 
of  peace.  True,  they  had  committed  themselves 
to  a  definite  democratic  peace  programme.  But 
what  were  the  diplomats  for,  if  not  for  dis- 
guising black  as  white?  They,  the  Germans, 
would  make  the  position  easier  for  the  Bolsheviks 
by  hiding  their  spoil  and  plunder  beneath  a 
democratic  formula.  Bolshevik  diplomacy  would 
have  sufficient  grounds  for  not  desiring  to  probe 
too  deeply  for  the  political  essence  of  their  en- 
ticing formulas,  or,  rather,  for  not  revealing  it 
to  the  eyes  of  the  world.  In  other  words,  Kiihl- 
mann  hoped  to  come  to  a  tacit  understanding 
with  us.  He  would  pay  us  back  in  our  fine 
formula,  and  we  should  give  him  an  opportunity  of 
obtaining  provinces  and  whole  nationalities  for  the 
benefit  of  the  Central  Empires  without  any  protest 
on  our  side.  In  the  eyes  of  the  German  working 
classes,  therefore,  this  violent  annexation  would 
receive  the  sanction  of  the  Russian  Revolution. 
When,  during  the  negotiations,  we  made  it  clear 
that  we  were  not  discussing  mere  empty  formulas 
128 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

and  decorative  screens  hiding  a  secret  bargain, 
but  the  democratic  foundations  of  the  cohabitation 
of  nations,  Kiihlmann  took  it  as  a  malevolent 
breach  of  a  tacit  agreement.  He  would  not  for 
anything  in  the  world  budge  even  an  inch  from 
his  formula  of  December  25th.  Relying  on  his 
refined  bureaucratic  and  legal  logic,  he  tried 
his  best  to  prove  to  the  world  that  there  was  no 
difference  whatever  between  black  and  white,  and 
that  it  was  only  due  to  our  malicious  will  that 
we  were  insisting  on  it. 

Count  Czernin,  the  representative  of  Austria- 
Hungary,  played  at  these  negotiations  a  part 
which  no  one  would  call  impressive  or  dignified. 
He  clumsily  seconded  and  undertook  at  all  critical 
moments,  on  behalf  of  Kiihlmann,  to,  make  the 
most  violent  and  cynical  declarations.  As  against 
this,  General  Hoffman  would  often  introduce 
a  most  refreshing  note  into  the  negotiations. 
Without  shamming  any  great  sympathy  with 
the  diplomatic  niceties  of  Kiihlmann,  General 
Hoffman  many  times  banged  his  soldier's  boot 
on  the  table,  at  which  the  most  intricate  legal 
debates  were  carried  on.  For  our  part,  we  had 
not  a  moment's  doubt  that  at  these  negotiations 
General  Hoffman's  boot  was  the  only  serious 
reality. 

The  presence  of  the  representatives  of  the 
Kieff  Rada  at  the  negotiations  was  a  great  trump 
card  in  Kiihlmann's  hands.  To  the  Ukrainian 
lower  middle  class,  who  were  then  in  power,  their 
"  recognition  "  by  the  capitalist  Governments  of 

I  129 


THE     RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

Europe  seemed  the  most  important  thing  in  the 
world.  At  first,  the  Rada  had  offered  its  ser- 
vices to  the  Allied  Imperialists  and  got  from 
them  some  pocket-money.  It  then  sent  dele- 
gates to  Brest-Litovsk  in  order  to  obtain  from 
the  Austro-German  Governments,  behind  the 
backs  of  the  peoples  of  Russia,  the  recognition 
of  their  legitimate  birth.  Scarcely  had  the  Kieff 
diplomats  entered  on  the  road  of  "  inter- 
national "  relations  than  they  manifested  the 
same  outlook  and  the  same  moral  level  which 
had  hitherto  been  a  characteristic  feature  of  the 
petty  Balkan  politicians.  Messrs.  Kiihlmann  and 
Czernin,  of  course,  did  not  indulge  in  any  illusions 
as  to  the  solvency  of  the  new  partner  at  the 
negotiations.  But  they  realized  quite  correctly 
that  by  the  attendance  of  the  Kieff  delegates  the 
game  was  fated  to  become  more  complicated, 
but  also  more  promising  to  them.  At  their  first 
appearance  at  Brest-Litovsk  the  Kieff  delegation 
defined  the  Ukraine  as  a  component  part  of  the 
nascent  Federal  Republic  of  Russia.  That  was 
an  obvious  embarrassment  to  the  diplomats  of 
the  Central  Powers,  whose  chief  concern  was 
to  turn  the  Russian  Republic  into  a  new  Balkan 
Peninsula.  At  their  second  appearance,  the  diplo- 
mats of  the  Rada  declared,  under  the  dictation 
of  Austro-German  diplomacy,  that  from  that 
moment  the  Ukraine  no  longer  desired  to  form 
part  of  the  Russian  Federation  and  would  con- 
stitute henceforth  an  independent  Republic. 

In  order  to  give  the  readers  a  clear  idea  of 
130 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

the  situation  in  which  the  Soviet  Government 
was  placed  at  the  last  stage  of  the  peace  nego- 
tiations, I  think  it  useful  to  reproduce  here  the 
main  passages  of  the  speech  which  the  author  of 
these  lines  delivered,  as  the  People's  Commissioner 
for  Foreign  Affairs,  at  the  sitting  of  the  Central 
Executive  Committee  on  February  27,  1918. 

THE  SPEECH  OF  THE  PEOPLE'S  COMMISSIONER 
FOR  FOREIGN  AFFAIRS. 

"  Comrades, — Russia  of  the  Soviets  has  not 
only  to  build  the  new,  but  also  to  sum  up  the 
results  of  the  past  and,  to  a  certain  extent — a 
very  large  extent  indeed — to  settle  old  accounts, 
above  all,  the  accounts  of  the  present  war  which 
has  now  lasted  three  and  a  half  years.  The  war 
has  been  a  test  of  the  economic  resources  of  the 
belligerent  nations.  The  fate  of  Russia,  a  poor, 
backward  country,  was,  in  a  war  of  attrition, 
pre-determined  from  the  beginning.  In  the 
mighty  conflict  of  the  military  machines  the 
decisive  r61e  belonged,  in  the  last  resort,  to  the 
ability  of  the  respective  nations  to  adapt  their 
industry  in  the  shortest  possible  time,  and  thus 
to  turn  out  again  and  again,  with  constantly  in- 
creasing rapidity  and  in  ever-increasing  quan- 
tities, the  engines  of  destruction  which  have  been 
wearing  out  in  no  time  in  this  terrible  slaughter 
of  nations.  At  the  beginning  of  the  war  every, 
or  almost  every,  country,  even  the  most  backward, 
could  be  in  possession  of  powerful  engines  of 
destruction,  since  those  machines  could  be  ob- 

131 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

tained  from  abroad.  All  backward  countries  did 
possess  them,  including  Russia.  But  the  war  soon 
wears  out  its  dead  capital,  unless  it  is  constantly  re- 
plenished. The  military  power  of  every  individual 
country  drawn  into  the  whirlwind  of  the  world- 
wide war  was  measured  by  the  ability  to  make 
guns,  shells,  and  other  engines  of  destruction 
by  its  own  means  during  the  war  itself.  If 
the  war  had  decided  the  question  of  the  balance 
of  power  in  a  very  short  time,  Russia,  speaking 
theoretically,  might  have  come  out  on  the  vic- 
torious side.  But  the  war  dragged  on,  and  did 
so  by  no  means  accidentally.  The  mere  fact 
that  during  the  preceding  half-century  all  inter- 
national politics  had  been  reduced  to  the  estab- 
lishment of  the  so-called  balance  of  power,  that 
is,  to  the  greatest  possible  equalization  of  the 
military  forces  of  the  adversaries,  was  bound, 
in  view  of  the  strength  and  wealth  of  the  modern 
capitalist  nations,  to  make  the  war  a  protracted 
business.  The  result  has  been,  first  and  fore- 
most, the  exhaustion  of  the  poorer,  less 
economically  developed  countries. 

"  Germany  proved  to  be  the  most  powerful 
country  in  the  military  sense,  owing  to  the  mighty, 
development  of  her  industry  and  the  new,  rational, 
up-to-date  structure  of  that  industry  side  by  side 
with  the  archaic  structure  of  her  State.  France, 
with  her  economic  system  largely  based  on  small 
production,  proved  to  be  very  much  behind 
Germany,  while  even  such  a  powerful  colonial 
Empire  as  England  showed  herself  weaker  than 
132 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

Germany,  owing  to  the  more  conservative, 
routine-like  character  of  her  industries.  When 
the  will  of  History  summoned  ^revolutionary 
Russia  to  initiate  peace  negotiations,  we  had  no 
doubt  whatever  that,  failing  the  intervention  of 
the  decisive  power  of  the  world's  revolutionary 
proletariat,  we  should  have  to  pay  in  full  for 
over  three  and  a  half  years  of  war.  We  knew 
perfectly  well  that  German  Imperialism  was  an 
enemy  imbued  with  the  consciousness  of  its  own 
colossal  strength,  as  manifested  so  glaringly  in 
the  present  war. 

"  All  the  arguments  of  the  bourgeois  cliques 
which  keep  telling  us  that  we  should  have  been 
incomparably  stronger  had  we  conducted  our 
peace  negotiations  in  conjunction  with  our  Allies 
are  fundamentally  wrong.  If  we  were  to  carry 
on,  at  some  distant  future,  the  peace  negotia- 
tions in  conjunction  with  the  Allies,  we  should, 
in  the  first  place,  have  had  to  go  on  with  the 
war  ;  but  seeing  how  our  country  was  ex- 
hausted and  weakened,  its  continuation,  not  its 
cessation,  would  have  led  to  further  exhaustion 
and  ruin.  We  should  thus  have  had  to 
foot  the  bill  of  the  war  in  conditions  still 
more  unfavourable  to  us.  Even  if  the  camp 
which  Russia  had  joined  on  account  of  the  inter- 
national intrigues  of  Tsardom  and  the  bourgeoisie 
— the  camp,  that  is,  at  the  head  of  which  stands 
Great  Britain — should  come  out  of  the  war  com- 
pletely victorious  (granting  for  the  moment  this 
rather  improbable  eventuality),  it  does  not  follow, 

133 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

comrades,  that  our  country  would  also  have  come 
out  victorious,  since  Russia,  inside  this  victorious 
camp,  would  have  been  still  more  exhausted  and 
ruined  by  the  long-drawn-out  war  than  it  is 
now.  The  masters  of  that  camp,  who  would  have 
gathered  all  the  fruits  of  victory — that  is,  England 
and  America — would,  in  their  treatment  of  our 
country,  have  displayed  the  same  methods  which 
were  employed  by  Germany  at  the  peace  nego- 
tiations. It  would  be  absurd  and  childish,  in 
appraising  the  policy  of  the  Imperialist  countries, 
to  start  from  other  premises  than  their  naked 
self-interest  and  material  strength.  Hence,  if 
we,  as  a  nation,  are  now  weakened  in  the  face 
of  the  Imperialist  world,  we  are  so  not  because 
we  broke  away  from  the  fiery  circle  of  the  war 
after  previously  shaking  off  the  chains  of  in- 
ternational military  obligations — no,  we  are 
weakened  by  the  same  policy  of  Tsardom  and 
the  bourgeois  classes  against  which  we  fought, 
as  a  revolutionary  party,  both  before  and  during 
the  war. 

"  You  remember,  comrades,  the  conditions  in 
which  our  delegates  went  to  Brest-Litovsk  last 
time,  direct  from  one  of  the  sittings  of  the  Third 
All-Russian  Congress  of  Soviets.  We  had  in- 
formed you  then  of  the  state  of  negotiations 
and  of  the  demands  of  the  enemy.  These 
demands,  as  you  no  doubt  remember,  amounted 
to  disguised,  or  rather  semi-disguised,  annexa- 
tionist  claims  to  Lithuania,  Courland,  part  of 
Livonia,  the  Moon  Sound  Islands,  and  a  semi- 
134 


THE     RUSSIAN     REVOLUTION 

masked  indemnity  which  we  then  computed  at 
six  to  eight  or  even  ten  thousand  million  roubles. 
In  the  interval,  which  lasted  ten  days,  serious  dis- 
turbances broke  out  in  Austria  and  strikes  took 
place  among  the  labouring  masses  there — the  first 
act  of  recognition  of  our  methods  of  conduct- 
ing the  peace  negotiations  on  the  part  of  the 
proletariat  of  the  Central  Powers  in  face  of  the 
annexationist  demands  of  German  Imperialism'. 
How  miserable  are  the  allegations  of  the 
bourgeois  Press,  that  it  took  us  two  months' 
talk  with  Kiihlmann  before  we  discovered  that 
the  German  Imperialists  would  demand  robbers' 
terms.  No;;  we  knew  that  beforehand.  But 
we  tried  to  turn  our  '  conversations  '  with  the 
representatives  of  German  Imperialism1  into  a 
means  of  strengthening  those  forces  which  were 
struggling  against  it.  We  did  not  promise  in 
this  connection  any  miracles,  but  we  asserted 
that  our  way  was  the  only  way  still  left  at  the 
disposal  of  revolutionary  democracy  for  securing 
the  chances  of  its  further  development. 

"  One  may  complain  that  the  proletariat  of 
other  countries,  especially  of  the  Central 
Empires,  is  passing  to  an  open  revolutionary, 
struggle  too  slowly.  Yes,  the  tempo  of  its 
advance  is  much  too  slow.  But  in  Austria- 
Hungary  we  saw  a  movement  which  assumed  the 
proportions  of  a  national  event  and  which  was 
a  direct  and  immediate  result  of  the  Brest- 
Lit  ovsk  negotiations. 

44  Before  we  departed  from  here  we  discussed' 

135 


THE     RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

the  matter  together,  and  we  said  that  we  had  no 
reason  to  believe  that  that  wave  would  sweep 
away  the  Austro -Hungarian  militarism.  Had  we 
been  convinced  to  the  contrary,  we  should  have 
certainly  given  the  pledge  so  eagerly  demanded 
from  us  by  certain  persons,  namely,  that  we 
should  never  sign  a  separate  treaty  with  Ger- 
many. I  said  at  the  time  that  it  was  impossible 
for  us  to  make  such  a  pledge,  as  it  would  have 
been  tantamount  to  pledging  ourselves  to  defeat 
German  Imperialism.  We  held  the  secret  of 
no  such  victory  in  our  hands,  and  in  so  far  as  we 
could  not  pledge  ourselves  to  change  the  balance 
and  correlation  of  the  world's  powers  in  a  very 
short  period  of  time,  we  openly  and  honestly 
declared  that  the  revolutionary  'Government 
might,  under  certain  circumstances,  be  compelled 
to  accept  an  annexationist  peace.  For  not  the 
acceptance  of  a  peace  forced  upon  us  by  the 
course  of  events,  but  an  attempt  to  hide  its 
predatory  character  from  our  own  people  would 
have  been  the  beginning  of  the  end  of  the 
revolutionary  Government. 

"  At  the  same  time  we  pointed  out  that  we 
were  departing  for  Brest  in  order  to  continue 
the  negotiations  in  circumstances  which  were  ap- 
parently becoming  more  favourable  to  us  and 
less  advantageous  to  our  adversaries.  We  were 
watching  the  events  in  Austria -Hungary,  and 
various  circumstances  made  us  think  that,  as 
hinted  at  by  Socialist  spokesmen  in  the  Reichs- 
tag, Germany  was  on  the  eve  of  similar  events. 
136 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

Such  were  our  hopes,  and  then  in  the  course  of 
the  first  days  of  our  new  stay  at  Brest  the 
wireless  brought  us  via  Vilna  the  first  news 
that  a  tremendous  strike  movement  had  broken 
out  in  Berlin,  which,  like  the  movement  in 
Austria-Hungary,  was  the  direct  result  of  the 
Brest-Litovsk  negotiations.  But,  as  it  often 
happens,  in  consequence  of  the  '  dialectical/ 
double-edged,  character  of  the  class  struggle, 
it  was  just  this  powerful ,  swing  of  the  prole- 
tarian movement,  such  as  Germany  had  never 
seen  before,  that  aroused  the  propertied  classes 
and  caused  them  to  close  their  ranks  and  to 
take  up  a  more  irreconcilable  attitude.  The 
German  ruling  classes  are  only  too  well  imbued 
with  the  instinct  of  self-preservation,  and  they 
understood  that  any,  even  partial  concession, 
under  such  circumstances,  when  they  were  being 
pressed  by  the  masses  of  their  own  people,  would 
have  been  tantamount  to  a  capitulation  before 
the  idea  of  revolution.  That  is  why,  after  the 
first  period  of  conferences,  when  Kuhlmann 
had  been  deliberately  delaying  the  negotia- 
tions by  either  postponing  the  sittings  or 
wasting  them  on  minor  questions  of  form,  he, 
as  soon  as  the  strike  had  been  suppressed  and 
his  masters,  he  felt,  were  for  the  time  being  out 
of  danger,  reverted  to  his  old  accents  of  com- 
plete self-confidence,  and  redoubled  his  aggres- 
siveness. Our  negotiations  became  complicated 
owing  to  the  participation  of  the  Kieff  Rada. 
We  reported  the  facts  of  the  case  last  time. 

137 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

The  Rada  delegates  made  their  appearance  at 
a  time  when  the  Rada  still  represented  a  fairly 
strong  organization  in  the  Ukraine  and  when 
the  issue  of  the  struggle  had  not  yet  been 
decided.  Just  at  that  moment  we  made  the 
Rada  an  official  offer  to  conclude  with  us  a 
definite  agreement,  the  principal  term  of  which 
was  our  demand  that  the  Rada  should  proclaim 
Kaledin  and  Korniloff  enemies  of  the  Revolution 
and  refrain  from  interfering  in  our  fight  against 
them.  The  Kieff  delegates  arrived  at  the 
moment  when  we  were  cherishing  hopes  of 
coming  to  an  agreement  with  it  on  both  heads. 
,We  had  already  made  clear  to  the  Rada  that  so 
long  as  it  was  recognized  by  the  Ukrainian  people 
we  should  admit  it  to  the  negotiations  as  an 
independent  member  of  the  Conference.  But 
in  proportion  as  things  in  Russia  and  the  Ukraine 
developed,  and  the  antagonism  between  the 
democratic  masses  and  the  Rada  was  becoming 
deeper  and  deeper,  the  readiness  of  the  Rada 
also  increased  to  conclude  any  sort  of  peace  with 
the  Central  Powers,  and,  if  necessary,  to  invite 
German  Imperialism  to  intervene  in  the  internal 
affairs  of  the  Ukrainian  Republic  in  order  toi 
support  the  Rada  against  the  Russian  Revolution. 
44  On  February  gth  we  learned  that  the  peace 
negotiations  between  the  Rada  and  the  Central 
Powers  had  been  successfully  completed  behind 
our  backs.  February  Qth  was  the  birthday  of 
Prince  Leopold  of  Bavaria,  and,  as  is  the  custom 
in  monarchical  countries,  the  solemn,  historical 
138 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

act  of  signing  the  treaty  was  fixed  for  this 
festal  day — whether  with  the  Rada's  agreement 
or  not  we  do  not  know.  General  Hoffman  caused 
the  artillery  to  fire  a  salute  in  honour  of  Leopold 
of  Bavaria,  having  previously  asked  the 
Ukrainians'  permission  to  do  so,  as,  according 
to  that  treaty,  Brest-Litovsk  had  been  incor- 
porated with  the  Ukraine. 

"  However,  at  the  very  moment  when  General 
Hoffman  was  asking  the  Kieff  Rada  for  per- 
mission to  fire  a  salute  in  honour  of  Prince 
Leopold,  events  had  advanced  so  far  that,  with 
the  exception  of  Brest-Litovsk,  but  little  terri- 
tory was  left  under  the  Rada's  authority.  On  the 
strength  of  telegrams  which  we  had  received 
from  Petrograd  we  officially  informed  the  dele- 
gates of  the  Central  Powers  that  the  Kieff  Rada 
was  no  longer  in  existence — a  fact  which  was 
by  no  means  immaterial  for  the  course  of  the 
peace  negotiations.  We  proposed  to  Count 
Czernin  to  send  representatives,  accompanied  by 
our  officers,  to  the  territory  of  the  Ukraine  in 
order  to  see  on  the  spot  whether  his  co -partner, 
the  Kieff  Rada,  was  still  in  existence  or  not. 
Czernin  at  first  seemed  to  jump  at  the  idea,  but 
when  we  raised  the  question  whether  the  treaty 
with  the  Kieff  delegation  would  only  be  signed 
after  the  return  of  his  messengers  or  not,  he 
began  to  hesitate  and  promised  to  consult  Kiihl- 
mann,  and  having  done  so,  sent  us  a  reply  in  the 
negative.  This  was  on  February  8th,  and  on 
the  following  day  they  were  obliged  to  sign  the 

139 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

treaty.  That  brooked  no  delay,  not  only  because 
of  Prince  Leopold's  birthday,  but  also  because 
of  a  more  serious  circumstance,  which,  of  course, 
Kuhlmann  had  explained  to  Czernin :  '  If  we 
send  our  representatives  to  the  Ukraine  now,  they 
may  find  that  the  Rada  is  no  longer  in  existence, 
and  then  we  should  have  to  face  the  Russian 
delegates  only,  which  of  course  would  greatly 
thwart  our  chances  at  the  negotiations.'  We  were 
told  by  the  Austro -Hungarian  delegates :  '  Leave 
alone  the  question  of  principles,  place  the  problem 
on  a  practical  footing — then  the  German  dele- 
gates will  try  to  meet  you.  It  is  impossible 
that  the  Germans  should  desire  to  continue  the 
war  for  the  sake,  for  instance,  of  the  Moon  Sound 
Islands,  if  you  formulate  your  demands  more 
concretely.  .  .  .'  We  answered:  'Very  well, 
we  are  ready  to  test  the  conciliatory  attitude 
of  your  colleagues,  the  German  delegates.  So 
far  we  have  been  discussing  the  question  of  the 
right  of  self-determination  of  Lithuanians,  Poles, 
Letts,  Esthonians,  etc.,  and  have  elucidated  the 
fact  that  there  is  no  chance  for  the  self-deter- 
mination of  these  small  nations.  Let  us  now 
see  what  kind  of  self-determination  you  intend 
to  allot  to  the  Russian  people,  and  what  are 
the  military  strategical  plans  and  devices  behind 
your  seizure  of  the  Moon  Islands.  The  Moon 
Islands,  as  part  of  the  Esthonian  Republic,  as 
a  possession  of  the  Russian  Federal  Republic, 
have  a  defensive  value,  while  in  the  hands  of 
Germany  they  are  means  of  offence  and  constitute 
140 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

a  menace  to  the  most  vital  centres  of  our  country, 
particularly  to  Petrograd.'  But,  of  course,  Hoff- 
man had  not  the  slightest  intention  of  making  any 
concessions.  Then  the  decisive  moment  came. 
We  could  not  declare  war — we  were  too  weak. 
The  army  was  in  a  state  of  complete  internal 
dissolution.  In  order  to  save  our  country  from 
ruin  it  was  necessary  to  re-establish  the  internal 
organization  of  the  labouring  masses.  This  moral 
union  could  be  established  only  by  constructive 
work  in  the  villages,  in  the  workshop  and  the 
factory.  The  masses,  who  had  passed  through 
the  colossal  suffering  and  the  catastrophic  ex- 
periences of  the  war,  had  to  be  brought  back 
to  the  fields  and  factories,  where  they  could  be 
rejuvenated  morally  and  physically  by  work  and 
thus  be  enabled  to  create  the  necessary  internal 
discipline.  There  was  no  other  way  of  salvation 
for  our  country,  which  had  to  pay  the  penalty 
for  the  sins  committed  by  Tsardom  and  the 
bourgeoisie.  We  were  forced  to  get  out  of  the 
war  and  lead  our  army  out  of  the  slaughter. 
At  the  same  time  we  declared  to  German  Im- 
perialism, straight  in  the  face :  '  The  peace  terms 
which  you  force  us  to  accept  are  those  of  violence 
and  plunder.  We  cannot  allow  you,  diplomats, 
to  tell  the  German  workers  :  '  You  branded  our 
demands  as  annexationist/;  look  here,  those 
demands  have  been  signed  by  the  Russian  Revolu- 
tion !  '  Yes,  we  are  weak,  we  cannot  fight  at 
present,  but  we  have  enough  of  revolutionary 
courage  to  tell  you  that  we  will  never  of  our  own 

141 


THE    RUSSIAN     REVOLUTION 

free  will  sign  the  terms  which  you  are  writing 
with  your  sword  across  the  bodies  of  the  living 
peoples.'  We  refused  to  give  our  signatures, 
and  I  believe,  comrades,  that  we  acted  as  we 
ought  to  have  acted. 

"  Comrades,  I  do  not  want  to  say  that  a 
further  advance  of  the  Germans  against  us  is 
out  of  the  question.  Such  a  statement  would 
be  too  risky,  considering  the  power  of  the  German 
Imperialist  Party.  But  I  think  that  by  the 
position  we  have  taken  up  on  the  question  we 
have  made  any  advance  a  very  embarrassing 
affair  for  the  German  militarists.  What  would 
happen  if  they  should  nevertheless  advance? 
There  is  only  one  answer  to  this  question.  If 
it  is  still  possible  to  raise  the  spirit  in  the  most 
revolutionary  and  healthy  elements  in  our  ex- 
hausted country,  reduced  as  it  is  to  desperate 
straits,  if  it  is  still  possible  for  Russia  to  rise 
for  the  defence  of  our  Revolution  and  the  ter- 
ritories of  the  Revolution,  it  is  possible  only  as 
a  result  of  the  present  situation,  as  a  result  of 
our  coming  out  of  the  war  and  of  our  refusal  to 
sign  the  peace  treaty." 

THE  SECOND  WAR  AND  THE  SIGNING 
OF  PEACE. 

The  German  Government,  during  the  first  days 
after  the  breaking  off  of  the  negotiations,  hesi- 
tated, uncertain  as  to  which  course  to  choose. 
The  politicians  and  diplomats  thought  apparently 
that  the  chief  thing  had  been  accomplished,  and 
142 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

that  there  was  no  need  to  run  after  our  signatures. 
The  military,  however,  were  in  all  circumstances 
prepared  to  break  through  the  framework  out- 
lined by  the  German  Government  in  the  Brest- 
Litovsk  treaty.  Professor  Kriege,  adviser  to  the 
German  delegation,  told  one  of  our  delegates  that 
in  the  present  conditions  there  could  be  no 
question  of  a  new  German  offensive  against 
Russia.  Count  Mirbach,  then  at  the  head  of 
the  German  mission  in  Russia,  left  for  Berlin 
assuring  us  that  a  satisfactory  agreement  on  the 
exchange  of  prisoners  had  been  reached.  But 
all  this  did  not  prevent  General  Hoffman  from 
announcing,  on  the  fifth  day  after  "the  breaking 
off  of  the  negotiations,  the  end  of  the  armistice, 
the  seven  days'  notice  being  antedated  by  him 
from  the  day  of  the  last  sitting  at  Brest.  It 
would  be  truly  out  of  place  to  waste  time  here, 
in  righteous  indignation  at  this  dishonourable 
act,  for  it  is  but  in  keeping  with  the  general 
diplomatic  and  military  morality  of  all  the 
governing  classes. 

The  new  German  offensive  developed  under 
conditions  which  were  deadly  to  Russia.  Instead 
of  the  agreed  seven  days'  warning,  we  only  had 
two  days'.  This  spread  a  panic  in  the  ranks  of 
the  army,  already  in  a  state  of  chronic  dissolution. 
There  could  scarcely  be  any  question  of  resis- 
tance. The  soldiers  would  not  believe  that  the 
Germans  would  advance,  after  we  had  declared 
the  state  of  war  at  an  end.  The  panic-stricken 
retreat  paralysed  even  the  will  of  those  individual 

143 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

regiments  which  were  ready  to  take  up  fighting 
positions.  In  the  working-class  quarters  of 
Petrograd  and  Moscow  the  indignation  at  the 
treacherous  and  truly  buccaneering  German 
attack  knew  no  bounds.  The  workers  were  ready, 
in  those  tragic  days  and  nights,  to  enlist  in  the 
army  in  their  tens  of  thousands.  But  the  neces- 
sary organization  was  lagging  far  behind.  In- 
dividual guerrilla  detachments,  full  of  enthusiasm, 
perceived  their  helplessness  at  the  first  serious 
.encounter  with  the  German  regular  troops,  and 
this  was,  of  course,  followed  by  a  further  depres- 
sion of  spirits.  The  old  army,  long  ago  mortally 
wounded,  was  falling  to  pieces,  and  was  only 
blocking  up  all  ways  and  by-ways.  The  new 
army,  on  the  other  hand,  was  arising  much  too 
slowly  amidst  the  general  exhaustion  and  the 
terrible  dislocation  of  industry  and  transport. 
The  only  real  serious  obstacle  in  the  path  of  the 
German  advance  was  the  huge  distances.  .  .  . 

Austria-Hungary  had  her  eyes  chiefly  on  the 
Ukraine.  Through  its  delegates  the  Rada  had 
made  a  direct  request  to  the  Central  Empires 
for  military  help  against  the  Soviets,  which  by. 
that  time  had  obtained  complete  victory  through- 
out Ukrainia.  In  this  way  the  Ukrainian  lower 
middle-class  democracy,  in  its  fight  with  the 
workers  and  the  poorest  peasantry,  had  volun- 
tarily opened  the  gates  to  foreign  invasion. 

At  the  same  time  the  Government  of  Svin- 
hufvud  was  seeking  the  help  of  German  bayonets 
against  the  Finnish  proletariat.  German  mili- 
144 


tarism  was  assuming  quite  openly,  in  the  face 
of  the  whole  world,  the  r61e  of  executioner  of 
the  Russian  workers  and  peasants'  revolution. 
In  the  ranks  of  our  party  there  arose  a  heated 
discussion  as  to  whether  we  should,  under  such 
conditions,  submit  to  the  German  ultimatum  and 
sign  a  new  treaty  which — we  were  all  quite  con- 
vinced of  that — would  contain  far  more  onerous 
conditions  than  those  we  had  been  offered  at 
Brest-Litovsk.  The  representatives  of  one  school 
of  thought  considered  that  at  the  present  moment, 
when  the  Germans  were  effectively  intervening  in 
the  internal  struggles  on  the  territory  of  the 
Russian  Republic,  it  was  unthinkable  to  make 
peace  in  one  part  of  Russia  and  remain  passive 
whilst  in  the  north  and  south  the  German  troops 
were  establishing  a  regime  of  bourgeois  dictator- 
ship. Another  school  of  thought,  at  the  head 
of  which  stood  Lenin,  argued  that  every  interval, 
every  breathing  space,  however  short,  would  be 
of  the  greatest  value  for  the  internal  consolida- 
tion of  Russia  and  for  the  restoration  of  her 
capacity  for  self-defence.  After  our  absolute 
inability  to  defend  ourselves  at  the  present 
moment  from  the  attacks  of  the  enemy  had  been 
demonstrated  so  tragically  before  the  whole 
country  and  the  whole  world,  our  conclusion  of 
peace  would  be  understood  everywhere  as  an 
act  forced  on  us  by  the  cruel  law  of  the  corre- 
lation of  forces.  It  would  be  mere  childishness 
to  base  our  action  on  abstract  revolutionary 
morals.  The  question  at  issue  was  not  how  to 

K  145 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

perish  with  honour,  but  how,  in  the  end,  we 
could  live  through  to  victory.  The  Russian 
revolution  wants  to  live,  must  live,  and  must 
by  all  possible  means  refuse  to  be  drawn  into 
battle  far  beyond  her  strength  :  she  must  win 
time  in  the  expectation  that  the  revolutionary 
movement  in  the  West  would  come  to  her  aid. 
German  Imperialism  was  still  at  close  and  fierce 
grip  with  British  and  American  militarism. 
Only  for  this  reason  was  it  possible  to  conclude 
peace  between  Germany  and  Russia.  We  must 
not  let  this  opportunity  slip  by.  The  well-being 
of  the  Revolution  was  the  supreme  law  !  We 
must  accept  the  peace  which  we  dared  not  refuse  ; 
we  must  gain  some  time  for  intensive  work 
in  the  interior,  including  the  reconstruction  of 
our  army. 

At  the  Congress  of  the  Communist  Party,  just 
as  at  the  fourth  Congress  of  the  Soviets,  those 
in  favour  of  peace  were  in  a  majority.  Many 
of  those  who  in  January  had  been  opposed  to 
signing  the  Brest  peace  treaty  were  now  in  favour 
of  peace.  "  At  that  time,"  said  they,  "  our  signa- 
ture would  have  been  understood  by  the  British 
and  French  workers  as  a  miserable  capitulation 
without  any  attempt  to  avoid  it\;  even  the  base 
insinuations  of  the  Anglo-French  chauvinists 
about  a  secret  agreement  between  the  Soviet 
Government  and  the  Germans  might  have  met 
with  some  acceptance  in  certain  sections  of  the 
Western  European  workers,  had  we  then  signed 
the  peace  treaty.  But  after  our  refusal  to  sign, 
143 


THE    RUSSIAN     REVOLUTION 

after  the  new  German  offensive  against  us,  after 
our  attempt  at  resistance,  after  our  military 
weakness  has  been  demonstrated  to  the  whole 
world  with  such  awful  clearness,  no  one  will 
dare  reproach  us  with  having  capitulated  without 
a  struggle."  The  Brest-Litovsk  treaty,  the 
second,  more  onerous  edition,  was  duly  signed 
and  ratified. 

In  the  meantime,  in  the  Ukraine  and  in  Fin- 
land the  executioners  were  going  on  with  their 
grim  work,  threatening  more  and  more  the  most 
vital  centres  of  Great  Russia.  Thus,  the  question 
of  the  very  existence  of  Russia  as  an  independent 
country  became  indissolubly  bound  up  with  the 
question  of  a  European  revolution. 

CONCLUSION. 

•When  our  party  was  assuming  the  reins  of 
Government,  we,  knew  beforehand  what  difficulties 
we  should  undoubtedly  meet  on  our  way. 
Economically  the  country  had  been  exhausted 
by  the  war  to  the  last  degree.  The  Revolution 
had  destroyed  the  old  administrative  machinery 
without  having  had  the  opportunity  of  creating 
a  new  one  in  its  place.  Millions  of  workers 
had  been  forcibly  torn  away  from  the  economic 
life  of  the  country,  thrown  out  of  their  class, 
and  morally  and  mentally  shattered  by  three 
years  of  war.  A  colossal  war  industry  on  an 
insufficiently  developed  economic  foundation  had 
sucked  up  the  very  life-blood  of  the  nation, 
and  its  demobilization  presented  the  greatest 

147 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

difficulties.  The  phenomena  inseparable  from 
economic  and  political  anarchy  had  spread  widely 
throughout  the  country.  The  Russian  peasantry 
had  been  for  centuries  welded  together  by  the 
barbarous  discipline  of  the  land  and  bent  down 
from  above  by  the  iron  discipline  of  Tsardom. 
The  state  of  our  economic  development  had 
undermined  the  one  discipline  and  the  Revolu- 
tion destroyed  the  other.  Psychologically,  the 
Revolution  meant  an  awakening  of  human  in- 
dividuality in  the  peasant  masses.  The  anarchical 
form  in  which  this  awakening  found  expression 
was  but  the  inevitable  result  of  the  previous 
repression.  It  will  only  be  possible  to  arrive 
at  the  establishment  of  a  new  order  of  things, 
based  on  the  control  of  production  by  the 
producers  themselves,  by  a  general  internal 
deliverance  from  the  anarchical  forms  of  the 
Revolution. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  propertied  classes, 
although  forcibly  removed  from  power,  refuse 
to  give  up  their  positions  without  a  fight. 
The  Revolution  has  raised  in  an  acute  form 
the  question  of  private  property  in  land  and  the 
means  of  production,  that  is,  the  question  of  the 
life  and  death  of  the  exploiting  classes.  'Politi- 
cally this  means  a  constant — sometimes  covert, 
sometimes  overt — bitter  civil  war.  In  its  turn, 
civil  war  necessarily  brings  in  its  train  anarchist 
tendencies  in  the  movement  of  the  labouring 
masses.  ' 

In  view  of  the  dislocation  of  finance,  industry, 
148 


THE    RUSSIAN    REVOLUTION 

transport,  and  the  food  supply,  a  protracted  civil 
war,  therefore,  is  bound  to  cause  gigantic  diffi- 
culties in  the  way  of  the  constructive  work  of 
organization.  Nevertheless,  the  Soviet  regime 
has  every  right  to  look  forward  to  the  future 
with  confidence.  Only  an  exact  inventory 
of  the  resources  of  the  country,;  only  a 
national  universal  plan  of  organization  of  pro- 
duction,;; only  a  prudent  and  economical  dis- 
tribution of  all  products  can  save  the  country. 
And  this  is  just  Socialism.  Either  a  descent 
to  the  state  of  a  'mere  colony,  or  a  Socialist 
transformation — such  is  the  alternative  which 
faces  our  country. 

This  war  has  undermined  the  foundations  of 
the  entire  capitalist  world,  and  in  this  lies  our 
invincible  strength.  The  Imperialist  ring  which 
is  choking  us  will  be  broken  by  a  proletarian 
revolution.  We  no  more  doubt  this  for  one 
moment  than  we  ever  doubted  the  final  downfall 
of  Tsardom  during  the  long  decades  of  our 
underground  work. 

To  struggle,  to  close  our  ranks,  to  establish 
discipline  of  labour  and  a  Socialist  order,  to 
increase  the  productivity  of  labour,  and  not  to 
be  balked  by  any  obstacle — such  is  our  watch- 
word. History  is  working  for  us.  A  proletarian 
revolution  in  Europe  and  America  will  break 
out  sooner  or  later,  and  it  will  free  not  only  the 
Ukraine,  Poland,  Lithuania,  Courland,  and  Fin- 
land, but  the  whole  of  suffering  humanity. 


149 


Printed  in  Grtat  Britain  by 

UN  WIN  BROTHERS,  LIMITKD 

WOKINQ  AND  LONDON 


War  and  Revolution  in  Asiatic 
Russia    BY  M-  PHILIPS  PRICE 

Demy  Svo.  8/.  6d.  net. 

"  One  of  the  best  books  of  travel  that  have  appeared  for  many  years." 
—  Everyman. 

Russia  and  the  Struggle  for 

Peace  BY  MICHAEL  FARBMAN 

Crown  8vo.  5/.  net. 

"  I  would  make  Michael  S.  Farbman's  '  Russia  and  the  Struggle  for 
Peace  '  compulsory  in  all  schools.  This  is  a  book  to  sweep  the  cobwebs 
away  for  ever.  We  here  learn  the  actual  truth  for  the  first  time  about 
the  Revolution."  —  Evening  News. 

"  A  singularly  valuable  addition  to  our  knowledge.  Nowhere  could 
one  find  a  clearer  or  more  obviously  truthful  account  of  the  great 
upheaval."  —  The  Herald. 

Three  Aspects  of  the  Russian 

Revolution    BY  EMILE  VANDERVELDE 

TRANSLATED  BY  JEAN  E.  H.  FINDLAY 

Cretvn  8vo.  5/.  net.     Postage  $d. 

"  A  valuable  and  original  series  of  notes  on  revolutionary  Russia."  — 
Daily  News. 

From  Autocracy  to  Bolshevism 


%vo.  BY  BARON  GRAVENITZ  $/.  net. 

"A  deeply  interesting  book."  —  Edinburgh  Evening  News. 


The   Spirit   of  Russia 

Studies  in   History,  Literature,  and  Philosophy, 
BY  THOMAS  GARRIGUE   MASARYK 

Sometime  Profes»or  of  Philotophy  at  the  Czech  University  of  Prague  ;  Lecturer 
at  the  School  for  Slavonic  Studies  at  London  University,  King's  College 

TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  GERMAN  BY  EDEN  AND  CEDAR   PAUL 
Demy  Svo.  2    voli.  of  about  500  pages  each.  32;.  net. 

The  author  is  widely  known  on  the  Continent  for  his  championship  (on 
"  realist "  lines)  of  the  cause  of  small  nationalities,  and  in  particular  for 
his  courageous  defence  of  the  claims  of  his  native  Bohemia.  His  writings 
on  philosophical  and  sociological  topics,  some  in  Czech  and  others  in 
German,  have  secured  for  him  a  well-established  position  in  the  field  of  i 
abstract  thought.  From  youth  onwards  he  has  been  interested  in  Russia, 
and  the  work  now  announced  is  the  fruit  of  many  years'  study  of  Russian 
literature  and  of  prolonged  and  direct  personal  acquaintance  with  the 
Russian  people.  The  book  will  serve,  not  merely  to  explain  to  Western 
Europe  the  Russia  that  made  the  revolution,  but  to  guide  us  in  our 
interpretation  of  the  post-revolutionary  developments. 

The     Romance     of    the 

Romanoffs       BY  JOSEPH  MCCABE 

Author  of  "The  Tyranny  of  Shams,"  "The  Soul  of  Europe,"  etc. 
Demy  Svo.  ILLUSTRATED.  loj.  6d.  net. 

"  The  dynasty  flaunts  its  brutal,  sordid,  attractive  and  romantic  career 
through  his  pages." — The  Times. 

"  He  has  produced  a  picture  which  is  complete  and  admirably  clear."- 
Glasgow  Herald. 


Japan 


at   the  Cross  Roads 


BY  A.  M.  POOLEY 

Editor  of  "  The  Secret  Memoirs  of  Count  Hayashi,"  etc.,  etc. 

Demy  Svo.  los.  6J.  net.     Postage  6a. 

"  Extremely  critical  and  of  exceptional  interest." — Daily  News. 

"  Is  arrestingly  candid  and  absorbingly  interesting." — Glasgow  Herald. 

LONDON  :  GEORGE   ALLEN  &   UNWIN  LIMITED 


THE  LIBRARY 
I  UNIVERSITY  OF  C 


University  of  California 

SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 

405  Hilgard  Avenue,  Los  Angeles,  CA  90024-1388 

Return  this  material  to  the  library 

from  which  it  was  borrowed. 


UC  SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 


A     000  656  251     6 


