THE LAST DAYS OF THE 
ROMANOVS 

BY 

GEORGE GUSTAV TELBERG 

PROFESSOR OF LAW IN SARATOV UNIVERSITY AND FORMER MINISTER 

OF JUSTICE OF THE RUSSIAN GOVERNMENT 

AT OMSK 

AND 

ROBERT WILTON 

SPECIAL RUSSIAN CORRESPONDENT FOR 
THE TIMES. LONDON 



ILLUSTRATED 




NEW XBir YORK 
HEORGE H, DORAN COMPANY 



PUBLISHER'S NOTE 

During the night between the i6th and 17th of 
July, 1918, the former Russian Emperor Nicholas 
II, his family, as well as all the persons Attached to 
it, were murdered by the order of the Yekaterinburg 
oviet of workmen's deputies. The news of this crime 
broke through the closed ring that surrounded Bolshe- 
vist Russia aad spread over the entire world. 

At the end of July, 1918, the town of Yekaterin- 
burg was taken from the Bolsheviks by the forces of 
the Siberian Government. Shortly after their occu- 
pation of the district an investigation was ordered to 
be made of the circumstances attendant on the mur- 
der. A judicial examination therefore took place of 
the witnesses connected with the life of the imperial 
family at Czarskoe-Selo, Tobolsk and Yekaterinburg 
by N. A. Sokoloff, the Investigating Magistrate for 
Cases of Special Importance of the Omsk Tribunal. 

Upon the fall of the Kolchak regime, copies of the 
depositions were taken from the archives by M. 
George Gustav Telberg, Professor of Law at the 
University of Saratov and Minister of Justice at 
Omsk, when he fled with the other ministers of the 
Omsk government. / These combined statements re- 
construct the life-story of the imperial family from 
the time of the emperor's abdication until the murder 



PUBLISHER'S NOTE 

of himself, his wife, his children, including the czare- 
vitch, and their few faithful servants in IpatiefFs 
house at Yekaterinburg. 

The translator has endeavored to preserve the orig- 
inal simplicity, and in some cases the crudeness and 
lack of education apparent in the witnesses. Colonel 
Kobylinsky, M. Gilliard and Mr. Gibbes are edu- 
cated men who apparently gave their evidence with- 
out displaying any outward emotion, but, though 
they did not exaggerate the sufferings of thd imperial 
family, they were not eye-witnesses of the final 
hours of their captivity. 

The testimony of the soldiers strikes a more sin- 
ister note. Two of them witnessed most of the daily 
happenings at IpatiefFs house, but they display cer- 
tain evidences of pity and of having been well-dis- 
posed towards the prisoners whose murder they 
condemned. Indeed these men are most insistent 
that the crime was committed by the "Letts." The 
third soldier (Medvedeff) took an active part in 
the murder. 

The narrative of Mr. Robert Wilton which sup- 
plements the translations of the official records is, 
we think, a document of incalculable value. Written 
by a man who for sixteen years was correspondent 
for the London Times in Russia, and who not only 
speaks Russian but was present throughout the inves- 
tigation of the scene of the murder and during the 
search for the relies, his story has a poignancy and 
an intrinsic value that cannot be overestimated. 
vi 



PUBLISHER'S NOTE 

It is proper here to explain to the reader that the 
contents of this volume as represented by the Official 
Depositions in Part I and Mr. Robert Wilton's Nar- 
rative in Part II came into existence quite independ- 
ently and without the design, originally, of publish- 
ing them together. Mr. Wilton, who escaped from 
Siberia after the fall of the Kolchak Government, 
took with him one of three copies of the dossier of 
the official investigation. Upon this original source 
he based his story, adding to it certain facts which 
he had personally gathered. By a most fortunate 
circumstance, George H. Doran Company, who were 
preparing for the press the depositions secured by 
M. George Gustav Telburg, learned of Mr. Wilton's 
narrative, and arrangements were immediately made 
to combine the records in one volume. 

As the two parts of the book are from different 
sources, no effort has been made to secure uniformity 
in certain minor variations in the spellings of proper 
names. The Index in Part III adopts the spelling 
used by Mr. Wilton, but the reader will readily 
recognize the same persons and places in Mr. Tel- 
berg's translation in Part I. 

It will be seen by comparing the two parts that, 
so far as the depositions here published go, they en- 
tirely bear out and give, so to speak, chapter and 
Verse for Mr. Wilton's narrative; and we have every 
reason for stating that, if and when the rest of the 
dossier becomes public, similar affirmation will be 
given to the whole of his thrilling story, which pre- 

vii 



PUBLISHER S NOTE 



sents clearly, succinctly, a full and absolutely au- 
thentic account of this great human tragedy the 
greatest perhaps of all time. 



vm 



CONTENTS 

PART I: TRANSCRIPT or THE DEPOSITIONS OF EYE- 
WITNESSES OF THE CRIME, TAKEN FROM THE ARCHIVES 
BY M. GEORGE GUSTAV TELBERG, MINISTER OF JUSTICE 
AT OMSK. 

CHAPTER PAGE 

I EXAMINATION OF M. GILLIARD .... 15 

II EXAMINATION OF MR. GIBBES .... 38 

III EXAMINATION OF COLONEL KOBYLINSKY , 61 

IV EXAMINATION OF PHILIP PROSKOURIAKOFF . 139 
V EXAMINATION OF ANATOLIE IAKIMOFF . . 160 

VI EXAMINATION OF PAVEL MEDVEDEFF . , 195 

VII RECEIPT OF BELOBORODOFF FOR THE AR- 
RESTED IMPERIAL FAMILY 006 

PART II: THE NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON, 
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT OF The Times (LPNDON),BAS;ED 
UPON THE ORIGINAL DOSSIER OF THE INVESTIGATING 
MAGISTRATE, NICHOLAS ALEXEIEVICH SOKOLOV. 

CHAPTER PAGB 

I PROLOGUE 211 

II THE STAGE AND THE ACTORS .... 222 

III No ESCAPE: ALEXANDRA MISJUDGED . . 232 

IV RAZPUTIN THE PEASANT 243 

V CAPTIVES IN A PALACE 253 

ix 



'CONTENTS 

CHAFTER PAGE 

VI EXILE INT SIBERIA 263 

VII THE LAST PRISON 276 

VIII PLANNING THE CRIME 291 

IX CALVARY- 303 

X " WITHOUT TRACE" 318 

XI DAMNING EVIDENCE 333 

XII ALL THE ROMANOVS 352 

XIII THE JACKALS 369 

XIV BY ORDER OF THE "TsiK" 380 

XV THE RED KAISER 394 

XVI EPILOGUE 404 

PART III: 

I THE MEMBERS OF THE IMPERIAL FAMILY AT 

THE OUTBREAK OF THE REVOLUTION . . . 415 

II CHRONOLOGY OF THE DOCUMENTS . . . 417 

III EXPLANATION OF RUSSIAN NAMES MENTIONED 

IN THE DOCUMENTS 420 

IV ALPHABETICAL INDEX OF NAMES .... 422 



ILLUSTRATIONS 

H.LM. NICHOLAS II, EMPEROR OF RUSSIA . Frontispiece 

PAGE 

THE MARTYRED FAMILY 64 

RAZPUTIN WOUNDED AT His VILLAGE HOME . . 64 

ALEXANDRA'S DESPAIR OVER RAZPUTIN'S DEATH . 65 

EMPRESS ALEXANDRA FEODOROVNA AND THE TZARE- 

VICH ALEXIS NIKOLAEVICH IN LIVADIA (CRIMEA) 65 

THE TZAREVICH ALEXIS AND His SPANIEL JOY, IN 

THE PARK AT TSARSKOE 65 

GRAND DUCHESS OLGA t . 96 

GRAND DUCHESS TATIANA 96 

GRAND DUCHESS MARIA 97 

GRAND DUCHESS ANASTASIA 97 

EMPRESS ALEXANDRA FEODOROVNA IN TOBOLSK . 192 

THE IPATIEV HOUSE IN EKATERINBURG (GENERAL 

VIEW) 192 

YANKEL YUROVSKY, THE MURDERER .... 192 

THE IPATIEV HOUSE, SHOWING THE FENCE STOCK- 
ADE AROUND THE HOUSE 193 

THE TSAR SAWING WOOD IN THE COURTYARD or THE 

GOVERNOR'S PALACE, TOBOLSK 193 

BED-ROOM OF THE EMPEROR AND THE EMPRESS IN 

THE IPATIEV HOUSE 193 

IN THE IPATIEV HOUSE .... 256 

XI . 



ILLUSTRATIONS 

PAGE 

THE GRAND DUCHESSES' ROOM IN THE IPATIEV 

HOUSE - 256 

THE COMMANDANT'S ROOM IN THE IPATIEV HOUSE 257 

THE HALL AND DRAWING-ROOM IN THE IPATIEV 

HOUSE 257 

THE IPATIEV HOUSE: THE ROOM IN THE BASEMENT 

WHERE THE IMPERIAL FAMILY WAS MURDERED . 288 

YANKEL QACOB) SVERDLOV, THE RED TSAR . . 288 

THE EMPRESS'S GREAT DIAMOND PENDANT . . . 288 

A CROSS BELONGING TO THE EMPRESS .... 288 

PEARL EARRING BELONGING TO THE EMPRESS . . 288 

IKONS (HOLY IMAGES) BELONGING TO THE EMPRESS 

AND HER DAUGHTERS ........ 289 

THE ENTRANCE TO THE SHAFT NEAR EKATERINBURG 289 

PLAN OF IPATIEV'S HOUSE AND GROUNDS AND OF 

UPPER AND BASEMENT FLOORS 307 

NEW ENVIRONS OF EKATERINBURG, SHOWING ROAD 
BY WHICH THE BODIES OF THE MEMBERS OF THE 
IMPERIAL FAMILY WERE CARRIED, AND THE PIT 

WHERE THE ASHES WERE BURIED . . . . \ 321 

"FAITHFUL UNTO DEATH" " . . 384 

THE FAULTS OF THE EARLIER INQ.UIRY . . . 384 

AT THE GANINA MINE 385 

THE PYRE AT THE BIRCH TREE 385 

THE HAND OF THE RED JEW MURDERERS . . 385 

ALEXANDRA'S GOOD LUCK SIGN ,.... 408 

THE MYSTERIOUS INSCRIPTION IN THE DEATH 

CHAMBER . ^ . . , . . * 408 



XII 



PARTI 

Transcript of the Depositions of Eye-Witnesses of 
the Crime, Taken from the Archives by 

M. GEORGE GUSTAV TELBERG, 
Minister of Justice at Omsk 



DEPOSITIONS OF EYE-WITNESSES 



EXAMINATION OF M. GILLIARD 

[M. Gilliard was attacked to the imperial household in 
the capacity of French tutor to the grand duchesses and the 
czarevitch. He was with the family at Czarskoe-Selo at 
the outbreak of the revolution, and like most of the othef 
members of the household, he elected to remain under ar- 
rest. M. Gilliard especially mentions the emperor 9 s love 
for his country and his bitterness of heart after the Treaty 
of Brest-Litovsk, and he insists that the attitude of the 
emperor and the empress towards Germany was one of 
hatred and contempt. 

M. Gilliard 9 s deposition is important inasmuch as it in- 
cludes a conversation which he had with Tchemodouroff in 
the latter part of August, 1918. Tchemodouroff then be- 
lieved that the imperial family had not been murdered, but 
had been removed to an unknown destination. M. Gilliard 
did not, however, place muck reliance in this statement. He 
describes his visit to Ipatieff's house and relates a curious 
superstition of the empress, who seems to have placed cre- 
dence in the efficacy of two Egyptian symbols as luck- 
bringers. Editor's Note.] 

On March 5, 1919* the Investigating Magistrate 
for cases of special importance of the Omsk District 
Court, in conformity with Paragraph 443 of the 
Criminal Code Procedure, questioned the man named 
below in the capacity of a witness, notifying him 

15 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

that during the investigation he might be interro- 
gated under oath. 

Replying to the questions that were put to him, 
the witness gave his name as: Peter Andreievitch 
Gilliard, and said: 

Since 1905 I have been giving French lessons to 
the daughters of his majesty. From 1912 I began 
to teach French to the Grand Duke Alexis. I 
started my instructions in Spala, but very shortly 
afterwards they were interrupted, as the grand duke 
met with an accident. I heard about it from other 
people who were attached t& the emperor's family. 
I heard that the Grand Duke Alexis, while swim- 
ming in a pool, fell and hurt his stomach* The 
result of this accident caused his foot to be tempor- 
arily paralysed. He was ill a very long time, con- 
sequently all studies were interrupted. They were, 
however, resumed in 1913, at the time when I be- 
came assistant tutor to the grand duke. 

After that I moved to the palace, where I oc- 
cupied the rooms next to the czarevitch. In 1913 
we went to Crimea and later came to Czarskoe-Selo. 
In the spring of 1913 we went to Crimea, Constance 
and Finland* From Finland we returned to Peter- 
hoflf, in order to meet the President of France, M. 
Poincare, It was in Peterhoff that the imperial fam- 
ily resided at the beginning of the war. 

In. 1915 we lived at Czarskoe-Selo up to the time 
when the emperor assumed supreme command of 

the aimj^During this time I ofteji wtnt with the 

, ^>- ^ 
16 ** 



EXAMINATION OF M. G I L L I A R D 

czarevitch to the Stavka (general army headquar- 
ters), to the front, and generally to every place that 
the emperor took his son. 

At the outbreak of the revolution the emperor 
was at the Stavka and his family lived in Czarskoe- 
Selo. The imperial family passed through many 
alarming moments during this period. All the chil- 
dren had the measles. At first the czarevitch got it 
and later all the grand duchesses in succession. 
Everybody was worried by the uncertainty of the 
situation and ignorance of the fate of the emperor. 
There was unrest amongst the Guards Rifles quar- 
tered in Czarskoe-Selo. One night was particu- 
larly alarming. Fortunately the commotion amongst 
the soldiers was calmed down by the officers. 

The emperor's abdication in behalf of the czare- 
vitch was learned of by the imperial family from 
the general in command of the Svodny guard regi- 
ment. Later the Grand Duke Dmitry Pavlovitch 
came to the palace and officially announced to her 
majesty the news of the abdication of the emperor. 

General Korniloff also came to the palace and 
Informed the empress that she must consider her- 
self under arrest. After General Korniloff s arrival 
her majesty instructed me to say that everyone must 
leave the palace except those who would like to 
stay of their own free will, and who would con- 
sequently have to submit to the routine of those who 
were arrested. Nearly everybody elected to stay 
in the palace, and so did I. During this time the 

17 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

Grand Duchess Maria Nicholaevna was taken ill 
with inflammation of the lungs. After some time 
the emperor arrived at Czarskoe-Selo. 

The restrictions imposed upon the imperial family 
consisted of a certain limitation of their freedom. 
The palace was surrounded by sentries. They were 
allowed to leave the palace to walk in the park only 
during a fixed time and always accompanied by a 
sentry. All the mail went through the hands of the 
commandant of the palace. Kotsebue was the first 
commandant. He was replaced by Korovitchenko 
and the latter was replaced by Kobylinsky who was 
formerly in command of the garrison. 

Kerensky came to Czarskoe-Selo on several oc- 
casions. He visited us in the capacity of the head 
of the new government to observe the conditions of 
our life. His manners and attitude towards the 
emperor were cold and official. His behaviour 
towards him gave me the impression of the treatment 
of the accused by a judge who is convinced of his 
guilt. It looked as if Kerensky believed the em- 
peror was guilty of something and therefore treated 
him coldly. Nevertheless, I must state that Keren- 
sky was always perfectly correct in his manner. 
When addressing the emperor he called him His 
Majesty, Nicholas Alexandrovitch. At the same 
time I must say that during this period Kerensky, 
as well as everybody else, avoided calling the enx- 
peror by his name, as though it were embarrassing 
to them to address him as Nicholas Alexandrovitch. 
18 



EXAMINATION OF M. GILLIARD 

On one occasion Kerensky arrived at the palace 
in the company of Korovitchenko and Kobylinsky 
and confiscated all the emperor's private papers. It 
seemed to me that after Kerensky was through with 
those papers he understood that the emperor had 
done no wrong to his country and he immediately 
changed his attitude and manners towards him. 

During the stay of the imperial family in Czar- 
skoe-Selo several disagreeable incidents took place. 
The first was the confiscation of a toy rifle from the 
Czarevitch, which was done on the request of the 
soldiers. The second incident was the refusal of 
the soldiers to answer the emperor's 'greeting. The 
emperor always addressed the soldiers with words 
of greeting. After the abdication the soldiers used 
to answer: "Sdravstvouyte Gospodin Polkovnik" 
(Good-day, Colonel). On one occasion, after being 
addressed by the emperor, the soldiers remained si- 
lent. It appears, however, that this took place 
not on account of their own decision but by orders 
of some assistant commandant of the palace, whose 
name I do not remember. 

There were days when the imperial family had 
to wait a considerable time in the semicircular hall 
where everybody used to assemble before taking the 
walk in the park. It was always the guards who 
were late and who kept everybody else waiting. 

However, all these incidents were mere trifles in 
comparison to the sufferings that were later inflicted 
on the imperial family. 

19 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

In the middle of July it became known, I cannot 
tell how, that the emperor and imperial family had 
to change their residence from Czarskoe-Selo to some 
other place. At first it was rumoured that it was to 
be a voyage to the south, but later it transpired that 
we were to proceed to Tobolsk. 

The reason that we had to move was due to the 
fears of the government for the safety of the im- 
perial family. During this time the government in- 
tended to take a firm course in handling the affairs 
of the nation. At the same time it feared that such 
a policy would create some outburst amongst the 
population which would have to be checked by armed 
force. Thinking that in the course of the struggle 
we might also be injured, the government made up 
its mind to send the imperial family to a quieter 
place than the vicinity of Petrograd. All this I 
relate to you from the words of her majesty, who 
was informed through Kerensky, as to the decision 
of the government. 

I remember that the following persons moved to 
Tobolsk with the imperial family: Prince Dol- 
goruky, M. Tatischeff, Dr. Botkin, Miss Schneider 
and myself. Later we were, joined in Tobolsk by 
Derevenko, Mr Gibbes and Baroness Buxhoevden, 
who volunteered to stay with the imperial- family. 
, The imperial family was placed in Tobolsk in 
the .house of the governor. I lived with the im- 
perial family. All the other people were placed in 
a house belonging to M. Korniloff, opposite the 

20 



EXAMINATION OF M . GILLIARD 

governor's house. The life in Tobolsk was very 
much as it had been in Czarskoe-Selo. The same 
restrictions were imposed. 

Our guards were composed of soldiers who were 
formerly in the Czarskoe-Selo sharpshooter regi- 
ments. Kobylinsky was, as previously, the com- 
mandant of the house. We were accompanied dur- 
ing our journey to Tobolsk by representatives of 
the government, Makaroff and Vershinin (the lat- 
ter being a member of the Duma). They spent a 
few days in Tobolsk and then departed. Their at- 
titude towards the s imperial family was quite cor- 
rect, and even kindly disposed this was par- 
ticularly true of Makaroff, and especially so in his 
manner towards the children. 

In the middle of October there arrived one Pan- 
kratoff, a commissar of the government, aoco(m- 
panied by his assistant, Nikolsky. They were to 
supervise our life and Kobylinsky was subordinate 
to them. These two men did not wilfully interfere 
with the welfare of the imperial family, but a great 
deal of harm was done by them unknowingly by 
their behaviour towards the guards and they de- 
moralised the morale of the soldiers. 

As far as we could judge, being prisoners, the 
inhabitants of Tobolsk were well disposed towards 
the imperial family. Now and then they sent us 
bon bons, cakes and various sweets. When they 
passed by the house and noticed any members of 
the imperial family, they bowed. 

21 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

The Rifles, who composed our guards, were en 
masse rather benevolent. There were some good 
men among the soldiers, but some of them were 
very bad. Until the Bolshevist revolution the latter 
kept quiet. 

The Bolsheviki brought misfortune to the im- 
perial family as well as to the whole of Russia. The 
Bolshevist revolution immediately reflected on the 
minds of the soldiers and those that were bad and 
evilly disposed became rough in their ways. 

On January 25th the soldiers turned out Pan- 
kratoff and Nikolsky and made up their minds to 
ask for a Bolshevik commissar from Moscow. The 
soldiers forbade the Baroness Buxhoevden to live in 
Korniloff s house. 

The worst came after the Brest-Litovsk treaty. 
The soldiers began to behave in a disgraceful man- 
ner. On one occasion the Cvarevitch noticed on 
the board of the swing on which the Grand Duch- 
esses liked to pass the time, some inscriptions. He 
did not have time to read them. When the emperor 
noticed them he asked Dolgoruky to remove the 
board. Vulgar, disgraceful, cynical and stupid 
words were cut on this board by soldiers' bayonets. 

The imperial family was forbidden by the soldiers 
to visit church. They were allowed to go to church 
only on Dvounadesiaty holidays (very important 
feast-days in the Orthodox religion). The soldiers in- 
sisted that the emperor should remove the shoulder 
straps from his uniform. Twice he refused, but 

22 



EXAMINATION OF M. GILLIARD 

-finally, after Kobylinsky informed the emperor that 
his refusal might result in serious trouble for him- 
self and his family, the emperor had to submit to this 
demand. 

A little hill was made in the garden for the amuse- 
ment of the children. Once the emperor and the 
empress viewed from the top of this small hill the 
departure of a large number of the soldiers (at that 
time many soldiers left on account of the demobilisa- 
tion of the army); but afterward the remaining 
soldiers levelled the hill to the ground. 

Things became worse and worse. It was especially 
severe after all sources of revenue were confiscated 
from the imperial family. This occurred on Febru- 
ary 12th. That day a wire from Moscow was re- 
ceived. I can not tell you who sent it. In this wire 
a new order of life for the imperial family was 
prescribed. Up to this time the imperial family 
had been maintained by the government treasury. 
Their life was quite appropriate and fitting for 
them and ran along in the same way that the former 
emperor and his family had been accustomed to. 

By the order of the Bolshevist authorities, lodg- 
ing, heating and lighting were to be provided for the 
imperial family, everything else had to be obtained 
at the. expense of the family or of those persons 
connected with them. We were also restricted in 
earning of money. I wanted to earn some by giving 
private lessons in the town, but the soldiers would 
not allow me to do so, and told me I was to leave 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

the house altogether in the event that I could not 
adapt myself to conditions as they were. 

By Bolshevist orders the imperial family could 
not spend for themselves and their servants more 
than four thousand, two hundred roubles per month. 
This state of affairs affected life very detrimentally. 
Coffee, butter and cream disappeared from the table. 
Scarcity of sugar was felt very seriously, as sugar 
was distributed in the quantity of half a pound per 
person for each month. Dinner consisted of two 
courses, and for those who were accustomed from 
the time of their birth to entirely different conditions 
of life, it was far more difficult to bear the situation 
than it was for those who were not familiar with the 
luxuries that the imperial family had always en-* 
joyed. 

The lack of resources and the necessity of econ- 
omising made it impossible to continue to pay the 
church chorus for their singing during the divine 
services held at home. The church choristers vol- 
unteered to sing free of charge. After that a small 
fee was still paid to them. 

The number of servants was considerably reduced 
and ten of their staff were discharged. 

Finally the attitude of the soldiers became so 
menacing that Kobylinsky, after losing all hope 
of retaining or regaining control, declared to the 
emperor that he desired to resign from his present 
position. The emperor asked him to stay, and Ko- 
bylinsky yielded to his request. 
24 



EXAMINATION OF M. GILLIARD 

In order to make life a little more cheerful, play- 
lets were staged, in which the children took an active 
part. The emperor tried to find forgetfulness in 
physical labour. He sawed wood with Tatischeff 
and Dolgomky, the daughters or myself. He also 
attended to the lessons of the czarevitch and person- 
ally instructed him in history and geography. 

But all the efforts made by the emperor to con- 
ceal his feelings could not hide from any observant 
person his terrible sufferings. Especially after the 
Brest-Litovsk peace treaty a very marked change 
was noticed in him that indicated his mood and 
mental suffering. I could say that his majesty was 
affected by this treaty with an overwhelming grief. 

During this time the emperor on several occasions 
spoke of politics to me a thing he had never al- 
lowed himself to do before. It seemed as if his soul 
was yearning for the companionship of another soul, 
hoping by such companionship to find relief from the 
intensity of his grief. I could not relate everything 
he told me, but the central idea of his words and 
thoughts was that up to the moment of the Brest- 
Litovsk treaty he believed in the future prosperity of 
Russia after that treaty he lost all faith. 

During this time he criticised Kerensky and 
Goutchkoff in sharp terms, considering them to be 
the most guilty for the collapse of the army. The 
emperor thought that by their weakness and incapac- 
ity the army disintegrated, and the result was that 
it opened the way for the Germans to corrupt Rus- 

25 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

sia. He regarded the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk as a 
disgrace and as treason on the part of Russia to- 
wards her Allies. He said : "And those who dared 
to accuse her majesty of treason have in the end 
turned out to be the real traitors." 

The emperor looked upon Lenin and Trotzky, 
the leaders of the Bolshevist movement, as German 
agents who had sold Russia for a large sum of 
money. 

After the Brest-Litovsk treaty a profound disdain 
was felt by the emperor and empress towards the 
German government and Emperor Wilhelmu They 
both felt deeply that the German government and 
Emperor Wilhelm had lowered themselves by deal- 
-'ing with the Bolsheviki and by resorting to such 
outrageous methods of warfare. 

Such was the tenor of our life during February 
and March. On March 3oth a delegate* previously 
sent to Moscow by the committee of our soldiery 
returned to Tobolsk. He brought a written order 
to Kobylinsky which stated that our life from this 
time on must be more severely supervised* We 
were all to live in the governor's house and a new 
plenipotentiary commissar had been ordered to 
Tobolsk for the purpose of enforcing new restric- 
tions, On April gth this commissar arrived. His 
name was lakovIefL On April loth he came to our 
house for the first time and was received by the 
emperor. On the same day he visited the czarevitch 
who at that time was sick. He returned shortly 
26 



EXAMINATION OF M. OILLIARD 

after his departure with an assistant (whose name 
I do not remember). They both visited the czare- 
vitch* On the same day lakovleff was received by 
the empress, lakovleff made quite a favourable im- 
pression on the emperor, who told me that he thought 
lakovleff not so bad, and that he believed him to 
be quite straight. 

The reason for lakovleff's arrival was quite a 
puzzle to us. This puzzle was solved on April 12th. 
On that date lakovleff went to the emperor and 
announced that he had orders to take him away 
from Tobolsk, The emperor replied that he would 
not leave Tobolsk, as he could not be separated from 
his son who was so ill (the czarevitch during this 
period suffered from the same affliction he had in 
Spala in 1912, with the difference that this time the 
bruise involved paralysis of the right foot), and that 
he did not intend to leave his family. lakovleff an- 
swered that he was merely fulfilling his instructions, 
and as the emperor refused to leave Tobolsk, a choice 
of two decisions had to be made: Either lakovleff 
must refuse to obey the orders, in which case another 
commissar with fewer scruples would be sent; or he 
must employ force in imposing the order. At the 
same time lakovleff told the emperor that he might 
be accompanied by any other persons he desired. " 
The only thing that could be done was for the em- 
peror to submit to lakovleff s demands. Everything 
that I have told in this connection I know from the 
words of her majesty. 

37 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

Nobody knew where the emperor was to be taken. 
His majesty inquired of lakovleff in advance, but 
the latter answered in a way that did not make 
the matter clear. Kobylinsky told us that lakovleff 
at first informed him the destination was to be Mos- 
cow, but that he later said he did not know where 
the emperor was going to be taken. 

All this sort of thing was intensely painful and 
humiliating for the imperial family, all of whom 
suffered most acutely. Her majesty was greatly tor- 
tured by having to decide whether to accompany 
the emperor or stay with the czarevitch. 

She made up her mind that she would go with 
the emperor and it was decided that the Grand 
Duchess Maria Kicholaevna should accompany 
them- The rest of the family was to stay in Tobolsk 
until the recovery of the czarevitch* 

lakovleff fixed the time of departure for four 
o'clock in the morning of April 13th* The evening 
before we all had tea together- The emptwr and 
empress wished us farewell and thanked us all for 
our services. 

At three o' clock in the morning the carts arrived 
at the door. They were wretched looking vehicles 
with plated bodies and had no seats and no springs. 
One had to sit on the bottom,, stretching out the feet. 
Only o0e telega (peasant cart) had a "capot" 
(hood). In this cart we decided to place her maj* 
esty* There was hardly anything 00 the bottom of 
the carriages* We went to the court yard where 
28 



EXAMINATION OF M OILLIARD 

an employe by the name of Kirpitchnikoff kept his 
pigs. There was some straw in stock. This straw 
we used for covering the bottom of the cart that 
was supplied with a hood and, I think, we put some 
straw also on the bottoms of some other carts. In the 
covered cart we also put a mattress. The emperor 
desired to go with her majesty and Maria Nicho- 
laevna* lakovleff insisted that the emperor should 
ride in the same cart as he did. They all left on April 
I3th shortly after four o'clock in the morning. 

At this time the following persons departed from 
Tobolsk: The emperor and empress, Grand Duchess 
Maria Nicholaevna, Botkin, Dolgoruky, Tchemod- 
ouroff, Sedneff and Demidova. They were accom- 
panied by six Rifles men and two officers Mat- 
veieff and Nabokoff, as well as by soldiers of lakov- 
leffs detachment. 

Some time after the departure one of the coach- 
men brought us a short note from Maria Nichol- 
aevna* She said in her note that the conditions , of 
travelling were extremely hard, that the road was 
bad and the carriage was awfuL 

Later Kobylinsky received a wire from Nabokoff 
announcing the arrival of the party at Tumen. . 
Greatly to the surprise of everybody Kobylinsky sud- 
denly received a telegram from Matveieff stating 
that the emperor and all the persons in his party 
weie held up In Yekaterinburg. This was quite un- 
expected, as we all thought that the emperor was to 
be taken to Moscow* 

29 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

On April 24th a letter came from the empress. 
She wrote that they had all been placed in two rooms 
of the Ipatieff house, that they felt very much 
crowded, and that the only place where they could 
walk was a small garden that was very dusty. She 
wrote also that all their belongings had been 
searched, even "medicines." In the same letter in 
very discreet language she made us understand that 
we should take from Tobolsk all our precious things. 
As previously agreed, she used in her letter the word 
"medicines" instead of "jewels/ 7 Later Tegleva 
received a letter from Demidova, undoubtedly writ- 
ten by order of her majesty. In this letter we were 
instructed how to deal with jewels, instead of which 
she used the expression "SednefPs belongings/* 

On April 25th two officers, as well as five sol- 
diers who escorted the emperor, returned to 
Tobolsk and told us the following story : lakovleff 
took the emperor to Omsk. About one hundred 
versts before arriving at Omsk he took the train and 
proceeded to Omsk alone. After that he came back 
and turned the train towards Yekaterinburg. The 
commissars in Yekaterinburg held up the train* 
Dolgoruky was arrested and taken to prison directly 
from the station. All the officers and men were also 
put tinder arrest in some cellar, where they were 
kept for two days, and let free only on the third day 
and after some protest was made. The general idea 
to be gathered from their narrative was that the 
detention of the train and the party was unexpected 
30 



EXAMINATION OF M . G I L L I A R D 

by lakovleff. They told us that he was hustling 
around all over the place, but was unable to accom- 
plish anything. It was also told us that later, 
Inkovleff proceeded independently from Moscow and 
wired to Kobyllnsky and Hohriakoff (the Chair- 
man of the Tobolsk Soviet), that he resigned from 
his mission of commissar to the imperial family. 

We started with the preparations for our trip. On 
April 25th the chairman of the local soviet, Hohriak- 
off, visited our house for the first time. After that 
he called on us frequently, urging us and hurrying 
our departure. I remember that on May 6th, the 
birthday of the emperor, the grand duchesses wanted 
to have divine service. Hohriakoff forbade it, say- 
ing that no time should be wasted. On May yth, at 
eleven o'clock in the morning, we moved to the 
steamer Russ and about three or four o'clock that 
day departed from Tobolsk, We were escorted by 
a detachment commanded by Rodionoff, which was 
composed chiefly of Letts. Rodionoff did not behave 
well; he locked the cabin door, in which were the 
czarevitch and Nagorny. All the other cabins^ in- 
cluding those of the Grand Duchesses, were locked 
alsov by his order. 

On May 9th we reached Tumen and the same day 
took a tram. We arrived at Yekaterinburg on 
May loth at two a. m. During the whole night 
we were switching from one station to another and 
being transferred from one track to another. Ap- 
" procdmately at nine o'clock the train was stopped 

3* 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

between two stations. It was muddy and there was 
a continuous drizzling rain. Five isvostchiks (cabs) 
were awaiting us at the station. Rodionoff, with 
some commissars, approached the car where the 
children were placed. The grand duchesses walked 
out of the can Tatiana Nicholaevna carried in one 
hand her pet dog and in the other a hand bag, the 
latter with great difficulty, dragging it on the pave- 
ment. Nagorny wanted to help her, but was roughly 
pushed aside, I noticed that Nagorny went in the 
same cab as the czarevitch. I remember that in every 
one of the other cabs there was a commissar or some 
other Bolshevik agent. I wanted to leave the car 
and wish them good*bye, but I was held up by a 
sentry. I never thought at that moment that I 
was seeing all of them for the last time; and I did 
not even know that I was then already discharged 
from the service of the imperial family* 

At last our train came into the station. About 
three hours later I saw Tatischeff, Hendrikova and 
Schneider being taken out of the train and escorted 
by soldiers. A little later HaritonofF, the little Sed- 
neff, Volkoff and Troupp were also taken away. I 
had almost forgotten to say that the children were 
accompanied by Dr. Derevenko. In a little while 
Rodionoff came and announced to us that: we "were 
not wanted," and that we were "free*** The Bar- 
oness Buxhoevden was then transferred to our ear* 

In about three days we received an order from 
the Soviet to leave the Perm district and return to 



EXAMINATION OF M- GILLIARP 

Tobolsk. We could not fulfil the order as the way 
was cut off by the advancing Czechs, so we stayed 
in Yekaterinburg, During this time I visited the 
town and had a look at the Ipatieff hou^e. 

On the 14th or 15th of May I witnessed the fol- 
lowing: I was walking on the streets of Yekaterin- 
burg with Derevenko and Mr. Gibbes. While we 
were passing IpatiefPs house we noticed that Sed- 
neff was sitting in a cab surrounded by soldiers who 
carried rifles with fixed bayonets; in another cab 
Nagorny was seated* When the latter looked up 
he saw us and looked at us for quite a long time 
but did not make a single movement that could 
betray to the people surrounding him that he 
knew us. 

The cabs, surrounded by horsemen, quickly drove 
to the centre of the town. We followed them as fast 
as we could and finally saw them disappearing in the 
direction of the prison, 

Our party consisted of eighteen persons and we 
proceeded to Tumen* At Kainishlov the soviet did 
not allow us to go any further. We stayed there 
for ten days* It was dirty and the whole place was 
infected by disease. Finally we were attached to a 
train full of Serbs and we arrived at Tumen. 

We suffered very severely* but at present I do 
not want to speak about my personal suffering. 

In the latter part of August I was visited by 
Tchemodouroff. His first words were: "Thank 
God, the emperor, her majesty and the children are 

33 



THE LAST PAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

alive all the others are killed/ 1 He told me also 
that he was in the rooms of the Ipatieff house where 
"Botkin and others" were shot. He told me that 
he had seen the bodies of Sedneff and Nagorny, 
whom he recognised by their clothes and that their 
bodies were put in a coffin and buried. He told 
me that all the others were obliged to dress them- 
selves in soldiers' uniforms and had been taken away, 
It was difficult for me to understand Tchemodour- 
off, as he talked very wildly. 

Tchemodouroff also told me that the life of the 
imperial family in Yekaterinburg was terrible, that 
all of them were very badly treated and that they 
had their meals together with the servants. The 
commandant, Avdeieff, had his meals also with the 
imperial family; he was often drunk and sometimes 
came into the room where the imperial family was 
without his tunic. 

Tchemodouroff also told me that Avdeieff often 
behaved towards the emperor in an indecent and in- 
sulting manner. For example, during the meals, 
when he wanted to help himself from the dish, he 
stretched his hands before the emperor and her maj- 
esty and in doing so touched the emperor's face with 
his elbow* 

The grand duchesses after their arrival at Yekat* 
erinburg slept on the floor. The Bolsheviki took 
away from her majesty a little bag which she used 
to hold in her hand, and also a gold chain that sup* 
ported the holy images by the czarevitch's bed* 
34 



EXAMINATION OF M . GILLIARD 

After TchemodourofFs arrival Mr. Gibbes and my- 
self went to Yekaterinburg for the purpose of giv- 
ing assistance to Sergeeff, a member of the court. 
Tchemodouroff told us that Sergeeff was in charge 
of the investigation of the fate of the imperial fam- 
ily. Together with Sergeeff we visited the Ipatieff 
house and inspected the room that had the bullet 
holes on the wall and on the floor. In this house I 
found two "Egyptian signs" which the empress had 
the habit of drawing on various things for good luck. 
One of these signs I noticed on the wall paper 
of her majesty's room, the other on the side of the 
window in a room where, under the Egyptian sign* 
the date was written in pencil: 17/30 April the 
date of the arrival of her majesty in Yekaterinburg. 
My attention was also attracted to the stoves ; they 
were all full of various burned articles. I recognised 
a considerable number of burned things such as tooth- 
and hair-brushes, pins and a number of small things 
bearing the initials: "A. F." [Alexandra Feodor- 
ovna,] 

I got the impression that if the imperial family 
had been taken away from Yekaterinburg, they must 
have been taken as they were, without any of their 
belongings. All the things they might have taken 
with them were burned. Nevertheless, at the time 
I left the house I could not believe that the imperial 
family had perished. It seemed to me that there 
was such a small number of bullet holes in the room 
I hod inspected that everybody could not have beea 

35 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

executed. When, a considerable time later, I re- 
turned from Yekaterinburg to Tumen, Volkoff 
called on me. I did not recognise him at first, as I 
had read in the newspapers that after the attempt on 
the life of Lenin, Hendrikova, Schneider and 
Volkoff were shot. 

Volkoff told me that he was taken directly from 
the train and put in the Yekaterinburg prison. From 
this prison he, Hendrikova and Schneider were 
transferred to a prison at Perm, Tatischeff was also 
in prison in Yekaterinburg* He was once taken out 
of prison but was never put back* I could hardly 
understand from Volkoff's words what happened to 
Tatischeff, Volkoff told me that he had seen in 
Tatischeffs hands a written Bolshevik order com- 
manding him to leave the Perm district. In the 
prison Volkoff was put in the same cell with the 
valet of the Grand Duke Michael Alexandrovitcbu 
The valet said that when the grand duke resided in 
Perm, four armed men called on him late at night. 
One of them aimed his pistol at the valet and ordered 
him to stand stilL The others told the grand duke 
that he had to follow them. The grand duke refused 
to obey their orders unless he were asked to do so 
by a member of the soviet personally knowti to him* 
Ih reply one of the armed men went up to the 
grand 'duke, took him by the collar and grumbled : 
"Here is one more of the Romanoffs/* 

On one occasion Volkoff, Hendrikova, Schneider 
and some other people were taken out of prison to 

36 



EXAMINATION OF M. GILLIARD 

the woods. Volkoff understood they were all going 
to be shot, so he started running. After he got out 
of danger and stopped, he heard the sounds of vol- 
leys from the place where the others had been left. 
He believes that Hendrikova and the rest were mur- 
dered- He thinks that the Bolsheviki considered 
him dead, because they were firing at him when he 
was running, and when he accidentally fell, he heard 
a voice say: "He's done for." 

About the fate of the Grand Duke Michael, Volk- 
off related the following: The grand duke had to sub- 
mit to force and followed the armed men. One 
of these men remained with the valet to prevent 
him from calling for help. When this man left the 
valet ran to the soviet and told everything that had 
happened. A tumult started in the soviet, but never- 
theless, the members of the soviet were in no hurry 
to start a pursuit. About an hour later they began 
looking for the grand duke. It was very hard to get 
any definite information from Volkoff about the fate 
of the Grand Duke Michael. 

I recall another detail of VolkofPs narrative: 
When the grand duke followed the strangers the 
valet said to him: "Your highness, doa't forget 
to take your medicine from the stove shelf/* 

I have nothing more to declare. My statement 
has been read to me and it is correctly written. 

(Signed} GIXXURD, 
" N. SOKOLOFF. 



37 



n 

EXAMINATION OF MR. GIBBES 

f The deposition of Mr. Gibbes should prove interesting 
to the public as being that of an Englishman who was 
wholly and unselfishly devoted to the imperial family. 
Sidney Gibbes acted as tutor to the czarevitch* and after the 
arrest of the emperor and his family ', he followed them to 
Tobolsk without a thought for his own safety* 

Mr. Gibbes knew the emperor and the empress intimately 
during these days of sorrow^ and his deposition shows that 
the czar was genuinely affected by the Treaty of Brest** 
Litovsk and the subsequent Red ruin of Russia* These 
recollections are absolutely unbiased, and there is no reason 
to doubt their accuracy. Editor's Note,] 

On July I, 1919, the Investigating Magistrate 
for Cases of Special Importance of the Omsk Tri- 
bunal, N. A. Sokoloff, questioned in Yekaterinburg 
the man named below in conformity with Paragraph 
443 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, in the 
capacity of a witness, and the witness stated, in 
reply to questions : 

My name is Sidney Ivanovitch Gibbes* Up to the 
year 1916 I was a visiting teacher of the English 
language to the grand duchesses and the czarevitch. 
I started my lessons with the Grand Duchesses Olga 
Nicholaevna, Tatiana Nicholaevna and Maria Nich* 
olaevna in 1908* When Anastasia grew up I be- 

38 



EXAMINATION OF MR. GIBBES 

gan to give her lessons also. I started to give instruc- 
tions to the czarevitch in 1914. In 1916 I was ap- 
pointed tutor to the czarevitch. The same year I 
moved to the Yekaterinensky Palace. In 1917 the 
duties of tutor to the czarevitch were performed 
partly by myself and partly by Gilliard. 

During the early part of the revolution the Im- 
perial family resided in Czarskoe-Selo. The empress 
and all the children were there. The emperor was 
at the Stavka. At the beginning of the revolution 
all the children were taken ill with the measles. The 
first to be attacked by that disease was the czarevitch 
and after him, all the daughters in succession. 

Personally I did not observe how the news of the 
revolution was taken by the empress. I heard from 
someone who was near to her that she wept. As far 
as I know the empress, my conviction is that she 
did not expect the revolution. It seemed to me that 
the empress thought that only a few concessions 
ought to have been made. The revolution was a^ 
blow to her and therefore she suffered, but being 
a firm character she did not cry very much. 

The empress and the imperial family were arrested 
by General Korailoff. I was not present at the pal- 
ace during the time of the arrest. I can not tell 
how it happened, I know that Korniloff was re- 
ceived by her majesty and that he announced to her 
that she was under arrest. The empress told me 
about that. She did not give me any details; she 
just related all that b a general way and, at the 

39 



THE LAST PAYS OF THE KOMAKOVS 

same time, added that she was very cold towards 
Korniloff and did not give him her hand. After 
Korniloff's announcement of the arrest I was not 
allowed into the palace. My request for admittance 
met with a negative response. The provisional gov- 
ernment would not allow me to stay with the im- 
perial family. I remember this fact distinctly. I 
saw the letter which stated so. It bore the signa- 
ture of five ministers. At the present time I 'do not 
remember their names, but I have it plainly in my 
memory that there were the signatures of five min- 
isters. It was stated in my application that I was 
giving lessons to the children. I can not tell whether 
the answer also carried the signature of the minister 
of public education. Being an Englishman I con- 
sidered all this very funny. 

Such is the reason why I was not allowed to be 
with the Imperial family during the time of their 
stay in Gzarskoe-Selo, and consequently, I did not 
see anything of their life during that period of time. 

Later I heard in Tobolsk that some soldiers and 
officers in Czarskoe-Selo behaved roughly towards 
the imperial family. The emperor himself told me 
in Tobolsk that on one occasion an officer refused 
to shake hands with him, explaining to him that he 
was on duty, and, therefore, had no right to shake 
hands. The emperor also spoke to me a little about 
Kerensky. He said that Kerensky was very nervous 
when he spoke with him. In fact, once he was so 
nervous that he grabbed an ivory knife from the 
40 



EXAMINATION OF MR. GIBBBS 

wall and nervously began bending it so badly that 
the emperor was afraid he would break the knife, 
and so he took it away from him. The emperor also 
told me that Kerensky believed that he (the em- 
peror) wanted to make a separate peace with Ger- 
many. The emperor denied that this was so. Keren- 
sky insisted,, and got nervous. I can not tell 
whether the private papers of the emperor were 
searched by Kerensky or not; but the emperor told 
me that Kerensky believed he had some papers that 
indicated his desire of making peace with Germany. 
I knew the emperor well and I understood the feel- 
ing of disdain he had towards Kerensky, when he 
spoke to me on those subjects* 

Kerensky was very nervous the day of the de- 
parture of the imperial family from Czarskoe-Selo. 
During the night he telephoned to the minister of 
communication, insisting upon his coming at once 
to Czarskoe-Selo. The minister of communication 
was in bed at this time, but that fact did not deter 
Kerensky* 

I can not tell 1 any thing else about the life of the 
imperial family in Czarskoe-Selo. I was devoted to 
the family a&d I wanted to be near them. I went 
to Tobolsk of my own free will. I arrived irt To- 
bolsk in the beginning of October. From Tumen I 
travelled with Klavdia Michaelovna Bitner. 

For two days I lived in KomilofFs house. On, 
the third day, at one p. m. I was called by the em- 
pcror. He received me in his workroom. The em* 

4* 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

press and the czarevitch were also present. I was 
very glad to see them and they were very glad to 
see me. At this time the empress began to realise 
that not all the people who had been devoted to 
her were unfaithful. 

Our stay in Tobolsk was altogether very agreeable. 
I did not see anything very objectionable in the con- 
ditions of our life. Certainly there were some dis- 
advantages as compared to what it had previously 
been; there were lots of trifles that created friction, 
but one could ge;t used to them. 

We all used to work very hard. The empress 
was teaching theology to the children (all the chil- 
dren took lessons except Olga Nicholaevna who had 
completed her course of studies in 1914). She also 
taught a little German to Tatiana Nicholaevna. 
The emperor personally gave lessons in history to the 
czarevitch* Klavdia Michaelovna Bitner was giv- 
ing instruction in mathematics and the Russian lan- 
guage to the Grand Duchesses Maria, Anastasia and 
the czarevitch. Hendrikova gave lessons in history 
to Tatiana Nicholaevna. I was instructor in Eng- 
lish. 

The lessons started at nine a. m. and continued 
up to eleven o'clock* From eleven till twelve o'clock 
the children were free to take a walk. Studies were 
resumed at twelve and continued for an hour* At 
one p, m, lunch was served, and after that coffee was 
drunk* According to the doctor's advice the czar* 
evitch had to rest a little on the sofa after lunch* 
42 



EXAMINATION OF MR. GIBBES 

During his rest Gilliard or myself used to read to 
him aloud. After that Nagorny dressed the czare- 
vitch and we went out for a walk till about four or 
five o'clock. After we returned the emperor gave a 
lesson in history to the czarevitch. After the lesson 
the czarevitch liked very much to play a game 
called: "The slower you ride the farther you go." 
We divided into two parties: The czarevitch, Gil- 
liard or myself were one party; Dolgoruky and 
Schneider the other. The czarevitch used to be 
extremely fond of that game. Schneider also used 
to put her heart into the game and fussed a little 
with Dolgoruky over it. This was quite funny, 
We played the game nearly every day and Schneider 
always used to say that she would never play the 
game again. 

From six to seven p. m, the czarevitch took lessons 
with me or with Gilliard. From seven to eight p. m. 
he prepared his lessons for the next day. Dinner 
was served at eight p. m. After dinner the family 
assembled upstairs. Sometimes we played cards. I 
played double patience with Schneider. Tatischeff, 
Olga Nicholaevna, Botkin, Schneider, Gilliard and 
Dolgoruky played bridge. The children and the em- 
peror occasionally played bezique. At times the em- 
peror read aloud. 

Sometimes the Grand Duchesses Olga, Maria, and 
Anastasia would go up to Demidova's room where 
Toutelberg, Ersberg and Tegleva had their meals. 
Occasionally Gilliard, Dolgoruky, the czarevitch or 

43 



THE LAST PAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

myself used to accompany them. We stayed some 
time in this room and had plenty of jokes and 
laughter. 

The emperor got up early. At nine a. m. he al- 
ways had tea in his workroom and read till eleven 
a. m. He then had a walk in the garden and during 
the walk always took some physical exercise. In To- 
bolsk he frequently used to saw logs. With some 
assistance the emperor built up a platform on the 
roof of the orangery. A staircase which was con- 
structed by our combined efforts led to the plat- 
form. The emperor liked very much to sit on this 
platform when the weather was stormy* Up till 
noon the emperor took his exercises, after which 
he always used to go to his daughters' room where 
sandwiches were served. Later he retired to his quar- 
ters and worked till lunch time. After lunch the 
emperor took a walk or worked in the garden till 
dusk. At five p. m. the family had tea, after which 
the emperor used to read till supper time* 

The empress got up at different times, sometimes 
much later than others. Sometimes she was ready 
with everybody else, but she was never seen by 
strangers in the morning. There were times when 
the empress came out only for lunch. In the morn* 
ing she occupied herself with her children or worked 
at something. She preferred fancy work: embroidery 
or painting. When there was nobody in the house, 
and she was left all by herself, she played the piano. 

The lunch and dinner were good. At lunch we 
44 



EXAMINATION OF MR. GIBBES 

used to have soup, fish, meat and dessert. Coffee 
was served upstairs. The dinner was similar to 
the lunch, with the difference that some fruits were 
served. 

If the empress was present at dinner we used to 
sit in the following order: The emperor in the mid- 
dle of the table; opposite him, the empress. To the 
right of the emperor, Hendrikova, and next to her 
the Grand Duchess Maria. To the left of the em- 
peror, Schneider and Dolgoruky. To the empress's 
right, the czarevitch; to her left, Tatischeff and the 
Grand Duchess Tatiana. Gilliard was seated at the 
end of the table and opposite to him were the Grand 
Duchess Anastasia and myself. If the empress dined 
upstairs her place was taken by the Grand Duchess 
Qlga. 

Botkin always dined with the imperial family, 
but had his lunch with his own family. He was 
seated with the Grand Duchess Olga and the czare- 
vitch* Sometimes on holy days Dr. Derevenko and 
his son Kolia were invited to dinner- Dinner was 
cooked by Haritonoff. The food was good and 
there was plenty of everything. 

Besides dinner and lunch* tea was served twice 
daily. In the morning the emperor had tea with the 
Grand Duchess Olga in his workroom. Tea in the 
evening was always served in the emperor's work- 
room and only the family was present. 

At the time of my arrival in Tobolsk two com- 
missars, Pankratoff and Nikolsky, stayed there. 

45 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

Pankratoff was not a bad sort of a fellow, but showed 
weakness, and was influenced by Nikolsfcy. Pank- 
ratoff did not cause us any uneasiness. The em* 
peror used to talk to him and Pankratoff told him 
many interesting things about Siberia, where he used 
to live in exile. The emperor spoke in a rather 
sarcastic way about Pankratoff calling him, "the 
little man" he was rather small in stature. Nikol- 
sky was rough and the family did not like him. I 
do not remember if Nikolsky ever made us feel 
uncomfortable or if ever the czarevitch cried 
on account of his rudeness* During the Bolshevik 
period no commissars were allowed in our house. 
It seems to me that some commissars arrived in 
Tobolsk, but were not recognised by the soldiers. 
The first commissar that ever entered the house was 
lakovlefL 

The Bolshevist revolution at first paid no atten- 
tion to us and it looked as if we were completely for- 
gotten. However, finally the Bolsheviki remem- 
bered us, and our money allowance was stopped 
short. We were given a soldier's ration and were 
ordered to limit our necessities to 150 roubles per 
week* Several servants were discharged, and we 
began to get very inferior food. Only two courses 
were served soup and meat, 

I did not speak to the emperor about the Brest- 
Litovsk Treaty but I noticed that the emperor suf* 
fered greatly after the Bolshevist revolution. The 
emperor abdicated because he thought it would be 



EXAMINATION OF MR. GIBBES 

better for Russia. It turned out to be worse. He 
did not expect that and suffered dreadful remorse. 
After we received the news that the state of affairs 
in Russia was very bad, I twice saw the emperor 
looking very much upset, remaining silent for a long 
time. His personal situation did not grieve him 
and he endured it wthout repining. 

lakovleff arrived in Tobolsk in the beginning of 
April, at the time when the czarevitch was sick. I 
was sitting by the czarevitch's bed. The emperor, 
accompanied by lakovleff and another man, who 
seemed to be his assistant, entered the room. lakov- 
leff looked at the czarevitch. The emperor said: 
"My son and his tutor." 

lakovleff did not appear to me to be a man of 
culture. He looked more like a clever sailor. I do 
not remember the appearance of the other man. 
lakovleff gazed attentively at the czarevitch, after 
which they departed* Later the emperor and lakov- 
leff returned to the room, but without the third 
man* They looked at the czarevitch and kept si- 
lent. A few days later I was again in the czare- 
vitch's bedroom- He was very ill and suffered 
greatly* The empress promised to see him after 
lunch. He waited and waited, but no one came. All 
the time he called: "Mamma, mamma/* I went out 
of the room and looked down the hall. I no- 
ticed the emperor, the empress and lakovleff stand- 
ing in the middle of the hall. I did not hear what 
they were talking about. I returned to the czare- 

47 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

vitch's room. He began to cry and asked: "Where 
is Mamma?" Once more I left the room. Some- 
body told me that the empress was anxious about 
something and this was the reason why she had not 
come to see the czarevitch. I was told that she 
was alarmed because the emperor had to be taken 
away from Tobolsk. I returned to the room. Be- 
tween four and five o'clock the empress came. She 
was quite calm, but her face showed traces of tears. 
Being afraid to disturb the czarevitch she began to 
tell me in an undertone that the emperor must 
leave Tobolsk, and that she and the Grand Duchess 
Maria were to go with him, and that as soon as the 
czarevitch was well the others would all follow 
them. The czarevitch overheard her but did not 
ask her to tell us where we were going, and wishing 
to avoid embarrassment, I did not ask her either. 
Soon after that I left the room. I thought that 
during the time they were preparing themselves for 
the journey, they probably would not like anyone 
to be present. They dined alone upstairs. 

In the evening we were all invited to the em* 
press's boudoir (the green room), where the tea 
was served. Conversation ran on travelling* We 
spoke mostly of luggage. At two o'clock the coaches 
arrived, one of them had a hood. I wished them 
good-bye in the lobby. The emperor took a place with 
lakovleff, the empress with the Grand Duchess 
Maria, and they departed. They were accompanied 
by Botkin, Tchemodouroff, Dolgoruky, Demidova 



EXAMINATION OF MR, GIBBES 

and Sedneff. We did not know the place of their 
destination. Not one of us had any idea that they 
were to be taken to Yekaterinburg, We all thought 
they were going to Moscow or to the east. The 
children were of the same opinion. We were all 
very anxious. We did not know what was going 
to happen to them. Of the persons left behind Tati- 
scheff was the senior; and of the remaining part 
of the imperial family, Tatiana was considered 
senior in the place of the Grand Duchess Olga. 

The czarevitch was gradually recovering, though 
very slowly. The first news we received was brought 
by an isvostchik who drove one of the coaches used 
by the family. 

We heard that the family reached Tumen safely. 
Later, somebody sent a wire that they were "held 
up'* at Yekaterinburg. We were badly stricken by 
this news, 

lakovleff told us nothing of Yekaterinburg and 
I heard someone saying that lakovleff himself was 
sent from Moscow and not from Yekaterinburg, 
and I don't think there is any doubt about this. 

Some time after that Hohriakoff came to our 
house* It turned out that previously to that time 
this man had spent quite a considerable time in To- 
bolsk, but we had never seen him in the house be* 
fore. It was thought that he was sent by lakovleff. 
When he came he wanted to see the czarevitch. Pos- 
sibly he did not believe in his illness as, after he 
left him, he immediately returned expecting that the 

49 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

czarevitch would get right up. About three days 
before our departure our guards were replaced by 
a detachment of Reds. This detachment was under 
the command of a certain Rodionoff. This man 
did not make a very bad impression on me. We 
were all very much interested in him. Tatischeff 
had known him before, but could not remember who 
he was nor where he had seen him. Hendrikova 
also knew him. Tatischeff thought he had seen 
Rodionoff in Berlin; and Hendrikova believed she 
had seen him in Verjbolovo. Tatischeff was formerly 
attached to the Emperor Wilhelm, and he thought 
he had seen Rodionoff in the Russian Embassy in 
Berlin. Tatischeff asked him what he did before. 
Rodionoff, not wishing to give a reply, answered: 
"I have forgotten/* We were very much interested 
in all that. When speaking about Rodionoff, Ta- 
tischeff used good-naturedly the expression : "My ac- 
quaintance/' Personally, I remember the follow- 
ing: In 1916 I was in Petrograd, where I visited 
an acquaintance of mine by the name of Ditveiler, 
I believe he was a Jew and a Russian subject. He 
used to work in a rope concern. During our con- 
versation I asked him where he had been* He an- 
swered that he spent his time with so and so (I 
have forgotten the name at present) * 'I asked Dit* 
veiler who the man was and Ditveiler answered: 
"Probably a German spy," and he added that an 
officer by the name of Rodionoff was present at one 
of their meetings. 
50 



EXAMINATION OF MR. GIBBES 

Rodionoff did not allow us to lock the doors of 
our bedrooms at night. 

We left for Tumen on a steamer. A few days 
before our departure Hohriakoff told us that he did 
not know whether we were going to be allowed to 
stay in the house which was occupied by the em- 
peror, the empress and the Grand Duchess Maria 
in Yekaterinburg or not. Rodionoff told us that 
from now on things were going to be much worse for 
us than they had been. In Tumen the children, 
Hendrikova, Schneider, Tatischeff, Buxheovden, 
Nagorny and Volkoff were placed in a passenger 
wagon, the rest of us were placed in a box car (Tep- 
loushka). We arrived at Yekaterinburg during the 
night of May Qth. It was cold. The whole night we 
were moving and changing tracks. At seven a. m. our 
cars were taken out of town. Some isvostchiks were 
waiting, and I watched through the window the 
departure of the children. I was not allowed to 
wish them good-bye. At ten o'clock we were moved 
to a station platform and Tatischeff and Schneider 
were taken out of the train. I can not tell any- 
thing about Hendrikova. After that Rodionoff came 
and announced that little Sedneff and Troupp must 
proceed to the house. Later Nagorny came and took 
with him some of the luggage as well as the chil- 
dren's beds. The beds were all alike, made of 
nickeled iron, similar to the bed the Emperor Alex- 
ander II had used during the Turkish war. The 
beds were comfortable and not heavy. After Na- 

51 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

gorny's departure, Rodionoff said to us : "You are 
free and you can go wherever you like/* 

I stayed in Yekaterinburg. Two or three days 
later I was walking with Derevenko and Gilllard on 
the Vosnesensky Prospect and suddenly noticed that 
Nagorny and Sedneff, surrounded by soldiers, were 
leaving Ipatieff's house, on two isvotschiks. We 
followed them and saw that they were taken to 
prison. 

A considerable amount of time elapsed when the 
former Prime Minister Prince George Eugenievitch 
Lvoff, who was in prison in Yekaterinburg together 
with Nagorny, toTd me that Nagorny often had 
disputes with the Bolsheviki on account of their bad 
treatment of the czarevitch* The Bolsheviki left 
for the czarevitch only one pair of boots. Nagomy 
insisted upon two pairs of shoes being left, telling 
the Bolsheviki that the boy was of Delicate health 
and, in case he got his feet wet, he would very badly 
need another pair of shoes. Some time later the 
Bolsheviki took from the czarevitch a long gold chain 
which supported the holy images which hung by 
his bed. Nagorny had several arguments with the 
Bolsheviki: "So finally I understock! why he was 
shot," added Prince Lvoff. 

After the Bolsheviki left Yekaterinburg I met 
TchecaodouToff, who came to see me. His words 
were: "Thank God, the children are saved/* I un- 
derstood him badly* In the course of his conversa- 
tion he suddenly asked me; "Do you think they 



EXAMINATION OF JM R OIBBES 

are saved*?" About ten days before his death he 
sent me a letter asking if there was any hope of 
their being alive. 

Tchemodouroff told me that the conditions of 
their life in Yekaterinburg were bad. For example : 
at Easter they had cakes. The commissar came and 
cut himself big lumps. In general he spoke about 
rough treatment, but it was very hard for me to 
understand him. He told me that the grand duch- 
esses had no beds. 

I have visited IpatiefPs house but found noth- 
ing out of the ordinary* The house was battered. 
The stoves were full of burned objects, and I saw 
many remainders of burned objects, such as portrait 
frames, all sorts of brushes and a* little basket in 
which the czarevitch used to keep his brushes. A 
few things were just scattered around, but I did 
not see much of their personal belongings. 

The emperor used to wear uniform trousers and 
high boots, which had been oV'&s patched, and a 
soldier's shirt. The czarevitch wore l&aki trousers, 
high boots and a soldier's shirt. 

In regard to the rubies you have shown me, I can 
state that the imperial family had quite a number 
of them in their various articles of jewelry. The 
Gjrand Duchess Olga had a brooch with similar 
%bie$, which was given to her by Queen Victoria* 

The sapphires looked very much like fragments 
of the Stone that the emperor had in his ring It 
shaped the same way, and I think there is a 

53 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE H O M A N O V S 

complete resemblance between them. The emperor 
wore the ring on the same finger with his wedding 
ring, and he told me that he could not take it off. 

My personal impressions of the imperial family 
are as follows: 

The Grand Duchess Olga Nicholaevna was about 
twenty-three years old, she was fair and had the 
lightest hair in the family. After her illness she got 
much thinner. She had beautiful blue eyes. All her 
personality was seen in her eyes. She was straight, 
just, honest, simple, sincere and kind. She was 
easily irritated and her manners were a little harsh. 
She was a good musician- She had a talent for 
music. She composed, though I do not think she 
wrote poetry. I believe that Hendrikova wrote 
some poetry, as she was well able to do. The Grand 
Duchess Olga was very modest. She liked simplicity 
and did not pay much attention to dress. Her 
morals reminded me of those of her father. She 
was very religious' and it seems to me that she 
loved her father more than anybody else. 

The Grand Duchess Tatiana Nicholaevna was 
very thin. You could hardly imagine anybody as 
thin as she was* She was twenty-one years of age, 
was tall, darker than the rest of the family, and 
elegant. The colour of her eyes was dark grey. Her 
eyes made her look different from all of her sistedl 
who showed their souls through their eyes. She was 
reserved, haughty, and not open hearted, but she 
was the most positive. She was also religious, but 
54 



EXAMINATION OF MK. GIBBES 

the motive back of her religion was: "It is my 
duty/' while Olga Nicholaevna had it in her heart. 
She was always preoccupied and pensive and it was 
impossible to guess her thoughts. She played the 
piano and played it better than anyone else in the 
family. However, she had only a better technique 
and did not show feeling in her music. She painted 
and embroidered well. She was her mother's favour- 
ite and the one in whom, of all the daughters, she 
confided the most. If any favours were to be ob- 
tained they had to be gotten through Tatiana Nich- 
olaevna. 

The Grand Duchess Maria Nicholaevna was a 
young woman of broad build. She was very strong; 
for example, she could lift me up from the ground. 
She had lighter hair than Tatiana, but darker than 
Olga. (Olga Nicholaevna had brown hair, of a 
golden shade, and Maria Nicholaevna had brown 
hair with a light shade.) She had very nice, light 
grey eyes. She was very good looking, but got too 
thin after her illness. She had a great talent for 
painting and always liked to exercise it. She played 
the piano indifferently and was not as capable as 
Olga or Tatiana. She was modest and simple and 
probably had the qualities of a good wife and 
mother. She was fond of children and was inclined 
$> be lazy- She liked Tobolsk and told me that she 
would be quite happy to stay there. It is quite 
difficult for me to tell you whom she preferred her 
father or her mother* 

55 



THE fcAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

N The Grand Duchess Anastasia Nicholaevna was 
sixteen or seventeen years old; she was short, stout 
and was, in my opinion, the only one in the family 
that appeared to be ungraceful. Her hair was of 
a lighter color than that of Maria Nicholaevna. It 
was not wavy and soft, but lay flat on the fore- 
head. Her eyes were grey and beautiful, her nose 
straight. If she had grown and got slim she would 
have been the prettiest in the family. She was re- 
fined and very witty. She had the talents of a 
comic actor, she made everybody laugh, but never 
laughed herself. It appeared as if her develop- 
ment had stopped and, therefore, her capacity faded 
a little* She played the piano and painted, but was 
only in the stage of studying both. 

The czarevitch, Alexis Nicholaevitch, was not 
healthy. He was tall for his age and very thin* 
He suffered much in his childhood* He wa$ sick 
with a disease inherited from his mother's family. 
He grew worse in Tobolsk, as there it was very 
difficult to obtain means to effect a cure. He had a 
kind heart and was very fond of animals* He could 
be influenced only by his feelings, and would not 
yield to authority* He submitted only to the em* 
peror* He was a clever boy but was not fond of 
books. His mother loved him passionately. She 
tried, but could not be strict with him, and most o| f 
his desires were obtained through his mother. Dis^ 
agreeable things he bore silently and withdut 
grumbling. He was kind-hearted and during 
56 



EXAMINATION OF MR. GIBBES 

last period of his life he was the only one who liked, 
to give things away. In Tobolsk he had some odd 
fancies for example, he collected old nails, saying: 
"They may be useful/' 

The grand duchesses spoke English and French 
well, but German badly. Alexis Nicholaevitch did 
not speak German at all he never had German 
lessons* His father spoke Russian to him, his 
mother English or French. 

The empress formerly used to be very good look- 
ing and graceful, though her feet were large. I 
was quite surprised when I saw her in Tobolsk. She 
looked much older and had many grey hairs. She 
had wonderful, soft, grey eyes. She was clever, but 
seemed cleverer to the people who knew her least. 
She was not haughty in the ordinary meaning of the 
word, but she always realised and did not for one 
moment forget her position in life. She always 
looked queenly* I never had a feeling of uneasi- 
ness when I was in her presence. I liked very much 
to be with her. She was kind-hearted and liked to 
perform kind deeds. She always had something 
in sight when she worked. She was extremely fond 
of house secrets, for example: to prepare a present 
for somebody and keep it a secret until it was ready. 
I felt a German in her. She was more economical 
'than aix English woman. She loved Russia and con- 
sidered herself Russian* The thing she dreaded 
most was losing Russia. Though during the reign 
of the emperor she was a number of times in Ger 



THE LAST PAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

many I never heard a single word from her about 
the Emperor Wilhelm* She was sincerely religious 
in the Orthodox way and was a true believer in 
God. She was most devoted to her family and re- 
ligion entered into her feelings immediately after 
the family. 

Her feeling of religion was quite normal and was 
not a product of hysteria. She had a stronger and 
more aggressive character than the emperor, but 
she had such a deep feeling of love for the emperor 
that when she knew beforehand his opinion she al- 
ways submitted. I never witnessed a single quarrel 
between them. It was quite obvious that she was 
very much opposed to his abdication, but she never 
reproached him. This was very clear to all the per- 
sons who were near them. And nobody could ever 
think of her being untrue to the emperor. They 
were an ideal couple and never separated. My opin* 
ion is that it would be hard to meet, especially in 
Russia, such a devoted pair who missed each other 
so much when they were parted. That is the rea- 
son why the emperor took Alexis Nicholaevitch with 
him so frequently on his trips. I suppose the latter 
in a way served as a substitute for the rest of his 
family. 

The emperor was very well educated. He spoke 
(and wrote) English and French to perfection* I 
could not judge of his knowledge of German. Hp 
was very orderly and did not like to have any oiu? 
touch his things. He had an exceptionally good 

58 



EXAMINATION OF MR. GIBBES 

memory. He did not care much for light reading. 
He read a great deal on social sciences and studied 
history. He gave the impression of an extremely 
honest character. He was very kind and had a 
compassionate heart. He was modest but reserved, 
and hated any sort of familiarity. His disposition 
was gay and he was fond of games. He was fond 
of conversation and sometimes had a chat with the 
soldiers in the guardroom. He loved his country 
devotedly and suffered for it greatly during the revo- 
lution* After the Bolshevik revolution it was felt 
that his sufferings were not due to his situation but 
that he suffered for Russia. 

The emperor was a good hunter and was fond of 
hunting, though I could not tell which forais of it 
he preferred. 

In regard to their attitude towards each other, 
this was an ideal family, very rarely met with. They 
did not need the presence of other people. 

Of the aides-de-camp, the most closely attached 
to the family were Dimitry Pavlovitch (Grand Duke 
Dimitry), Mordvinoff and Sabline. The nearest to 
the empress was Anna Alexandrovna Viroubova. 

With regard to Rasputin, it seems to me that the 
empress believed in his holiness, his power of healing, 
and in the efficacy of his prayers. Rasputin did not 
visit the house as frequently as reported by gossipers. 
His visits to the palace, I think, were due to the ill- 
"hess of Alexis, I thought him to be a clever, cunning 
and good-natured moujik (peasant). I have noth- 

59 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

ing to add to the above statement. My statement 
has been read to me and it is written correctly. * . , 
The imperial family used to drink tea three times 
during the day. The third time at approximately 
eleven p, m., in the emperor's workroom. 

(Signed) S. I. GIBBER 
" N. SOKOLOFF. 



60 



Ill 

EXAMINATION OF COLONEL 
KOBYLINSKY 

[The deposition of Colonel Kobylinsky affords complete 
documentary evidence of the conditions of life experienced 
by tjie imperial family from March 1917 until May 1918* 
during which time they were under his charge. Colonel 
Kobylinsky appears to have been a brave soldier and a just 
man who did what he considered to be his duty, but who 
treated the unfortunate prisoners with humanity and 
courtesy* His statement will be of enormous value to 
historians of the future^ inasmuch as it reveals a new aspect 
of the character of the Emperor Nicholas ZJ, and negatives 
the proGerman tendencies of which both he and the em- 
press have been so persistently accused. Editor's Note.] 

On April 6- 10, 1919, the Investigating Magistrate 
for Cases of Special Importance of the Omsk Tri- 
bunal questioned in Yekaterinburg, in conformity 
with Paragraph 443 of the Penal Law Regulations, 
the person named below in the capacity of witness. 
The witness stated: 

My name is Eugene Stefanovitch Kobylinsky, 
age forty years, colonel attached to the commander 
of the Tumen military district. I belong to the 
Orthodox Church. At the beginning of the great 
war I was in command of a company of Petro- 
gradsfcy Guard Regiment. 

61 



THE LAST PAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

On November 8, 1914, 1 was wounded in my foot 
by a rifle bullet. In July, 1916, 1 was severely shell- 
shocked on the Austrian front during the battles 
near Gouta-Staraya. The shell-shock was followed 
by a very severe case of kidney trouble. In Septem- 
ber, 1916, I was sent to the hospital in Czarskoe- 
Selo. From this hospital I was sent to lalta and on 
my return to Gzarskoe-Selo, after a medical ex- 
amination, I was reported in 1916 as physically un- 
fit for active service, and was transferred to the re- 
serve battalion of my former regiment* I was in 
this battalion at the beginning of the revolution. 

Late in the evening of March 5th I was told to 
report to the headquarters of the Petrograd military 
district- At eleven p, m. I went to the headquarters 
and was told that I was called by order of General 
Korniloff (the famous Korniloff, who was at the 
time commanding the forces of the Petrograd mili- 
tary district). 

I was received by Korniloff, who said: "I have 
assigned you to a very important and responsible 
position." I asked him what it was. "I will tell 
you tomorrow/ 7 answered the general. I tried to 
learn from Korniloff why the choice fell on me* 
"Mind your business and get ready/* answered the 
general. I saluted and left. The next day, March 
6th, I received no orders. No orders arrived on 
March 7th either. I began to think then that my 
appointment had lapsed, when suddenly I was in- 
formed by telephone that Korniloff ordered me to 
62 



EXAMINATION OF E. S. K O B Y LI N S K Y 

be at Czarskoe-Selo station at eight a. m. on March 
8th. I arrived at the station, where I met General 
Korniloff and his A. D. C. Korniloff said, "When 
we get into a compartment of the car I will tell you 
the destination/* We boarded the train, where 
Korniloff told me: "We are going to Czarskoe-Selo, 
I am going there to announce to the empress that 
she is under arrest. You are going to be in com- 
mand of the Czarskoe-Selo garrison. Captain Kot- 
sebue will be Commandant of the palace, but you 
will also supervise the palace and, Kotsebue will be 
subordinate to you/' S 

We arrived at the palao& In the waiting-room 
we were met by the gragfd* marshal of the hnperial 
court, General Benckjfeidorf. Korniloff explained 
to him that he woukj like the emperor's suite to be 
assembled and beg^ged to be received by her majesty. 
Benckendorf sentjjT a footman to ask everybody down 
and personally/^ en t to present to the empress our 
plea for an audience. After he returned he told us 
that the 9*f n p re ss would see us in ten minutes. 
Shortly a&ter this we were told by a footman that 
< m i^ty desired to see us. Together with Kor- 
iiioffwe entered the children's room. There was no- 
body there, but the moment we came in the em* 
press entered from another door. We bowed. She 
gave her hand to Korniloff and nodded to me. Kor- 
niloff said ; "I have the heavy burden of inf orming 
you of the decision of the council of ministers. From 
this moment you must consider yourself under arrest* 

63 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

If you are in need of anything kindly apply to the 
new commandant/' After that, addressing me, 
Korniloff said : "Colonel, leave us together and take 
a position by the door" I retired* About five 
minutes later Korniloff called me in and when I 
entered the empress held out her hand to me. We 
bowed and went downstairs. In the waiting-room 
some of the emperor's suite were assembled, Kor- 
niloff announced to them: "Gentlemen, this is the 
new commandant; from this time on the empress is 
under arrest. HSinybody desires to share the fate 
of the family he ina^K^tay with them, but make up 
your minds at once, asM at:er I W *M n t let any* 

* T ^_ if 

one enter the palace/' AtSljhis time the guard was 
kept by his majesty's Svodnyvuard Regiment com- 
manded by Major General Ressfe- The Major Gen- 
eral declared that he wanted to )lv eave * The grand 
marshal of the imperial court, Cofo n t Benckendorf 
and Count Apraksin, who was in cha$^ e * $& em- 
press's personal affairs, announced thatfc thc y would 
remain with the empress. \ 

On the same day Korniloff confirmed tfc c instruc- 
tions reardin the ''' 



tions regarding the status of the arrested 
the restrictions imposed upon them. The guards 
of this Svodny regiment were relieved by the Fim 
Rifles regiment. Komiloff left Csarsko<sSelo and 
I remained there as commandant* 
Before the change of the guards Colonel Lasareff 

f 11 m ^ P c 5 mission to sa ? Pod-by* to the empress 
I allowed km to do so. He saw the empress aad 



EXAMINATION OP E . S. KOBYLINSKY 

wept bitterly. He also wept another time when he 
saw the colours of the Svodny regiment being taken 
out of the waiting-room. Some days later, I do not 
remember the date, I was notified by telephone of 
the arrival of the emperor. I went to the station. 
After the arrival of the train the emperor left his 
car and walked very quickly through the station 
without throwing a single glance at anybody, and 
took his seat in an automobile. He was accompanied 
by a marshal of the court, Count Vasily Alexandro- 
vitchTDolgoruky. Together with Dolgoruky the em* 
peror seated himself in the automobile. 

Two men dressed in plain clothes came towards 
me; one of them was Vershinin, a member of the 
Duma. They told me that their mission was ended 
and that from this time on the emperor was to be 
under my guard. 

I can not forget a certain circumstance I witnessed 
at that time. There were quite a number of persons 
who had been in the emperor's train. "When the 
emperor left the train these people crowded out to 
the station platform and quickly dispersed, throw- 
ing frightened looks in all directions. It appears 
that they were very much afraid of being recognised. 
All this looked rather disgusting, 

I accompanied the emperor to the palace. He 
iguncdiately went upstairs to see his children who 
were sick 

Shortly afterwards the emperor's baggage was 
brought from the station. 



THE LAST DAYS OF THB ROMANOVS 

The life of the imperial family during their stay 
in Czarskoe-Selo was in keeping in every way with 
the conditions that the imperial family had the right 
to expect. The instructions limited the connections 
of the imperial family with the outer world, and, of 
course, brought some restrictions in their interior 
life. The mail always went through the hands of 
the commandant of the palace. It was allowed to 
leave the palace only through the park. The palace 
and the park were always surrounded by sentinels. 
Walking in the park was allowed only from morn- 
ing till dark. 

These were the only restrictions, and the govern- 
ment by no means interfered in the intimate life of 
the family- Except the above-mentioned limitations 
as to the time of walking in the park, the govern- 
ment imposed no hardships. 

During the first days in Czarskoe-Selo the children 
were sick with measles; Maria Nicholaevna and, I 
think, Olga Nicholaevna had also inflammation of 
the lungs. Very soon they all recovered. 

Usually the day was spent in the following man- 
ner: The family got up early, with the exception 
of the empress. Indeed she also occasionally would 
get up early but she usually stayed a long time in 
bed. At eight a. m. the emperor always had a walk 
in the company of Dolgoruky. They walked for 
about an hour and a half, taking also some physical 
exercise. At one o'clock the family had lunch. After 
lunch until three o'clock the family used to work in 
66 



EXAMINATION OF E. S. KOBYLINSKY 

the garden. After that the children took lessons. 
Tea was served at four p. m. Sometimes after tea 
the family went out to the park. Dinner was served 
at seven o'clock. 

During the stay in Czarskoe-Selo, some incidents 
took place to which I would like to draw your at- 
tention : A few days after the arrest of the imperial 
family a disagreeable incident took place in regard 
to the body of Rasputin. His corpse was in Czar- 
skoe-Selo. A church was being built and he was 
buried in one of its sections. After that became 
known to the soldiers they dug up the grave, re- 
moved the cover of the coffin and began to examine 
the body. They found a holy image in the coffin 
that bore the signatures of Alexandra, Olga, Tatiana, 
Maria, Anastasia and Ania. This image was placed 
by his right cheek. In some way all this became 
known to the commander of an anti-aircraft battery 
and he took the image away from the soldiers. I 
saw it personally. I think the image represented the 
holy virgin. I reported by telephone all these facts 
to the district headquarters. I was instructed to 
take the body of Rasputin to the station and to ship 
it to Sredniaya-Rogatka, where it was to be in- 
terred* I was told to do this in secret. Obviously 
it was impossible to carry out this order without the 
soldiers and the populace learning of it. Later I 
was told to take the body to Czarskoe-Selo station; 
I did this and put it iu a box car. In another car I 

67 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

placed some soldiers without explaining to them 
what they had to guard. 

The next day a commissar by the name of Koupt-' 
chinsky (who was also in charge of automobiles) 
forwarded me a written order signed by the chair- 
man of the council of ministers. The order stated 
that I was to transmit the body of Rasputin (the 
name was written as "Novykh"), to Kouptchin- 
sky so that he might deliver it on a truck to the place 
of its destination. We could not do all that in Czar- 
skoe-Selo, so we moved the car with the corpse to the 
station Pavlovsk Second. In that station we found 
an old case and put in this case the coffin containing 
Rasputin's body. All this was covered with mats 
and old empty bags. Kouptchinsky went with the 
body to Petrograd, but on the way the secret became 
known to the mob which threatened to snatch away 
the body, so Kouptchinsky had to bum it on the 
way. 

The other incident in our peaceful life was the 
sudden arrival of a stranger* This stranger came 
to me, presented himself as Maslovsky and handed 
me a letter from the executive committee of the 
soviet of the workmen and soldiers' deputies. This 
maa wore the uniform of a colonel* I do not re- 
member his features- The letter contained a de* 
maud that I assist the bearer in the erecutiott of 
his orders. I remember very well that the letter 
was signed by- Tscheidze, a member of the duma. It 
also bore a proper seal This mau who called him- 
68 



EXAMINATION OF E. S, K O B T 1 1 K S K Y 

self Maslovsky told me that he had the order of 
the executive committee to take the emperor to the 
St. Peter and Paul fortress. I told Maslovsky firmly 
that I would not let him do it. 

"Well, colonel, understand that the blood that 
will be shed will be on your conscience/* answered 
Maslovsky. I said that I could not help it, and he 
retired. I thought he had left for good but it ap- 
peared that he went to the palace, where he was met 
by the commander of the first regiment, Captain 
Aksiouta. He showed him the letter and told him 
that he wanted to see the emperor. After searching 
Maslovsky's pockets, Aksiouta showed him the em- 
peror in such a way that the emperor did not notice 
it, I reported this event to headquarters, where my 
actions were approved, 

Kotsebue did not occupy the position of com- 
mandant of the palace for a very long time. He was 
dismissed on account of the following: There lived 
in the palace a maid of honour to the empress, Vi* 
roubova, and with her stayed a lady by the name of 
Den, who wore a Red Cross uniform* 

The soldiers learned through the servants that 
Kotsebue oft stayed for quite a long time with 
Viroubova and spoke English with her. After I 
* heard it I verified this rumour. The footman (I do 
not remember his name), who told die story to the 
soldiers, confirmed to me the fact that Kotsebue was 
often seen with Viroubova. Fearing agitation 
amongst the mea I reported it to Korniloff. Komil* 

69 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

off called for Kotsebue, forbade him. to enter the 
palace, and ordered me temporarily to fulfil the 
duties of commandant of the palace. 

I was not on my new post more than a week when 
Paul Alexandrovitch Korovitchenko was appointed 
to be commandant of the palace. Korovitchenko 
was a colonel in one of the regiments which was sta- 
tioned in Finland. He was graduated from the 
military law academy, after which he stayed some 
time on active service. He was called back into 
active service at the beginning of the war. He had 
some private connection with Kerensky, who at this 
period succeeded Prince Lvoff, leaving his position 
of minister of justice to Pereverseff. Korovitchenko 
was also on good terms with the latter. 

Kerensky came to Czarskoe-Selo several times. 
The first time he arrived when Korovitchenfco was 
there, I can not tell you anything about his be- 
haviour towards the emperor, as I was never present 
at their conversations. I can not tell you anything 
about it from Korovitchenko's words either* As far 
as I can remember Tegleva told me that Kerensky 
always behaved to the emperor in a very correct 
manner. During one of the visits of Kerensky 
Viroubova was arrested. 

This took place while I was present Together 
with Korovitchenko we entered her room* Koro- 
vitcbenko announced to her that she had to be taken 
to Petrograd, She dressed for the occasion and 
asked permission to say good-bye to the empress. 
70 



EXAMINATION OF E- S, K O B Y L I N S K Y 

This was granted. We were both present at their 
parting, watching it from a certain distance. They 
both spoke English and cried. Madame Den was 
taken to Petrograd together with Viroubova. 

Korovitchenko was once present at a conversa- 
tion between Kerensky and the emperor. Kerensky 
declared to the emperor that he must confiscate some 
of his private papers and that he had detailed Koro- 
vitchenko to do it. I was also told to be present and 
distinctly remember the scene. It all turned out very 
unpleasantly. The private papers of the emperor 
were kept in a special, very large case. There were 
a large number of papers and they were placed in 
bundles in very good orcfer. While indicating the 
papers, the emperor took a letter from the case, say- 
ing: 'This letter is of a private character.*' The 
emperor by no means wanted to keep the letter from 
being confiscated, but simply took it as it was lying 
separately from the others and intended to put it 
back in the case. At the same time Korovitchenko 
abruptly grabbed the letter and for a moment it 
seemed that the emperor was holding one end of the 
letter and Korovitchenko was pulling the other- The 
emperor looked vexed. He let go his end of the 
letter with the words : "Well, it looks as if I am not 
needed any longer; I had better go and have a walk." 
Saying this he departed. 

Korovitchenko took all the papers he considered 
interesting and delivered them to Kerensky. Keren- 
sky and Pereverseff expected to find in them some- 

71 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

thing that would indicate the treachery of the em* 
peror or empress in favour of the Germans, especially 
as at this time it was insinuated by all the news- 
papers. They found nothing that could compromise 
the emperor or empress. At last they got hold of a 
telegram that was sent in code from the emperor to 
the empress. After some hard work in deciphering 
if they made out a sentence, "Feeling well, kisses." 

The family did not like Korovitchenko, but per- 
sonally I can state that Korovitchenko exerted his 
best efforts to please the imperial family. For ex- 
ample: he obtained for them permission to work in 
the garden and go out in rowboats. But the best 
disposed towards the imperial family were some sol- 
diers and officers of the first regiment. 

Following an old custom the officer of the day in 
the palace used to be given at Easter time a pint of 
wine. This custom was not changed and after the 
soldiers learned about it they started fussing and 
it took fifty bottles of vodka to pacify them. 

Once the soldiers accused Ensign Zeleny of kiss- 
ing the empress's hand. 

This last-mentioned incident and the story about 
the wine made a lot of trouble and an investigation, 
was ordered* 

The morale of the soldiers grew worse and worse* 
They were quite intoxicated by their peculiar under- 
standing of freedom and they began to invent all 
sorts of cmy demands. The worst in this respect 
72 



EXAMINATION OF E. S. KOBYLINSKY 

was the second regiment, where not only the sol- 
diers behaved badly, but also the officers. 

On one occasion an officer of the second regiment 
declared: "We must see them ourselves. As they 
are under guard they have to be seen." It is obvious 
that only vulgar curiosity or a desire to inflict use- 
less mental sufferings, prompted the officer to make 
such a demand. My efforts to oppose their desires 
were fruitless, and my argument that the parents 
would never desert their sick children had no effect 
whatever. Fearing that they would be able to ac- 
complish their purpose without my authority I re- 
ported this matter to General Polovtseff, who at 
that time occupied General KornilofFs position. It 
was decided to do everything in the following man- 
ner: When the new captain of the guards came for 
the relief of the one on duty they were both to be 
taken to the emperor, with the empress present also. 
To avoid unnecessary embarrassment we decided to 
conduct this formality just before lunch the time 
when the family was always gathered together. It 
was decided that the captain of the guard on duty 
was to take his leave from the emperor and the new 
one was to greet the emperor. After all this had 
been decided upon and carried out for a certain 
while, a very disagreeable incident took place. When 
the guards of the first regiment were being relieved 
bjr the guards of the second, as usual, both captains 
went to see the emperor. The emperor wished good- 
bye to the captain of the departing guard and shook 

73 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

hands with him. When the emperor extended his 
hand to the new captain it remained stretched out 
in the air, as the officer stepped backward. Being 
unpleasantly impressed by this the emperor went 
towards the officer, put his hands on his shoulder 
and with tears in his eyes asked him : "Why did you 
do that?" The officer once more drew backwards and 
answered: "I was born of common people and when 
they stretched out their hand to you you did not take 
it, so now I will not shake hands with you." I re- 
late this story as I heard it from the officer of the 
first regiment who witnessed this revolting incident* 
As the revolution proceeded the agitation grew 
deeper amongst the soldiers. Having no opportuni- 
ties to find anything wrong in the life of the ar- 
rested ones they tried to find new ways of inflicting 
suffering upon the imperial family. On one oc- 
casion they saw the czarevitch carrying a small rifle. 
This rifle was a model of the standard infantry rifle 
and was presented to the czarevitch by some mu- 
nition works. It was absolutely harmless, as special 
cartridges had to be used for it and none of those 
cartridges were available. Of course, the trouble 
was started by the soldiers of the second regiment. 
All the efforts of the officer (I do not remember his 
name) to persuade the men that their demand was 
ridiculous, had no results* In order to avoid violence 
he took the rifle from the czarevitch. After this 
thing occurred I came to the palace where Gilliard 
and Tegleva told me the story and added that the 
74 



EXAMINATION OF E. S. KOBYLINSKY 

czarevitch was crying. I ordered that the rifle 
should be forwarded to me, took it apart, and in 
this way, smuggled it back to the czarevitch. 

Finally the soldiers and through them the soviet 
of Czarskoe-Selo ceased entirely to comply with my 
orders and appointed Ensign Domodziantz, an 
Armenian, to act as my assistant. He was a rough 
man and made the utmost efforts to get into the 
palace, where I tried my best to prevent him from 
going. After that he began to pass his time in the 
park, especially when the family were walking there. 
Once as the emperor was walking by and held out 
his hand to him, he refused to shake hands with the 
emperor, saying he had no right to do it, being an 
assistant commandant. 

After this incident was related to Kerensky he 
came to the palace at Czarskoe-Selo and called for 
the chairman of the local soviet (he did not come 
In regard to this incident, but on some other busi- 
ness)* The chairman of the soviet said to Kerensky : 
"I want to let you know, minister, that we elected 
Ensign Domodziantz to be assistant commandant of 
the palace.** Kerensky answered: "Yes, I know it, 
but was it so necessary to elect him; couldn't you 
elect somebody else?" However, no changes were 
made, as Kerensky himself had no power. 

It was Domodziantz who told the soldiers not to 
answer the emperor's greeting. Of course the sol- 
diers followed his advice, and, of course, it was the 
soldiers of the second regiment. I had to ask the 

75 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

emperor not to greet the soldiers, as I was losing 
control over the men, so the emperor refrained from 
further greetings to them. 

At the same time I must state that it was not only 
the soldiers who were unfair in their attitude towards 
the imperial family. 

People began to get frightened to show their feel- 
ings towards the imperial family. The Grand 
Duchess Olga was very much liked by Margaret 
Hitrovo. Often she came to me and asked me to 
deliver letters to Olga Nicholaevna, She always 
used to sign her letters: "Margaret Hitrovo," In 
the same way, all the letters that were brought to me 
by Olga Kolsakova, bore also her full signature* But 
there were some letters brought to me to be delivered 
that were signed merely: "Lili" (Den) or "Titi" 
(Velitchkovskaya). I said to Miss Hitrovo: "You 
always sign your letters with your full name, the 
same as is done by Olga Kolsakova, but there are 
others who hide their names. This is not fair. Sup- 
pose the mail should be seen by somebody else and I 
should be asked who are the authors of those letters? 
My position would be extremely embarrassing. 
Please inform the writers of those letters that I de* 
sire them to call on me, I must know who they are." 
After that I ceased to receive letters from "Lili" or 
"TitL* 

Count Apraksin very shortly after the amst made 
a request to be allowed to resign, as all his business 
in the palace was finished and his family resided in 



EXAMINATION OF E. S. KOBYLINSKY 

Petrograd By order of the minister of justice (the 
order was given to me through Korniloff) he was al- 
lowed to leave the palace. 

Now I have related everything that I remember 
about the state of the imperial family in Czarskoe- 
Selo. 

I can only add that the imperial family received 
all the newspapers that appeared at this time, as 
well as English and French magazines. Of the Rus- 
sian newspapers I can name: "Russkoe-Slovo," 
"Russkaia-Volia," "Retch," and "Novoe-Vremia," 
"Petrogradsky Listok," and "Petrogradskaia- 
Gaseta." 

Now I am going to tell you how the imperial 
family was moved to Tobolsk. This was preceded 
by the following events : 

About a week before the departure of the imperial 
family, Kerensky arrived at Czarskoe-Selo. He 
called me up as well as the chairman of the soviet 
and the chairman of the military section of the 
Czarskoe-Selo garrison, Ensign Efimoff (Efimoff 
was an officer of the second regiment). Kerensky 
said to us : "Before speaking to you I ask your word 
that everything I say will be kept secret." We gave 
our word to Kerensky- Then he told us that accord- 
ing to the resolution of the council of ministers, the 
imperial family were to be taken out of Czarskoe- 
Sek>> but that the government did not consider it a 
secret f rom the "democratic organizations." He said 
also that I had to go with the imperial family. After 

77 



.THE LAST, DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

that I retired but Kerensky continued a conversation 
with the chairman of the soviet and Efimoff. In 
about an hour I met Kerensky and asked him where 
we were going, adding that I must give notice to 
the family so that they could prepare themselves for 
the trip. Kerensky responded that he would do it 
personally and proceeded to the palace. In the palace 
he had a personal talk with the emperor, but he did 
not give any answer to my question as to when and 
where we were going. 

Later I saw Kerensky about two or three times and 
always asked him where we were going and what 
things were to be taken by the imperial family- 
Kerensky did not answer my questions but only re- 
plied; "Tell them that they must take plenty of 
warm things." 

About two days before our departure Kereasky 
called me up and ordered me to form a detachment 
of men out of the first, second and fourth regiments 
that would perform guard duty and that I was to ap- 
point officers in the companies. The word: "Ap- 
pointment" at this time had quite a special meaning. 
The agitation in the army was so great that we could 
not make appointments. A commander of a regi- 
ment had no influence whatever his power being in 
the hands of the soldiers' committee* 

Being afraid that in this way it might happen that 
amongst the officers selected, there would be some 
unreliable ones, I asked Kerensky for permission to 
make my own choice of five officers for each com* 

78 



EXAMINATION OF E. S, K O B Y L I N S K Y 

pany, out of which two (this number of officers had 
to be in each company, according to military regula- 
tions) could be selected by the men. Kerensky 
agreed to this. 

The evening of the same day I called for the com* 
mander of the regiment and chairman of the regi- 
mental committees. I said : "A very secret and im- 
portant mission is going to take place. I want every 
commander of a regiment to choose a company of 
ninety-six men and two officers." At the same time 
I forwarded them a list of officers that I named, out 
of which the selection had to be made. In answer 
to my words the commanders of the regiments and 
the chairmen of the committees of the first and fourth 
regiments answered: "Very well, sir," but the chair- 
man of the second regiment committee, of course a 
soldier (whose name I don't remember), answered: 
"We have made our choice already. I know what 
sort of mission is being prepared." "How do you 
know it, when I don't know anything about it my- 
self?" I asked. He replied: "Certain people told us 
all about it and we elected Ensign Dekonsky." Pre- 
vious to that this ensign was dismissed from the 
fourth regiment by its own officers and men, but 
was * taken into the second regiment. Even at this 
time Ensign Dekonsky was undoubtedly a Bolshevik. 
When I heard about his election I told the chairman 
of the committee that Dekoasky should not go under 
any circumstances* The chairman answered: "Yes, 
he shall/' I had to go to Kerensky and tell him 

79 



(THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

that if Dekonsky was to go with the mission, I re- 
fused to go, and that Kerensky being Minister of 
War could easily make things straight. Kerensky 
came to Czarskoe-Selo, called for the chairman of 
the committee and some desperate arguing took place. 
Kerensky insisted on his demands, but the chairman 
kept on answering: "Dekonsky shall go/* Finally 
Kerensky got excited and said in a very loud voice: 
"Such are my orders/' The chairman submitted and 
departed. When the soldiers that were appointed to 
the departing detachment learned that Dekonsky 
was not going, they also refused to go. And due to 
that the company of the second regiment was com- 
posed of the worst elements* 

On July 29th I called on Kerensky and met there 
the assistant commissar of the ministry of the court, 
Paul Michaelovitch Makaroff, an engineer by pro- 
fession. From their conversation for the first time 
I understood that the imperial family was being 
transferred to Tobolsk. The same day Makaroff 
ordered Engineer Ertel, who formerly used to ac- 
company the dowager empress on her trips, to pre- 
pare a train for two a. m, on August ist* 

On July 3oth I was asked by the members of 
the imperial family to bring to the palace the Zna- 
mensky holy image of the virgin from the Znamea* 
sky Church* as they wanted to hold divine service on 
the birthday of Alexis Nicholaevitch. I remember 
that during this day as well as the following I had 
an enormous ainount of trouble oa account of the 
80 



EXAMINATION OF E, S. KOBYLINSKY 

? 

state of mind of the soldiers. *' I had personally to 
fulfil all the demands of the imperial family. When 
the question about the holy image was settled and 
I think, even after divine service, I was visited by 
the commander of the district forces (at that time 
Ensign Kousmin), a colonel and some man in plain 
clothes. The latter, stretching out his hand to me, 
said: "May I introduce myself? I was in prison 
in the Kresty." To this moment I still remember 
his dirty paw. 

As if for the inspection of the guards, Kousmin 
and the colonel hid themselves in a room that had a 
door leading into the corridor and waited a full 
hour for the end of the service, on purpose to watch 
the imperial family walking back from church. The 
same evening, after the departure of Kousmin and 
his gang, Makaroff and Eliah Leonidovitch Tati* 
scheff came to see me* Tatischeff told me that the 
emperor proposed to him, through Kerensky and 
Makaroff, to share the fate of the family. He told 
me: "I was rather surprised, as I am not a member 
of the court, but if it is the desire of the emperor I 
will not hesitate for a moment, as my duty is to 
fulfil the desire of my emperor/* (I must note that 
Tatischeff was invited by the emperor instead of 
Benckendorf.) It was obvious that Benckendorf 
could not go. He was very old and he had a wife 
who was also very old and very ill. Benckendorf was 
married to the Princess Dolgoruky, mother of Vasily 
Dolgoruky, so it turned out that the 

81 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

step-son had to take the step-father's place. It 
was for similar reasons that Madame Narishkina, a 
lady of honour to the empress, could not go with the 
imperial family, as she was extremely old and had: 
inflammation of the lungs. 

The same day Margaret Hitrovo called on me and 
made a terrible row, accusing me of concealing from 
her the fate of the imperial family and stating that 
she heard that the imperial family were going to be 
imprisoned in a fortress. 

In the evening Kerensky telephoned to me that 
he would come to Czarskoe-Selo at midnight of 
August ist and would say a few words to the detach- 
ment of soldiers before its departure. 

All the day of July 3 1st I spent in preparation for 
the departure. As far as I remember nothing im- 
portant occurred. Kerensky arrived at midnight. 
The detachment was ready and we went to inspect 
the first battalion. Kerensky said a few words to 
the soldiers, the substance of which was: "You kept 
the guard of the imperial family in CzarskocsSdo, 
and you must do the same thing in Tobolsk, whither 
the imperial family is being moved, according to the 
resolution of the council of ministers. Remember, 
don't strike a man when he is down. Don't behave 
like ruffians, be polite* You will receive allowances 
as for the Petrograd district, as well as tobacco and 
soap. You will also receive a daily allowance/* 
The same was said by Kertnsky to the fourth battal* 
ion, but he did not visit the second battalion at all. 
82 



EXAMINATION OF E. S. KOBtfLINSKY 

I must draw your attention to the fact that the sol- 
diers of the first and fourth regiments were in quite 
different conditions from the soldiers of the second 
regiment. The former were dressed very smartly 
and had a large stock of clothes. The soldiers of 
the second regiment had altogether a low morale, 
were dirty, and had a smaller supply of clothes. This 
difference, as you will see, had very important re- 
sults. After Kerensky had said farewell to the sol- 
diers, he said to me: "Well, now go and get Michael 
Alexandrovitch. He is at present at the Grand 
Duke Boris Vladimirovitch's." I went for him in a 
motor car to the place indicated and met Boris 
Vladimirovitch, an unknown lady, and Michael 
Alexandrovitch with his wife, and Mr. Johnson, an 
English secretary. The three of us, Michael Alex- 
androvitch, Johnson and myself, proceeded to the 
Alexandrovsky palace. Johnson remained in the 
motor car and Michael Alexandrovitch went to the 
waiting-room, where were Kerensky and the officer 
of the day* All three of them went to see the em- 
peror in his room. I remained in the waiting-room. 
Suddenly Alexis Nicholaevitch ran towards me and 
asked: "Is that Uncle Mimi that has arrived?" I 
answered that it was he, and Alexis Nicholaevitch 
asked my permission to hide himself behind the door. 
"I want to see him when he goes out," said the czare- 
vitch. He hid himself behind the door and looked 
through the slit at Michael Alexandrovitch laughing 
like a child at his ingenuity* Michael Alexandra- 

83 



THE LAST PAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

vitch spoke with the emperor for about ten minutes 
and then left. 

The imperial family left for the station at five 
o'clock in the morning. Two trains were prepared. 
The imperial family, the people with them, some ser- 
vants and a company of the first regiment took the 
first train ; the remaining servants and companies the 
second train. The luggage was distributed in both 
trains. In the first train Vershinin, a member of the 
duma, also took a place, and Engineer Makaroff, 
and the chairman of the military section* Ensign 
Efimoff was also sent at the wish of Kerensky, in 
order that on his return he might report to the soviet 
the arrival of the imperial family at Tobolsk* The 
places in the trains were distributed in the follow- 
ing manner: In the first very comfortable car (of the 
International Company sleeping cars) went the em* 
peror in one compartment, the empress in another, 
the grand duchesses in the third, Alexis Nicholae- 
vitch and Nagorny in the fourth- Demidova, Te* 
gleva and Ersberg in the fifth, Tchemodouroff and 
Volkoff in the sixth. In another car the places were 
taken by Tatischeff and Dolgoruky in one oompart* 
ment, Botkin in a small compartment, Schneider 
with her maids, Katia and Masha, in one compart- 
meat, Gilliard in one compartment, Hendrikova 
with her maid, Mejanz, in a compartment In the 
third car places were taken by: Vershinin, Makaroff, 
myself, my A* D* C., Lieutenant Nicholas Akxai*- 
drovitch Mxmdel, the commander of the First com- 

84 



EXAMINATION OF E. S. K O B Y L I N S K Y 

pany, Ensign Ivan Trofimovitch Zima, Ensign Vlad- 
imir Alexandrovitch (I am not very sure of 
his name) Mesiankin, and in a separate little 
compartment. Ensign Efimoff took his place, as 
nobody desired to travel in his company. The 
fourth car was a dining car, in which the Im- 
perial family used to have their meals, except the 
empress and Alexis Nicholaevitch who had their 
meals together in the empress's compartment. The 
soldiers were placed in three third-class cars. Sev- 
eral baggage cars were also attached to the train. 
Nothing particular happened until we arrived at 
Perm. Just before the arrival our train was stopped 
and a man looking like a minor railroad official, with 
a big white beard, boarded the car I was in. He 
introduced himself as the chairman of the railroad 
workmen and announced that the railroad workmen 
("Tovarischy/' comrades) wanted to know who 
was In the train and would not allow the train to pro- 
ceed until their curiosity was gratified, Vershinin 
and Makaroff showed him the papers with Keren- 
sky's signature on them- The train continued on its 
journey. We arrived at Tumen approximately the 
fourth or fifth of August (of the Old Style). We 
arrived at Tumen in the evening and on the same day 
took our places aboard two steamers. The imperial 
family, the persons with them, and the company of 
the first regiment took their places on the steamer 
Rvss. A part of the servants and the company of 
the second and fourth regiments on the steamer 

85 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMAKOVS 

Kormiletz. The ships were good and comfortable, 
but the Kormiletz was inferior to the Russ. We ar- 
rived at Tobolsk, as far as I can remember, during 
the evening of August 6th, about five or six p. m. 
The house where the imperial family was to take 
residence was not yet ready, so we spent a few days on 
the ships. 

When we travelled on the train, it did not stop 
at big stations, but only at the intermediate stations. 
The emperor and other passengers frequently left 
the train and proceeded ahead of it, and the train 
slowly moved after them. When we lived on the 
steamers, sometimes we put them alongside on the 
bank, at a distance of about ten versts from the 
towns, where the family could have a walk* 

During the time when the family lived on the 
steamers Engineer Makaroff was putting the house 
in order. Tatischeff, Hendrikova, Schneider, Tou- 
telberg, Ersberg, Tegleva and Demidova were en- 
gaged in arranging the furniture. When the house 
was ready the family moved into it. For this pur- 
pose a good-looking carriage was assigned to the em- 
press. She rode with Tatiana Nicholaevna, All the 
others walked. 

Two houses were assigned for the residence of the 
imperial family, their suite and servants. One was 
the governor's house, the other was opposite to the 
governor's and belonged to Mr. Korniloff. 

Not any of the furniture was taken from Czar* 
skoe-Selo. So the furniture of the governor's house 
86 



EXAMINATION OF E. S. K O B Y L I N S K Y 

was used, but some of the things had to be ordered 
and bought in Tobolsk. 

The only things that were taken from Czarskoe- 
Selo for the imperial family were camp beds. Later, 
a number of things were sent from Czarskoe-Selo 
after the necessity for them was discovered by 
Makaroff. 

The arrangement of the rooms in the governor's 
house was as follows: The first floor opened into 
the lobby; from this lobby there ran a corridor that 
divided the house into two parts. The first room 
opening out of this lobby on the right-hand side was 
occupied by the officer of the day. Next to it was 
the room occupied by Demidova. In this room she 
had her meals, as well as Tegleva, Toutelberg and 
Ersberg. The room next to it was occupied by Gil- 
Hard, who used to give lessons to Alexis Nicholae- 
vitch, Maria Nicholaevna, and Anastasia Nicho- 
laevna. Next to that was the dining-room of the im- 
perial family. On the left side of the corridor, op- 
posite the room of the officer of the day, was a room 
occupied by Tchemodouroff, next to it the pantry, 
next to the pantry a room occupied by Tegleva and 
Ersberg, next to that a room occupied by Toutelberg. 
A staircase above TchemodourofPs room led to the 
upper story into the workroom of the emperor. Next 
to the workroom was a hall. There was also another 
staircase leading from the hail to the lobby, A 
corridor leading from the hall divided the upper 
story into halves* The first room on the right was a 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

drawing-room, next to it was the emperor and em- 
press's bedroom, next to the bedroom was the bed- 
room of the grand duchesses. Opposite the drawing* 
room was the room occupied by Alexis Nicholaevitch, 
next to that was the lavatory, and next to the lava- 
tory was the bathroom. 

All the other people of the suite were located in 
KornilofFs house. 

The following persons arrived with the imperial 
family at Tobolsk: (i) Eliah Leonidovitch Tati- 
scheff, general aide de camp to the emperor; (2) 
Prince Alexander Vasilievitch Dolgoruky; (3) 
Eugene Sergeevitch Botkin, physician; (4) Countess 
Anastasia Vasilievna Hendrikova, personal maid of 
honour to the empress; (5) Baroness Sophie Carlov- 
na Buxhoevden, personal maid of honour to the em- 
press; (6) Katherine Adolf ovna Schneider, court lec- 
turer; (7) Peter Andreevitch Gilliard; (8) Alexan** 
dra Alexandrovna Tegleva, nurse; (9) Elizabeth 
Nicholaeyna Ersberg, waiting-maid to the grand 
duchesses; (10) Maria Goustavovna Toutelberg, 
waiting-maid of the empress; (11) Anna Stcphan* 
ovna Demidova, another waiting-maid of the em- 
press; (12) Victorina Vladimorovna Nikolaeva, a 
ward of Hendrikova; (13) Pauline Mejanz, Hen* 
drikova's maid; (14) Katia and Masha (I do not 
know their surnames), maids of Mi$s Schneider; 
(15) Terenty Ivanovitch Tchemodouroff* valet of 
the emperor; (16) Stephan Makaroff, assistant to 
Tchemodouroff; (17) Alexis Andreevitch Volkofl^ 



EXAMINATION OF E. S. KOBYLINSKY 

servant of the empress; (18) Ivan Dimitrievitch 
Sedneff, servant of the grand duchesses; (19) 
Michael Karpoff, grand duchesses' footman; 
(20) Klementy Gregoryvitch Nagorny, czarevitch's 
footman; (21) Sergius Ivanoff, Gilliard's ser- 
vant; (22) Tioutin, the waiter of Tatischeff and 
Dolgoruky; (23) Francis Jouravsky, waiter; (24) 
Alexis Troupp, footman; (25) Gregory Solodouhin, 
footman; (26) Dormidontov, footman; (27) Kis- 
seleff, footman; (28) Ermolay Gouseff, footman; 
(29) Ivan Michaelovitch Haritonoff, cook; (36) 
Kokischeff, cook; (31) Ivan, I think, Vereschagin, 
cook; (32) Leonid Sedneif, assistant cook; (33) 
Sergius Michailoff, assistant cook; (34) Francis 
Purkovsky, assistant cook; (35) Terchin, assistant 
cook; (36) Alexander Kirpitchnikoff, clerk, perform- 
ing in Tobolsk the duties of janitor; (37) Alexis 
Nicholaevitch Dimitrieff, barber; (38) Rojkoff, in 
charge of the wine cellars; after our arrival in 
Tobolsk we were joined by (39) Vladimir Nicho- 
laevitch Dcrevenko, physician; (40) Mr. Sidney 
Ivanovitch Gibbes. 

Our life in Tobolsk went on peacefully* The 
restrictions were the same as in Czarskoe-Selo and 
all felt even freer than in C&arskoe-Selo, 

The officer of the day kept to his room and nobody 
interfered with the private life of the imperial* 
family. Everybody got up early, except the em- 
press* as I told you when I was describing the life 
im Cfcirskrie*3elo. In the morning, after breakfast, 

89 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

the emperor usually took a walk and always had 
some physical exercise. The children also had their 
walk. Everybody did what he or she wanted to do. 
In the morning the emperor used to read and write 
his diary. The children took lessons. The empress 
read and embroidered or painted. Lunch was served 
at eleven o'clock. After lunch the family usually 
had a walk. Frequently the emperor used to saw 
logs with Dolgoruky, Tatischeff or Gilliard; some- 
times the grand duchesses took a part in this exercise* 
Tea was served at four o'clock and usually during 
this time everybody was at th$ window watching the 
outside life of the town. Six o'clock was dinner 
time. After dinner came Tatischeff, Dolgoruky, 
Botkin and Derevenko. Sometimes they played 
cards. Of the family the only card players were the 
emperor and the Grand Duchess Olga. Sometimes 
in the evening the emperor used to read aloud while 
everybody listened. Sometimes plays were staged, 
usually French or English. Tea was served at eight 
o'clock and a conversation always took place until 
about eleven but never as late as twelve o'clock* 
After that everybody retired. The czarevitch re- 
tired at nine o'clock, or at a time very close to it. 

The empress always dined upstairs and sometimes 
the czarevitch dined with hen The rest of the fam- 
ily ate in the dining-room. 

All the members of the suite and the servants 
could go out of the house when and where they 
wanted to* They were not under any restrictions in 
90 



EXAMINATION OF E. S. KOBYLINSKT 

this way. The movements of the imperial family 
were, of course, limited, the same as in Czarskoe- 
Selo. They could go only to church. Divine service 
was conducted in the following manner: If it was a 
late service it took place in the house and was there 
performed by the clergy of Blagoveschensky church. 
The priest, Father Vasilieff, officiated. The imperial 
family went to church only for the early service. 
For the purpose of going to church they had to go 
through the garden and across the street. Sentries 
were placed all the way leading to the church, and 
there was no admittance to church for strangers. 

As far as you could judge, even from the list of 
the servants attached to the imperial family, the 
government tried to conserve the condition of life 
that was appropriate to the position of the imperial 
family* When we left Czarskoe-Selo I was told by 
Kcrensky: "Don't forget that this is the former em- 
peror and neither he nor his family must be in need 
of anything." The guard of the house was under my 
command. After the family arrived at Tobolsk I 
think they got used to me, and as far as I tinder- 
stand, they did not have any feeling against me. I 
can state that because before our departure I was 
received by the empress who gave me a holy picture, 
with which she blessed me. 

This peaceful and quiet life did not continue very 
long, 

I see some resemblance between the first periods 
of life in Czarskoe-Selo and Tobolsk. The rel- 

91 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

atively easy conditions of life in Czarskoe-Selo at 
the beginning gradually got worse. At that time the 
government was gradually losing ground. At the 
same time agitation grew amongst the soldiers whose 
state of mind got worse and worse. Finally, seeing 
the necessity of fighting for power and at the same 
time wishing well towards the family, the Kerensky 
government made up its mind to transfer the im- 
perial family from the centre of the political struggle 
to a quiet and peaceful place. This turned out to be 
absolutely right. The population of Tobolsk was 
very well disposed towards the imperial family. 
When we were approaching Tobolsk, all the inhabit- 
ants turned out on the piers and when the family 
was proceeding towards the house it was apparent 
that the population had kindly feelings towards 
them. At this time the people were afraid to show 
their sympathies openly, so they tried to show their 
feelings in a secret way. Many donations were 
made to the imperial family, mostly food and sweets, 
though I must say that the imperial family received 
very little of it, as most of it was eaten on the way 
by the servants. 

Soon the general agitation struck Tobolsk, a$ spe 
cial attention was given to this town by all sorts of 
politicians* solely because of the fact that it waa the 
residence of the imperial family. 

I had the command over my men only till Septem- 
ber. In September there came a commissar of the 
government by the name of Vasily Semenovitch 
92 



EXAMINATION OF E. S. KOBYLINSKY 

PankratofL This man brought a letter signed by 
Kerensky which stated that from now on I would 
have to be subordinate to Pankratoff and therefore 
obey all his orders. Pankratoff told me himself that 
when aged eighteen, defending a woman, he killed a 
gendarme in Kiev. For that he was court-martialled 
and imprisoned in Schiisselburg fortress, where he 
was placed in solitary confinement for fifteen years. 
After that he was exiled in the Yakout district, where 
he lived for twenty-seven years. 

His assistant was Ensign Alexander Vladimiro* 
vitch Nikolsky, who was also exiled in the Yakout 
district for being a member of the Social-Revolution* 
ary party. During this time he got friendly with 
Pankratoff, When Pankratoff was appointed com- 
missar to the imperial family he asked Nikolsky to 
be his assistant 

Pankratoff was a clever man with a well-developed 
mind, and an extraordinarily mild disposition. 
Nikolsky was tough; he was graduated from a sem- 
inary and had hardly any manners. He was as 
obstinate as a bull, and the moment he decided any- 
thing he went towards his object breaking everything 
in his way. After they had arrived and seen how 
things were getting along, Nikolsky immediately an- 
nounced to me his surprise about the way that 
"Everybody is so freely coming and going (the suite 
and servants)* It can't be done in such a way. This 
way they can let in an outsider. Photos have to be 
taken of everybody/* I started to persuade him, not to 

93 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

do it, as the sentries knew everybody's appearance 
very well. Nikolsky responded: "We were ordered 
to have our pictures taken in front view and profile, 
so their pictures should be taken/* He ran to the 
photographer and pictures were taken of a number 
of people and suitable inscriptions were placed on 
each photo. Alexis Nicholaevitch, being a very 
playful and mischievous boy, on one occasion peeped 
through the fence. After this was learned by Nikol- 
sky he came and made a huge fuss about it. He 
reprimanded the soldier who was on duty and spoke 
in a very sharp tone to the czarevitch. The boy got 
offended and protested to me that Nikolsky was 
shouting at him. The same day I asked Pankratoff 
to cool down Nikolsky's zeal. 

As I stated before, Pankratoff personally would 
not have done any harm to the imperial family, but 
nevertheless it turned out that, both being politi* 
cians, they were the cause of a lot of trouble. Not 
understanding life, and being true members of the 
Social-Revolutionary party, they insisted upon every- 
body joining the party and began to convert the 
soldiers to their faith. They started a school where 
they taught soldiers literature and all sorts of useful 
knowledge, but after every lesson they talked politics 
to their pupils, telling them the program of the 
Social-Revolutionary Party. The soldiers listened 
and understood it in their own way. The results of 
these lectures were that the soldiers were converted 
94 



EXAMINATION OF E. S. KOBYLINSKY 

to Bolshevism. They also wanted to print a news- 
paper and call it Zemliai Volia (Land and Free- 
dom). 

There was a man by the name of Pisarevsky who 
lived during this period in Tobolsk. He was a wild 
social democrat and therefore an enemy to the S. R*'s. 
This Pisarevsky started his campaign among the sol- 
diers against Pankratoff and Nikolsky. Pisarevsky 
was publishing a Bolshevik newspaper called 
Rabotchaya-Gazcta (Workmen's Newspaper). See- 
ing that Pankratoff had a certain influence amongst 
the soldiers, Pisarevsky began to invite the 
soldiers to his home and demoralise them. Shortly 
after the arrival of Pankratoff and Nikolsky our de- 
tachment was divided into two groups the Pank- 
ratoff party and the party of Pisarevsky in other 
words, Bolsheviks* This Bolshevik party was com- 
posed of the soldiers of the second regiment who were 
the poorest and had a very low morale. A very 
small number of men formed a third group, I should 
say, neutral* and most of its members were soldiers 
that were mobilised in 1906 and 1907. 

The result of these political campaigns was the 
demoralisation of the soldiers, who began to act like 
ruffians. Formerly they did not want to make 
trouble for the imperial family. Now they did 
not know what next they should demand for them- 
selves- They followed only their own interests, but 
the result of it was always that either a member of 
the imperial family or some of the persons at- 

95 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

tached to them had to suffer* At first the soldiers 
came to me under the influence of the political 
struggle and said : u We have to sleep in bunks, our 
food is bad, but 'Nicholashka' (a slang name for 
the emperor that was popular during the revolution) 
who is arrested, has such an amount of food that his 
cooks throw it in the waste bucket." At this time 
life in Tobolsk was not expensive. Though Keren- 
sky had not fulfilled his promise and we received 
Omsk allowances and not those of the Petrograd 
district, the allowances were large enough to obtain 
very good food for the men- For the purpose of 
avoiding new protests from the soldiers it was neces- 
sary to take up money matters with Pignatti, the 
district commissar, and increase the allowance to one 
thousand roubles, substituting the good food of the 
soldiers for the unnecessary and luxurious. 

As I said before, Kerensky promised the soldiers 
some pay additional to their previous daily allow- 
ance. The month of November came and no ad- 
ditional money was forwarded to us. Again the sol- 
diers came to me and said : "They promise us every- 
thing and give us nothing. We are going to procure 
for ourselves the daily pay. We intend to demolish 
the shops and to obtain daily pay in this manner/* 
Once more I had to visit Pignattt and borrow from 
him fifteen thousand roubles. In this way I dis* 
tributed tx> the soldiers daily pay to the amount of 
fifty kopejes, and shut their mouths for a time. At 
the same time the soldiers made up their mind to 

96 



EXAMINATION OF . S, K O B Y L I N S K T 

send delegates to Moscow and Petrograd to settle 
this question of pay. They chose for their mission 
Matveieff and Lupin. After some time they both 
returned (Matveieff returned as an officer); they 
said that they were promised that the money would 
be forwarded. Again I had to go to Pignatti and 
beg him once more for fifteen thousand roubles, as 
the soldiers did not believe any more in promises, 
and being out of my control, could create an un- 
believable amount of trouble. 

When the soldiers learned from the newspapers 
that the men called to the colours in 1906-1907 
were demobilised, they demanded their demobilisa- 
tion also. After I got on my side the soldiers who 
were not to be demobilised the others were per- 
suaded to stay. 

Then came the Bolshevist revolution. The wild 
movement that spread throughout Russia caused us 
many sufferings. It was about this time that the 
following incident took place: Father Vasi- 
lieff, the clergyman who performed divine service, 
was not a man of great tact. Although he was very 
well disposed towards the imperial family, he ren- 
dered them very poor service by his behaviour. On 
October 24* (before the Bolshevist revolution), 
the day of the anniversary of the accession of the 
emperor to the throne, the imperial family was 
having its communion. (The day before, during the 
night service held in the house the imperial family 
had made their confessions,) Nobody took any par* 

97 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

ticular notice of divine service on this day, but 
Father Vasilieff permitted a very foolish thing to 
happen: when the imperial family left the church, 
the church bells rang continuously until the family 
entered the house. 

At Christmas, on December 25th, the imperial 
family was present in church during the early serv- 
ice. As was the custom, after the service a thanks- 
giving prayer took place. On account of the cold 
weather I relieved the sentries from their posts be- 
fore the end of the service, leaving only a small 
number on duty by the church. Some of the re- 
maining soldiers entered the church, the older ones, 
to pray, but the majority to warm themselves. Usu- 
ally the total number of soldiers in the church at 
any one time was very small. On entering the 
church on this day I noticed that there were more 
soldiers present than usual. I could not explain 
how it happened- Maybe the reason was that Christ* 
mas was considered a big holiday. When the 
thanksgiving service was coming to an end I left 
the church and ordered a soldier to call the guard* 
After that I did not enter the church and I did not 
hear the end of the service. When the imperial 
family left the church, Pankratoff, who was there 
too* said to me : "Do you know what the priest has 
done? He has read the prayer for the pro* 
longation of the life of the emperor, the empress 
and the whole family, mentioning their names in 
the prayer- After the soldiers heard it they started 
98 



EXAMINATION OF E. S. KOBYLI.NSKY 

grumbling.'' This useless demonstration of Father 
Vasilieff resulted in much trouble. The soldiers 
started an uprising and made up their minds to kill, 
or at least to arrest the clergyman. It was very 
difficult to persuade them not to take any aggres- 
sive steps and to await the decision of an investigat- 
ing committee. The bishop, Hermogen, immedi- 
ately transferred Father Vasilieff to the Abalaksky 
monastery for the time being, the situation was so 
strained. I went to the bishop personally and re- 
quested that another clergyman be appointed. After 
that Father Hlynoff performed the services for the 
imperial family* 

The results of these troubles with the clergyman 
was that the soldiers lost all faith in my word* 
Their comment was: "When the service takes place 
in their home, probably a prayer for the prolonga- 
tion of the life of the imperial family is always 
made/* So the men decided not to allow the im- 
perial family to go to church, and to permit them 
to pray only -in the presence of a soldier. The only 
thing I could obtain for them was permission for 
the imperial family to visit church on the "Dvounar 
desiaty-Prasdniky" (very important holy days in the 
orthodox church). I had to submit to their decision 
that a soldier should be present at divine service 
at home. In this way the tactlessness of Father 
Vasilieff was the reason why the soldiers were per- 
mitted to enter the house, which, prior to that time,, 
they were not allowed to do, Another incident 

99 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

happened a little later. A soldier by the name of 
Rybakoff was present at divine service and heard the 
clergyman during his prayer using the name of 
Queen Alexandra (a saint)* A new fuss was started* 
I had to call up Rybakoff, find a calendar, and ex- 
plain to him that during the prayers they did not 
speak of the Empress Alexandra Theodorovna, but 
only of a saint by the name of Queen Alexandra. 

When the demobilisation of the army took place 
my sharpshooters began to take their discharge. In- 
stead of the old soldiers who were departing, some 
young oats were sent from the reserves of Czarskoo 
Selo. And those soldiers that came, having previ- 
ously been located in the centre of the political 
struggle, were vicious and corrupt. 

The Pisarevsky group increased in number and 
was strengthened by new Bolsheviki arriving. 
Finally, Pankratoff, due to the propaganda of Pisa- 
revsky, was declared to be "counter-revolutionary'' 
and expelled by the soldiers. He departed and so 
did Nikolsky. 

The soldiers sent a telegram requesting the pres- 
ence of a Bolshevik commissar in Tobolsk, but for 
some reason the commissar did not arrive. 

Not knowing what other objections could be made, 
the soldiers decided to forbid the persons of the 
suite to leave the house- I explained how ridiculous 
this demand was. They changed their mind and de- 
<ded to let them go out, but only ia the company 
of a sentry. Finally they got sick of that and 
100 



EXAMINATION OF E. S. 1C O B Y JL I N S K V 

changed their minds so as to let everybody out of 
the house twice a week, and each time for not longer 
than two hours, but without the company of a sentry. 

On one occasion, wishing to say good-bye to a large 
number of departing soldiers, the emperor and em- 
press ascended a small hill formed of ice for the 
amusement of the children. The remaining soldiers, 
feeling very angry about it, levelled the little hill 
to the ground, saying that somebody might shoot at 
the imperial family when they were on the top of 
the hill, and the guard would be responsible for it. 

One day the emperor dressed himself in a "tcher- 
keska" (uniform of a tribe) and wore a dagger in his 
belt. Tumult started amongst the soldiers: 'They 
must be searched, they carry weapons.'* I made 
great efforts to persuade them not to make the search. 
Personally I went to see the emperor and, explain-* 
ing the situation, asked him to give me the dagger 
(later it was taken by RodionofF)* Dolgoruky and 
Gilliard handed me their swords and these were all 
hung up on the wall of my office, 

I have quoted the words of Kerensky spoken, be- 
fore our departure from Czarskoe-Selo. The im-* 
penal family wa$ in no need of anything in Tobolsk, 
but money vanished and no more arrived. We be* 
gan to live on credit* I wrote about this to Lieu- 
tenant General Anitchkoff> who was charged with 
the intendency of the court, but with no results. 
Finally, Haritonoff, the cook, told me that he was 
no longer trusted and that it looked as if they 

101 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

wouldn't give him anything more on credit, I went 
to the director of the Tobolsk branch of the na- 
tional bank and he advised me to speak to a mer- 
chant X, who was a monarchist, and had some money 
free in the bank. By virtue of a letter of exchange 
endorsed by Tatischeff, Dolgoruky and myself, the 
merchant gave me twenty thousand roubles. Of 
course I asked Tatischeff and Dolgoruky to remain 
silent about this loan and by no means to mention 
it to the emperor or any one of the imperial family. 
All these events were very trying to me. This was 
hell and not life. My nerves were strained to the 
limit of their endurance. It was very hard for me 
to look for and beg money for the maintenance of 
the imperial family, so one day when the soldiers 
made a resolution that the officers should take off 
their shoulder straps, I could stand no more, I 
understood that I had lost absolutely all control of 
the men and realised my impotence. I went to the 
house and asked Tegleva to report to the emperor 
that I begged to be received by him* The emperor 
received me in Tegleva's room and I said to him: 
"Your majesty, authority is slipping out of my 
hands. They took off our shoulder straps. I can't 
be useful to you any more. I wish to resign, if you 
will not object to it. My nerves are strained* I am 
exhausted/* The emperor put his arm over my 
shoulder, his eyes were filled with tears. He said to 
me: "I beg of you to remain, Evgenii Stepano- 
vitch, for my sake, for the sakt of my wife and for 
102 



EXAMINATION OF E. S. KOBYLINSKY 

the sake of my children. You must stand it. You 
see that all of us are suffering/' 

Then he embraced me and we kissed each other. I 
resolved to remain. 

It happened once that Dorofeef, a soldier of the 
fourth regiment (the apearance of the detachment 
changed completely), came and told me that at a 
meeting of the soldiers' committee it was decided 
that the emperor must take off his shoulder straps 
and he was charged to go with me and take them off* 
I tried to persuade Dorofeef not to do it* He be- 
haved aggressively, calling the emperor "Nicol- 
ashka" and was extremely angry during the conver- 
sation. I pointed out to him that it would be very 
embarrassing if the emperor were to refuse to do it. 
The soldier answered: "If he refuses to do it I will 
tear them off myself/' Then I said : "But suppose he 
strikes you in the face?' He replied: "Then I will 
strike him also/' What more could I do? I tried 
again to persuade him, saying that things are not al- 
ways as easy as they look and that the emperor was a 
cousin of the king of England, and that very serious 
complications might follow. I advised the soldiers 
to ask instructions from Moscow, I caught them on 
that point they left me and wired to Moscow, 
Then I went to see Tatischeff, asking him to beg the 
emperor to refrain from wearing shoulder straps in 
the presence of the soldiers. After that the emperor 
wore a black fur Romanoff overcoat that bore no 
shoulder straps* 

103 



THE LAST PAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

Swings were made for the children. The grand 
duchesses used them. The soldiers of the second 
regiment while on sentry duty carved out on the 
board of the swings with their bayonets the most 
Indecent words. The emperor saw them and the 
board was removed. This was done when Sergeant 
Shikunoff was the captain of the guard. He was a 
Bolshevik. 

I do not remember what day It was when I re- 
ceived a telegram from Karelin, a commissar in 
charge of the former ministry of the imperial court. 
It stated that the nation had no more means to main- 
tain the czar's family, that they ought to support 
themselves and the Soviets would give them only 
a soldier's ration, quarters and heat. 

This was one of the worst hardships inflicted by 
the Bolshevik! on the imperial family. It was also 
said in the telegram that the family could not spend 
more than six hundred roubles monthly per person. 
Naturally, after this order, the quality of the food 
served to the family deteriorated It acted detri- 
mentally also on the position of the persons belong- 
ing to the suite. The imperial family could not any 
longer maintain the persons belonging to their suite* 
so those who had no money of their own were obliged 
to leave. A number of servants were discharged: 
(i) The waiter, Gregory Ivanoff Solodouhm; (2) 
The waiter, Ermolai GusefF; (3) Dormidontoff, the 
waiter; (4) Kisseleff, the waiter; (5) Vereschagin 
the cook; (6) Semen Michailoff, the cook's assistant; 
104 



EXAMINATION OF E, S K O B Y I, I N S K Y 

(7) Francis Purkovsky; (8) Stepan Makaroff, Tche- 
modouroff's assistant; (9) Stupel, the valet (I for- 
got to mention his name before as having been among 
the servants) ; and there were some others. 

The soldiers still having their minds occupied with 
the question of their daily pay sent to Moscow a 
man by the name of Loupin, a Bolshevik. Having 
returned, he described the situation in Moscow in 
rosy hues and brought the very encouraging news to 
the soldiers that instead of the fifty kopeks per day 
they received at the time of the provisional govern- 
ment, they were to get three roubles per day. This 
news quickly made all the soldiers Bolshevik, "This 
shows what a good sort commissars really are. The 
provisional government promised us fifty kopeks per 
day, but did not pay it* The commissars will give us 
three roubles per day/' Joyfully they told this 
aews to one another* 

Loupin brought the paper that contained the order 
to put Tatischeff, Dolgoruky, Hendrikova and 
Schneider under arrest. He also brought the news 
chat our detachment would soon be relieved and a 
new commissar sent with a fresh detachment of men. 
[ suppose the soldiers were afraid of the arrival of 
the new commissar. All persons belonging to the 
suite they decided to transfer to the Governor's 
house and to put them under guard there. All these 
persons were moved to the house except Gibbes (the 
Eaglishmaa did not like to live with anybody else, 
so he was allowed to live outside). 

105 



THE LAST PAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

New partitions were made in the house, in the en- 
trance room adjoining Tchemodouroffs room, 
thereby providing space for Demidova, Tegleva and 
Ersberg. Demidova's room was divided by a cur- 
tain, and Tatischeff and Dolgoruky were quar- 
tered there. In the room where Ersberg and Teg* 
leva previously lived, Schneider and her two maids 
were placed. The room previously occupied by 
Toutelberg was, given to Hendrikova and Niko- 
laieva. Toutelberg was placed under the main stair- 
way behind the partition. In such a manner we 
were able to avoid intruding upon the privacy of the 
imperial family. 

Gibbes was settled in a small house near the kitch- 
en. So all persons, including the servants, were 
under arrest. Only in cases of the utmost neces- 
sity were a few of the servants allowed to go to 
town. 

As I said, Loupin brought news of the coming of a 
new commissar. The commissar arrived, but he was 
not the same man that Loupin had been speaking 
about. The commissar who was sent from Omsk 
to supervise the life of the imperial family, was a 
Jew named Dutzman. He took up his quarters in 
Korniloff s house. He did not play any active part, 
and never came to the house* Very soon he was 
elected to be secretary of the district soviet and 
stayed there j>ermanently. 

During this time the leaders of the soviet were: 
Dut2man, a Jew named Peissel and a Lett named 
106 



EXAMINATION OF E. S. KOBYLINSKT 

Disler. Zaslavsky also apparently took part in the 
soviet activities. He was, as I understand, the rep- 
resentative of Yekaterinburg, or, properly speaking,, 
Ural district soviet. The reason for his arrival was 
not clear to me. It seemed that at this time the 
Omsk Bolsheviki were quarrelling with those of Ye- 
katerinburg. The Omsk Bolsheviki desired to in- 
clude Tobolsk under their jurisdiction in Western 
Siberia; but the Yekaterinburg people wanted to in- 
clude it in the Ural district. Dutzman .was an Omsk 
Bolsheviki representative, and Zaslavsky was a rep- 
resentative of Yekaterinburg Bolsheviki. I presume 
that Zaslavsky came to Tobolsk because, even at this 
time, the Yekaterinburg Bolsheviki intended to move 
us from Tobolsk to Yekaterinburg. Matveieff, a 
Bolshevik, whom I have mentioned many times, used 
to visit the soviet frequently* Once he told me that 
the soviet asked that two soldiers selected from each 
company should call on them. Six soldiers were 
delegated* They informed me that the soviet had 
decided to transfer all the czar's family "To the 
Hill," which meant prison. 

(The Tobolsk prison was situated on a height, 
so it was called "The Hill")- I pointed out 
that the czar's family were under the authority of 
the central soviet and not of the local soviet, but this 
did not help, I advanced another argument, saying 
that it was impossible to execute their order or de- 
mand, as with the imperial family it would be neces- 
sary also to transfer to the prison all the soldiers of 

107 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

our detachment which was not practicable, and 
that we could not do otherwise, as in case of an attack 
on the prison there would be no force left to defend 
it. Our soldiers began to get boisterous, and the 
soviet was obliged to change their opinion and an- 
nounced that no decision had yet been arrived at, 
but that the soviet merely mentioned this suggestion 
in a tentative way. 

All of us were awaiting the arrival of the new 
commissar. It was rumoured that it was Trotzky 
himself who was coming. Finally the Commissar 
lakovleff arrived. He came to Tobolsk in the eve- 
ning of February pth and stayed in KornilofFs 
house. He was accompanied by a certain Avdeieff 
(I considered him to be lakovleffs assistant), a 
telegraph operator, who was transmitting lakovleff 1 s 
telegrams to Moscow and to Yekaterinburg, and a 
young boy. 

lakovleff appeared to be thirty-two or thirty-three. 
His hair was of jet black colour; he was taller than 
the average; thin, but strong and muscular, appar* 
ently Russian; gave the impression of being very 
energetic; he was dressed like a sailor; his words 
were short and abrupt; but his language was sug- 
gestive of a good education; his hands were clean 
and hk fingers thin; he gave one the impression of 
being cultivated and having acquired a training and 
experience usually associated with those who have 
lived abroad for a long time. Leaving Gilliard, he 
said: "Bon jour. Monsieur/ 1 (This showed some 
108 



EXAMINATION OF E. S. KOBYLINSKY 

knowledge of French.) lakovleff told me that he 
lived in Finland, where for some reason or other he 
had been sentenced to be hanged. He succeeded in es- 
caping, and later lived in Switzerland and in Ger- 
many. As far as I remember his Christian names 
were Vasily Vasilievitch, lakovleff being his surname. 

Avdeieff appeared to be about twenty-six or 
twenty-seven years of age, medium height, rather 
thin, dirty, uncultivated; he wore soldier's clothes. 
His face was round but not fat and bore no signs of 
drunkenness. 

lakovleff said that he was born in Ufa or per- 
haps somewhere in the Ufa district. A detachment 
of Reds came with him. They were cavalry and 
infantry and all young soldiers, lakovleff's idea 
was to make us understand that he was quite popu- 
lar in Ufa, that he knew there quite a large num- 
ber of people; and for this reason he had organised 
his detachment there. His men/ were quartered 
partly in KornilofPs house and partly in the apart- 
ment occupied by my soldiers. On the morning of 
April loth lakovleff came to me together with Mat- 
veieff and introduced himself as extraordinary com- 
missar. Three documents were in his hands. All 
these documents bore the imprint of the "Russian 
Federated Soviet Republic" and were signed 
by; Sverdloff and Ovauesoff (or Avanesoff). The 
first document was addressed to me and con- 
tained an order for me to execute without delay 
all the requests of the extraordinary commissar, 

109 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

Tovarisch (comrade) lakovleff, who was assigned 
to perform a mission of great importance. My re- 
fusal or neglect to execute these orders would result 
In my being killed on the spot. The second docu- 
ment was addressed to the soldiers of our detach- 
ment. It contained the same orders as the first, and 
carried also a threat of the same penalty court- 
martial by a revolutionary tribunal and instant 
death. The third document was an identification of 
lakovleff that stated the fact of his having been ap- 
pointed for an extraordinary mission, but no de- 
tails of the character of the mission were given. 
Without explaining to me the reason of his arrival, 
lakovleff told me that he wanted to talk to the 
soldiers. At eleven o'clock I assembled the men of 
my detachment. lakovleff announced to them that 
their representative "Tovarisch" (comrade) Loupin, 
had been in Moscow, where he petitioned for an 
increase in their daily allowance. Now lakovleff 
had brought the money with him. Every soldier 
was to get three roubles per day* After that he ex- 
hibited his identification. Matveieff read it aloud* 
The soldiers started to examine the document. They 
paid great attention to the seal on it. It appeared 
as if they did not have very much confidence in 
lakovleff* lakovleff understood this and began 
speaking about daily allowances, the time for the 
relief of our detachment, and things of the same 
sort. Apparently he knew very well how to handle 
a mob and how to play upon their weak points, 
no 



EXAMINATION OF E. S. KOBYLINSKY 

He spoke eloquently and earnestly. At the conclu- 
sion of his speech he dwelt on the misunderstanding 
between the soldiers and the local soviet that oc- 
curred on account of the Soviet's decision to im- 
prison the imperial family, and he promised to 
settle this question. After that he went with me to 
see the house. He looked first at the exterior view; 
then he entered the lower floor, and then the upper. 
As far as I can remember, he saw from a distance 
the emperor and the grand duchesses, who were at 
that time in the court. I suppose he did not see 
the empress, but, as I remember, accompanied by 
Avdeieff, he visited the czarevitch. I had the im- 
pression that lakovleff tried to persuade Avdeieff 
that the czarevitch was ill. I remember that this 
day the officer on duty was Ensign Semenoff. Av- 
deieff wished to remain in the room of the officer 
of the day, but Semenoff protested and succeeded 
in drawing Avdeieff away. Nothing else happened 
during this day. 

On April nth lakovleff again requested that the 
soldiers be assembled. There came to the meeting 
with him, Zaslavsky, a representative of the soviet, 
and Degtiareff, a student. The student was sent 
from Omsk, so he represented the Siberian interests 
in the Tobolsk soviet. Zaslavsky represented the in- 
terests of the Ural district. The student began to 
speak to the soldiers. He accused Zaslavsky of up- 
setting the nerves of the soldiers, of spreading false 
rumours about the danger threatening the imperial 

ill 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

family, and of saying that somebody was digging a 
tunnel under the house. Such rumours were really 
afoot, and once we passed a very disturbed night 
awaiting trouble. These rumours originated in the 
soviet- I had learned about them when I went to the 
soviet the time they resolved to imprison the impe- 
rial family. At this time the main argument for their 
decision was the "danger for the imperial family 
in remaining in the Governor's house." Such was 
the substance of the student's speech. Zaslavsky 
vainly tried to defend himself* He was hissed and 
went away. Zaslavsky came to Tobolsk about a 
week before lakovleff's arrival and left Tobolsk 
about six hours before lakovleffs departure. Later 
I will tell you the motive of this performance in 
assembling the soldiers and why lakovleff had to 
do it* 

The same day at eleven o'clock in the evening, 
Captain Aksiouta came to me and reported that 
lakovleff had assembled the detachment's committee 
and announced his intention of taking the czar's 
family out of Tobolsk- lakovleff said that not only 
the emperor but also the whole family would have 
to leave. In the morning on the 12th of April 
lakovleff came to me and said that according to the 
decision of "the central executive committee** he 
must take the family out of Tobolsk* I asked htm: 
<<Why?'* and "What will you do with the csat** 
vitch*? He can not travel as he is sick." lakovleff 
answered me : **This certainly is the trouble* I have 
112 



EXAMINATION OF E. S. KOBYLINSKY 

talked this matter over through direct wire with the 
C. E, C. and received the order to leave the family 
in Tobolsk and to transfer only the emperor." (Usu- 
ally he called him "the former emperor.") "When 
could we go to see them? I intend to leave the town 
tomorrow/' I told him he might see the family after 
lunch around two o'clock. Then he left me. I 
went to the house and asked, as far as I remember, 
Tatischeff, to ask the emperor at what time he could 
receive lakovleff and myself. The emperor made 
an appointment at two o'clock, after lunch was oven 
At two o'clock lakovleff and I entered the hall. The 
emperor and empress stood in the middle of the halL 
lakovleff stopped a little distance from them and 
bowed. Then he said : "I have to tell you" (he was 
talking to the emperor only), "that I am the special 
representative of the Moscow Central Executive 
Committee, and my mission is to take all your 
family out of Tobolsk, but, as your son is ill, I have 
received a second order which says that you alone 
must leave/* The emperor answered: "I will not go 
anywhere." Upon which lakovleff said: "I beg you 
not to refuse, I am compelled to execute the order. 
In case of your refusal I must take you by force 
or resign. In the latter case they would probably 
decide to send a less scrupulous sort of man to take 
Bay position. Be calm, I am responsible with my 
life for your security. If you do not want to go 
alone you could take with you the people you desire. 
B$ ready* we are leaving tomorrow at four o'clock/ 1 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

Then lakovleff again bowed to the emperor and 
the empress and left. At the same time the emperor, 
who did not reply to lakovleff's last words, turned 
abruptly and accompanied by the empress, went out 
of the hall. lakovleff went down. I followed him, 
but when we were going out the emperor made a 
sign to me to remain. I went down with lakovleff 
and after he left, returned upstairs. In the hall I 
saw the emperor, empress, Tatischeff, and Dolgo- 
ruky. They stayed by the round table in the corner. 
The emperor asked me where they intended to take 
him. I replied that personally I did not know, but 
that it was possible to understand from some hints 
made by lakovleff that it was intended to take the 
emperor to Moscow. The following reasons made 
me think of that: In the morning on the 12th of 
April, lakovleff came to me and said that he would 
go at first with the emperor, then return to gbt the 
family. I asked him: "When do you intend tacome 
back? 9 * lakovleff answered: "Well, in four or five 
days we will reach our destination. I will remain 
there a few days and start back. I will be herfe again 
in about ten days or two weeks." This is the reason 
why I told the emperor that lakovieff intended to 
take him to Moscow* Then the emperor said: **I 
suppose they want to force me to sign the Brest- 
Litovsk treaty, but I would rather give my right 
hand to be cut off than to sign that treaty." "I shall 
also go," said the empress giving evidence of deep 
emotion* "If I am not there they will force him to 
114 



EXAMINATION OF E. S. K O B Y L I N S K Y 

do something in the same way that it was done Be- 
fore," and added something about Rodzianko, Ob- 
viously the empress referred to the emperor's 
abdication. 

Thus ended the conversation and I went to Kor- 
niloff's house to see lakovleff. He asked me who 
were the persons going. And he repeated (for the 
second time), that anybody could go with the em- 
peror on condition that he did not take much bag- 
gage. 

I returned to the house and asked Tatischeff to let 
me know who were the persons who intended to go. 
I promised to call in an hour's time for the answer. 
I came back and Tatischeff said to me that the fol- 
lowing persons were leaving Tobolsk: the emperor, 
the empress, the Grand Duchess Maria, Botkin, Dol- 
goruky, Tchemodouroff, Sedneff, the waiter, and 
Demidova, the maid. When I reported the names 
to lakovleff he answered : "It's all the same to me/' 
I suppose lakovleff's only idea was to get the em- 
peror out of Tobolsk as soon as possible. When he 
noticed the emperor's unwillingness to go alone, 
lakovleff thought: "That's all the same to me; let 
him take whom he likes; but do it quickly." That 
was the reason why he repeated so often: "That's all 
the same, let them take anybody they want" not 
expressing the second part of this thought "Do it 
quickly/' He did not mention it but all his actions 
indicated that that really was his desire. He was 
also in a great hurry and for this reason too he gave 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

the order to limit the amount of baggage. I did not 
enter the house any more on this day, I thought 
that they would feel better if they were left to them* 
selves, so I did not go there. The family at this 
time was making preparations for the departure. 
As Gilliard told me, the empress was extremely 
downhearted. Though a very reserved woman, she 
nevertheless worried much about her decision to go 
with the emperor, which involved leaving her be* 
loved son behind. If the empress knew that they were 
going to take her to Yekaterinburg, why should she 
have been depressed? Yekaterinburg is not so far 
from Tobolsk. But she felt from all of lakovlefFs 
actions, and so did everybody else in the house, that 
he was not taking them to Yekaterinburg, but to 
some other distant place, such as Moscow* And that 
they were not taking them away in order to advance 
their interests in any way, but for something else, 
that was connected with the state's interest, and that 
once in Moscow the emperor would be compelled to 
make some very serious and responsible decisions* 
The emperor had the same ideas and apprehensions. 
He expressed them when he spoke of the Brest- 
Litovsk treaty. 

I did not sleep all that night. According to the 
order of lakovleff, in the evening I assembled the 
soldiers again. lakovleff explained to the men that 
he intended to take the emperor out of Tobolsk; he 
did not name the place he was taking him to, and 
asked the soldiers to keep the matter secret 
116 



EXAMINATION OF E. S. K O B Y L I N S K Y 

From whom was lakovleff hiding his intentions? 
I explain it in this way: In the local soviet (Pes- 
sel, Disler, Kagomitzky, Pisarevsky and his wife} 
there were two factions the Siberian, that consid- 
ered Tobolsk in their sphere of influence; and the 
Uralian, that considered Tobolsk to be in their 
region. Zaslavsky represented the second. What 
was the reason for his arrival in Tobolsk? I could 
not explain that. Many things are still a mystery to 
me. I don't know whether he came to Tobolsk be- 
cause we were there or not. It was perfectly clear 
from lakovleff's speeches that he, lakovleff, repre- 
sented a third power, the central Moscow authorities. 
After he came to Tobolsk he began to fear an opposi- 
tion to the removal of the imperial family from the 
Tobolsk soviet. However, he settled this matter 
with the Tobolsk soviet* Zaslavsky was opposed 
to the removal, so I think that lakovleff asked the 
soldiers to keep the departure of the imperial family 
secret because he feared that the local authorities 
would interfere. So I felt persuaded that lakovleff, 
being a representative of the third power, worked 
in accordance with its desires, fulfilled the instruc- 
tions he got from them in Moscow, and that that 
was the place where the imperial family was to be 
taken. 

It appeared that the soldiers were confused and 
disturbed by lakovlefPs declarations and by his anx- 
iety for secrecy. I noticed they were afraid for 
themselves, for fear some evil might befall them 

117 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

in consequence of all this. They said it was neces- 
sary for them to go with the emperor, and told 
lakovleff this. 

lakovleff at first refused this demand, saying that 
his own detachment was quite reliable. But finally 
he made a compromise and a small detachment of six 
men from our soldiers was selected to escort the 
emperor. 

At four o'clock a. m. the Siberian carriages 
(Koshevy) were prepared. One carriage had a 
cover; the seat was made of straw, which was tied 
with strings to the body of the carriage. The em- 
peror, the empress and all other persons left the 
house. The emperor embraced and kissed me. The 
empress gave me her hand. lakovleff seated himself 
in the same carriage as the emperor. The empress 
took her seat with the Grand Duchess Maria; Dol- 
goruky with Botkin, Tchemodouroff with Sedneff* 
There were some carriages containing soldiers at the 
head and some in the rear. The departing detach- 
ment was composed partly of our soldiers, but mostly 
of lakovleff s. Two machine guns were with the de- 
tachment, A number of cavalrymen from lakov* 
lefFs detachment accompanied the party* There 
were also some carriages with the baggage. They all 
started on their trip about four o'clock. After their 
departure everybody in the house was distressed and 
sad. I noticed that even the soldiers had the same 
feeling. They began to behave in a more humane 
way towards the emperor's children. Later, when I 
118 



EXAMINATION OF E. S. KOBYLINSKY 

was in Tumen, I was told by one of the coachmen 
who accompanied the imperial party that as soon as 
they reached the stage posts, the horses were im- 
mediately changed and the journey continued with- 
out any delay. Once the horses were changed in the 
village of Pokrovskoe, where the stage post was 
situated, opposite to a house formerly belonging to 
Rasputin. I was told that his wife was standing by 
the house and his daughter was looking out of the 
window. Both of them made the sign of the cross 
to the czar's family. 

I had asked two soldiers, Lebedeff and Nabokoff 
(who were a good sort of men from our detachment), 
to telegraph to me along the route how things were 
proceeding. I got a telegram from Lebedeff that 
was sent from the village Ivlevo. Nabokoff tele- 
graphed me from Pokrovskoe. Both of their tele- 
grams were very brief. "Proceeding safely." One 
telegram was sent from a railway station: "Proceed- 
ing safely. God bless you; how is the little one? 
lakovleff." Of course the telegram was written by 
the emperor or empress, but sent by lakovlefFs per- 
mission. 

On the 2oth of April the committee of our de- 
tachment received a telegram from Matveieff who 
informed them of the arrival at Yekaterinburg, I can 
not remember the exact words, but we were all sur- 
prised at its contents- We were all thunder-struck, 
as we were previously convinced that the emperor 
and empress would be taken to Moscow* We began 

119 



THE I/AST BAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

to await the return of the soldiers from the escorting 
detachment. After they returned Loupin made a 
report to our soldiers. He scored the Yekaterinburg 
Bolsheviki. Labedeff and Nabokoff told me the fol- 
lowing: Having arrived at Tumen, the emperor, the 
empress and the other persons were placed in a pas- 
senger car (I can not tell you anything about the 
arrangement in the car) ; this car was guarded by our 
six soldiers. From Tumen they proceeded in the 
direction of Yekaterinburg. In one station they 
learned that they would not be allowed to proceed 
beyond Yekaterinburg, where they would be held 
up. (This was a mistake of lakovlefFs. Zaslavsky 
left Tobolsk a few hours before him, and I suppose, 
informed the Yekaterinburg soviet of the departure 
of the imperial family from Tobolsk.) Having 
learned this news lakovleff turned the train back to 
Omsk, in order to go forward via Ufa, Cheliabinsk* 
etc. As I understood Nabokoff, the train was ap- 
proaching Omsk, when it was stopped a second time, 
lakovleff went out in order to find what was hap- 
pening. He learned that Yekaterinburg informed 
Omsk that lakovleff was declared to be an outlaw 
*on account of his intention to take the czar* s family 
to Japan. lakovleff went to Omsk personally and 
had a talk with Moscow by a direct wire* After 
returning he announced: "I have orders to go to 
Yekaterinburg/' 

Arriving in Yekaterinburg^ the emperor, empress* 
Grand Duchess Maria, Bockin, Tchemodouroff* 
130 



EXAMINATION OF . S. KOBYLINSKY 

Sedneff and Demidova were placed in IpatlefFs 
house* Dolgoniky was taken to prison. All our 
soldiers were kept in the car, and later disarmed and 
arrested. They were kept under arrest for a few 
days and then released. Each of our arrested soldiers 
received different treatment. Lebedeff and Nabo- 
koff were treated worse than the others. Matveieff 
and some of the others a little better. They were 
released at different times* On one occasion Mat- 
veieff went (for what purpose I do not know), to 
see Goloschekoff and Beloborodoff. When all of 
them were released and placed in a railway car in 
order to go back to Tobolsk, lakovleff came to them 
and said that he had resigned and was going to 
Moscow, and that the soldiers should go with him 
and report about everything that had happened. It 
was clear that lakovleff regarded the stoppage of 
the train at Yekaterinburg as an act of insubordina- 
tion of the Yekaterinburg Bolshevik! to the orders of 
the central authorities. What was the matter? Why 
could lakovleff not proceed to Moscow? (The 
soldiers said that he finally left them and went to 
Moscow alone.) I explain those events in this way: 
Yekaterinburg was a centre of widespread Bolshe- 
vism* It was the capital of the whole Ural region : 
'The Red Yekaterinburg/ 1 I heard that Moscow 
reproached the Yekaterinburg Bolsheviki for spend- 
ing too much money and threatened that they would 
stop sending them money altogether if they did not 
expend it more economically in future. Following 

121 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

their local interests, the Yekaterinburg Bolsheviki 
detained the imperial family in Yekaterinburg as 
hostages, in order to converse with Moscow in a freer 
manner and make Moscow more amenable to their 
demands. Possibly I am mistaken, but that is my 
idea. 

Further, "the telegraph operator who remained 
after lakovlefPs departure received a telegram that 
read as follows: "Take the detachment with you 
and depart. I have resigned and am not responsible 
for the consequences/' A part of lakovlefPs de- 
tachment was still remaining in Tobolsk; and that is 
why lakovleff sent the telegram. The telegraph 
operator, a very young man, and the soldiers of the 
detachment departed. I don't know where they were 
going. Avdeieff left Tobolsk before lakovleff, as 
he was sent by lakovleff in order to prepare a train 
for the imperial family. 

Some time elapsed when our detachment com- 
mittee received a telegram from Moscow (I don't 
know from whom it came. It announced that lakov- 
leff was replaced by Hohriakoff. About the ap- 
pearance of Hohriakoff in Tobolsk I will tell the 
following: There were no real Bolsheviki in the 
Tobolsk soviet. The leaders were mostly social 
revolutionists- So it was even at the time when 
almost everywhere the Soviets consisted of com- 
munists. There was a time when even Nikolsky was 
temporary chairman of the soviet* Later, Dimitrieff, 
an extraordinary "Commissar," came from Omsk to 
122 



EXAMINATION OF E. S. KOBYLINSKY 

Tobolsk. His intention was to organise the Bolshe- 
vik power. A special detachment of soldiers ar- 
rived with him from Omsk. At the same time Yekat- 
erinburg claimed that Tobolsk was in their jurisdic- 
tion, so another detachment arrived from Tumen. 
But Dimitrieff, as representative of Siberian opinion, 
had the upper hand and the Tumen detachment left. 
Having organised the Bolshevik power, Dimitrieff 
Burned to Omsk. During this period of organ- 
the soviet rule in Tobolsk Hohriakoff 
was the flI l &^^^h 1 ?li ; ^man of the soviet. In those days 
various BolsheviKctgfachments arrived from differ- 
ent places at Tobolsk. A detachment of Letts was 
also formed there. Long before the imperial family 
had all left Tobolsk, the Letts were already there, 
and created considerable disorder, as for example, 
when they searched Baroness Buxhoevden. I do not 
know who was their commander, but he apparently 
did not please Hohriakoff, and was relieved by 
Rodionoff who came from Yekaterinburg. A short 
time after Hohriakoff took his appointment, re- 
placing lakovleff as commissar, he received a tele- 
gram from someone in Moscow that instructed him 
to remove all the remaining members of the family 
to Yekaterinburg. I must not forget to mention 
that Hohriakoff after being appointed commissar, 
ordered Rodionoff to come from Yekaterinburg to 
Tobolsk* When asking for Rodionoff from Yekat- 
erinburg, Hohriakoff had in mind that he would 
be in charge of the imperial family, but not of the 

123 



JTHE 1AST PAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

Tobolsk district* Hohriakoff did not act as the 
chairman of the district soviet, but in the capacity 
of an extraordinary commissar having supervision 
of the imperial family. Some time after he was 
appointed commissar, however, before our detach* 
ment was relieved by Letts, I went to the house. 
Our soldiers were on sentry duty* They did not 
allow me to enter, saying that that was Hohriak- 
offs orders. I applied to Hohriakoff. "They 
did not understand me," he answered. For several 
days after this incident took place I continued to 
visit the house. But shortly after Rodionoff ar- 
rived our guards were relieved by the Letts, who 
occupied all the sentry posts simultaneously and I 
was not allowed to enter the house. It was just 
a few days before the family left. How things went 
after this I can tell you, as I heard from people who 
remained in Tobolsk. I remember also that Rodion- 
off on his arrival, came to the house, assembled the 
members of the family, and made a regular roll 
call. This surprised me very much. Shortly after- 
wards, unexpectedly for me, the Letts assumed the 
sentry duties and I was not allowed to enter the 
house, I was told that the Letts behaved in the fol- 
lowing fashion. Once divine service took place in 
the house. The Letts searched the priest They 
searched the nuns in a very indecent manner and 
touched everything in the sanctuary* Rodionoff 
placed a Lett by the sanctuary in order to super- 
vise the priest. It created such an unhappy effect 
124 



EXAMINATION OF E. S. KOBYLINSKY 

that the Grand Duchess Olga wept, and said that if 
she had known beforehand that conditions were to 
have been like this she would never have made a 
request for divine service. 

After I was not allowed to enter the house any 
more, my nerves gave way, I became ill and 
had to remain in bed. The family left Tobolsk 
on the yth of May. I was unable to leave my bed 
and could not'bid them "Farewell" The following 
persons went to Yekaterinburg: (i) Tatischeff; (2) 
Derevenko; (3) Hendrikova; (4) Buxhoevden; (5) 
Schneider; (6) Gilliard; (7) Gibbes; (8) Tegleva; 
(9) Ersberg; (10) Toutelberg; (11) Mejantz; (12) 
Katia; (13) Masha; (14) Volkoff; (15) Nagorny; 
(16) Ivanoff; (17) Tutin; (18) Youravsky; (19), 
Troupp; (20) Haritonoff; (21) Kokicheff; (22) 
Leonid Sedneff. 

Soon after we were transferred to Tobolsk from 
Czarskoe-Selo two maids, Anna Utkina and Anna 
Pavlovna Romanova, joined us. The soldiers did 
not allow them to enter the house. They remained 
at Tobolsk and did not go to Yekaterinburg. I do 
not know where Hohriekoff came from. He was 
not educated and his capacities were not of a very 
high order* Previously he had been a stoker on a 
battle ship, the Alexander IL He usually wore a 
black leather suit. 

Neither do I know the origin of RodionofL He 
was about twenty-eight or thirty years of age, below 
medium height, not educated and produced an un- 

125 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

pleasant impression. He seemed to be a cruel and 
cunning man. Baroness Buxhoevden assured us 
that she had seen him during her travels abroad. She 
met him on one occasion at a frontier station in the 
uniform of a Russian gendarme. I should say we 
still felt the gendarme in him, though he was not a 
good type of gendarme soldier, but that of a cruel 
man with the manners of a secret service agent* 
After his arrival Rodionoff searched Nagorny when 
the latter returned to the house from the train. He 
found a letter from Dr. Derevenko's son to the 
czarevitch and reported it to Hohriakoff, saying: 
"That is a nice sort of man; he said that he had noth- 
ing, and I found this letter." Then addressing me he 
added: "I am sure that during your time numbers 
of things were smuggled in. 55 Hohriakoff was very 
pleased, saying: "I have been watching this rascal 
quite a time, he is a disgrace to us." That is what 
the sailor Hohriakoff was saying about the sailor, 
Nagorny. It could not be otherwise. One was 
"The beauty and the pride of the Russian Revolu- 
tion." 1 The other was a man devoted to the im- 
perial family, who loved the czarevitch, and who 
was loved by him, and for this reason he perished. 
Sedneff surely also perished for being "a disgrace/' 
as he was also a sailor and also devoted to the im* 
perial family. 

After the departure of the imperial family I was 

1 This is what Trotzfcy called the tailors of the Baltic Fleet 
after they had murdered their officers. Translator's Note. 
126 



EXAMINATION OF E. S. KOBYLINSKY 

cut off for a long time from all news and nobody 
could tell me anything about them. In June Omsk 
was taken from the Reds. The Omsk Bolshevik! 
escaped from Omsk on steamers and came to To- 
bolsk. Our Tobolsk Bolsheviki also ran away with 
them. Power in Tobolsk was taken into the hands 
of officers. Tumen continued to remain in the hands 
of the Bolsheviki. A fighting line separated us. 
Then I got news about Hohriakoff. He appeared 
to be in command of something on the river near 
Pokrovskoe (being a sailor, I suppose). They say 
that Matveieff was also in command. Tegleva told 
me afterwards that Hohriakoff was not permitted 
to go into the Ipatieff house, even though he was 
sure to be a commissar while there. After Tumen was 
taken, most of the people who left Tobolsk with 
the imperial family returned, except the following: 
(l) Dolgoruky; (2) Tatischeff; (3) Derevenko; 
(4) Hendrikova; (5) Botkin; (6) Schneider; (7) 
Tegleva; (8) Ersberg; (9) Toutelberg; (10) Volk- 
off; (11) Nagorny; (12) Tcliemodouroff; (13) Sed- 
neff; (14) Troupp; (15) Haritonoff; (16) Leonid 
Sednefi; (17) Ivanoff. 

They told us the following: During the journey 
of the imperial family they were treated in a dis- 
graceful manner. While they were on a steamer 
Rodionoff forbade them to lock their cabin doors 
from the inside, but Nagorny and the czarevitch were 
locked in by him from the outside. Nagorny got 
very angry and quarrelled with Rodionoff, telling 

127 



T.H.JS JLAST JL> A Y S U tf X Jti J KUMANOVS 

him that it was inhuman to a sick child. (Even 
here in Tobolsk Rodionoff displayed the same at- 
titude, and would not allow the Grand Duchess Olga 
to lock the door of her bedroom or even to shut it.) 

When the train (arrived at Yekaterinburg the 
czarevitch, the Grand Duchesses Olga, Maria, Tati- 
ana and Anastasia were transferred to the house. 
The emperor and empress were transferred also, with 
all the persons who accompanied them, except Dol- 
goruky, who was taken to prison* When the chil- 
dren came to Yekaterinburg the following persons 
were immediately arrested: Tatischeff, Hendrikova, 
Schneider and Volkoff. Lately I heard from Gilliard 
that Sedneff and Nagorny were also removed from 
the house. Gilliard and Gibbes witnessed that. 
Derevenko remained in Yekaterinburg. Tegleva, 
Ersberg and Ivanoff stayed in Tumen; Toutelburg 
at Kamyshloff . The following persons remained in 
the Ipatieff house with the imperial family: Tchem- 
odouroff, Sedneff (a boy), Troupp, Haritonoff, 
Demidova and Botkin. 

Some time after Yekaterinburg was taken Tchem-* 
odouroff came to Tobolsk. I saw him and talked 
with him. He came to Tobolsk absolutely destitute, 
a very aged man, suffering mentally and broken 
down. He died recently* His conversation was in* 
coherent. He could only answer questions, but his 
answers were sometimes contradictory. I will tell 
you here the outstanding points of his conversation 
that I can recall: After the arrival at Ipatidfs 
128 



EXAMINATION OF E. S. KOBYLINSKY 

house the emperor, empress and the Grand Duchess 
Maria were searched in a very rough manner. The 
emperor lost his temper and protested. He was 
rudely informed that he was merely a prisoner and 
that he therefore had no right to protest. Tchemo- 
douroff noticed that Avdeieff was the senior. The 
meals were very bad. The dinner was brought from 
a cheap lunch room, and they always brought it late, 
at three or four o'clock instead of one. They dined 
together with the servants. The pan was put on 
the table. There was a lack of spoons, knives and 
forks. The Red soldiers sometimes participated in 
the dinner. Sometimes a soldier came in and helped 
himself to the soup, saying: "Enough for you, I 
will take some myself/' The grand duchesses slept 
on the floor as there were no beds for them. Roll 
calls were frequently made. When the grand duch- 
esses went to the lavatory the Red soldiers followed 
them, saying it was on purpose to guard them. Even 
according to Tchemodouroff, who was not able to 
give the whole account, being so extremely de- 
pressed, it was clear that the august family was 
constantly subjected to intense moral tortures. 
Tchemodouroff did not believe that the family had 
been killed. He said that Botkin, Haritonoff, 
Demidova and Troupp were killed, but the family 
itself was taken away. He said that by killing the 
aforementioned people they simulated the murder of 
the family. He said that for the same reason the 
house was devastated, also some things were burned 

129 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

and others thrown into the waste basket. I remember 
he told me that somebody had found pieces of a holy 
image and an Order of St. Vladimir which was al- 
ways worn by Botkin. 

In a short time after this Volkoff came to Tobolsk. 
He said that Hendrikova, Schneider and himself 
were taken from the railway car in Yekaterinburg 
and sent to prison. From there they were trans- 
ferred to a prison in Perm. Afterwards they were 
taken out of the Perm prison, and led out to be shot, 
but he fled on the way and escaped. The others 
were executed. 

In Tobolsk I heard for the first time about the 
murder of the imperial family. I saw it in the Omsk 
newspaper Zaria^ or may be in a Tobolsk news* 
paper Narodnoe-Slovo. The Bolshevik communi- 
cation described the "execution" of the Emperor 
Nicholas "the sanguinary." In regard to the char- 
acter and private life of the members of the imperial 
family, I state the following: The emperor was a 
very clever man, well informed, and very interest- 
ing to talk with ; he had a remarkable memory. He 
was very fond of physical labour and could not keep 
well without it. He was very modest in his needs. 
Even in Gzarskoe-Selo I saw him wearing old trous* 
ers and worn boots. He drank very little. During 
dinner he drank not more than one glass of port witxc 
of Madeira. He liked the simple Russian dishes, 
borsch, shchy and kasha, I remember very well one 
day he came to the wine cellar and seeing some 
130 



EXAMINATION OF E* S KOBYLINSKV 

cognac, ordered Rojkoff to give it over to me and 
said: "You know, I don't drink it myself." I never 
saw him drinking anything except Port or Madeira. 
He was very religious. He hated, and could not 
stand Germans. The particular characteristics of 
his personality were kindness and a mild disposition. 
He was exceptionally kind. Of his own will as a 
man he would never cause any pain to anybody. 
This quality made a very strong impression upon 
other people. He was kind, modest, straight and 
frank. He behaved himself in a very modest and 
natural manner. In Tobolsk he played checkers with 
the soldiers. I am sure that many soldiers had very 
kindly feelings towards the imperial family. For 
example: when the soldiers (good regular soldiers) 
were leaving Tobolsk they went secretly to the em- 
peror to wish him farewell and kissed him. The 
emperor's idea was that the Russian man was a mild> 
kind-hearted fellow; he did not understand many 
things, but it was easy to impress and influence him 
by kindness. The czar himself was of this type. 
I often pitied him, for the soldiers frequently per- 
mitted themselves to act with rowdy manners, gen* 
erally in the absence of the imperial family. They 
often made a number of dirty jokes in reference to 
the imperial family. Perhaps they were afraid to 
do it in their presence. And that was the reason why 
the august family did not realise the danger of their 
positioDu 

The czar loved Russia and more than once I heard 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

him express his fear of being taken abroad. He 
did not understand art, but liked nature and hunt- 
ing extremely. It was painful for him to abstain 
from hunting for any length of time, and he dis- 
liked to have to spend his time indoors. A weak 
character was his fault and therefore he was 
influenced by his wife. I noticed that even in 
trifles, when he was consulted on some details, the 
usual answer was: "As my Wife wishes. I will ask 
her/' 

The empress was very clever, extremely reserved 
and had a strong character, and her main feature 
was her love of power. Her looks were majestic. 
When you spoke to the emperor there were moments 
when you forgot you were speaking to the czar, but 
when you spoke to the empress the feeling that she 
belonged to a royal family did not leave you for 
a moment. Owing to her character she always took 
the leading part in all family affairs, and subdued 
the emperor to her opinion. Certainly she felt more 
keenly than he did their humiliating position. Every- 
body noticed how rapidly she was aging. She spoke 
and wrote Russian very correctly and loved Russia 
very much. She feared, as the emperor did, to be 
taken abroad. She had a talent for painting and 
embroidery. Not only was the German in her un- 
noticeable, but you might have thought that she was 
born in a country opposed to Germany. This was 
explained by her education. After her mother's 
death, being still very young, she was educated in 



EXAMINATION OF E. S. KOBYLINSKY 

England by her grandmother, Queen Victoria, I 
never heard a single German word from her. She 
used to speak Russian, English and French. There 
was no doubt of her illness. Dr. Botkin ex- 
plained to me the nature of it. Being the daughter 
of the Grand Duke of Hesse, it was something that 
she inherited from that family weakness of the 
blood vessels. This malady produced paralysis fol- 
lowing a bruise, from which the czarevitch was suf- 
fering. The men got rid of this illness after 
arriving at maturity, when this trouble entirely 
disappeared. With women the illness only 
started after their climacteric and from this stage 
hysteria was progressive. It was clear that the em- 
press was suffering from hysteria. Botkin explained 
to me that this was the origin of her religious ecstasy. 
All her manual activities and all her thoughts were 
led by religious motives, and there was a touch of 
religion in her work- When she was making a pres- 
ent to anybody it always bore the inscription : "God 
bless yoii and protect you/' or something similar to 
that. There is no doubt that she loved her husband, 
but she loved him not in the way a woman loves a 
man, but as the father of her children. She loved 
all her children, but her son she adored. 

The Grand Duchess Olga was a nice looking young 
blonde, about twenty-three; her type was Russian. 
She was fond x>f reading, capable and mentally well 
developed; spoke English well and German badly. 
She had some talent for art, played the piano, 

133 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

(she learned singing in Petrograd; her voice was 
soprsmo), and she painted well. She jwas very 
modest and did not care for luxury, 

Her clothes were modest and she restrained her 
sisters from extravagance in dress. She gave alto- 
gether the impression of a good, generous-hearted 
Russian girl. It looked as if she had had some sor- 
rows in her life and still carried traces of it. It 
seemed to me that she loved her father more than 
she loved her mother. She also loved her brother, 
and called him "The Little One" or "The Baby," 

The Grand Duchess Tatiana was about twenty* 
She was quite different from her sisters. You recog- 
nised in her the same features that were in her mother 
the same nature and the same character- You felt 
that she was the daughter of an emperor. She had 
no liking for art. Maybe it would have been better 
for her had she been a man. When the emperor and 
empress left Tobolsk nobody would ever have 
thought that the Grand Duchess Olga was the senior 
of the remaining members of the imperial family. If 
any questions arose it was always Tatiana who was 
appealed to. She was nearer to her mother than the 
other children; and it seemed that she loved her 
mother more than her father. 

The Grand Duchess Maria was eighteen; she was 
tall, strong* and better looking than the other sis- 
ters. She painted well and was the most amiable* 
She always used to speak to the soldiers, questioned 
them, and knew very well the names of their wives, 
134 



EXAMINATION OF E. S. KOBYLINSKY 

the number of their children, and the amount of 
land owned by the soldiers. All the intimate affairs 
in such cases were always known to her. Like the 
Grand Duchess Olga, she loved her father more than 
the rest. On account of her simplicity and affability 
she was given the pet name by the family of "Mash- 
ka." And by this term she was called by her brother 
and by her sisters. 

The Grand Duchess Anastasia, I believe, was 
seventeen. She was over-developed for her age; she 
was stout and short, too stout for her height; her 
characteristic feature was to see the weak points 
of other people and to make fun of them. She was 
a comedian by nature and always made everybody 
laugh. She preferred her father to her mother and 
loved Maria Nicholevna more than the other sisters. 

All of them, including Tatiana, were nice, modest 
and innocent girls. There is no doubt they were 
cleaner in their thoughts than the majority of girls 
nowadays. 

The czarevitch was the idol of the whole family. 
He was only a child and his characteristic features 
were not yet worked out. He was a very clever, 
capable and lively boy. He spoke Russian, French 
and English, and did not know a word of German. 

In general, I could say about the whole imperial 
family that they all loved each other and were so 
satisfied with their family life that they did not need 
BOT look for intercourse with other people. Never 
before in my life have I seen, and probably never 

135 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

again shall I see, such a good, friendly and agree- 
able family. 

Now I can say that the time will come when the 
Russian people will realise what terrible tortures this 
very fine family was subjected to, especially when 
they consider how from the first days of the revolu- 
tion the newspaper men insinuated a lot of scandal- 
ous stories about their intimate family life. Take, 
for instance, the story about Rasputin. I had many 
talks about it with Dr. Botkin. The empress 
was suffering from hysteria. This illness induced a 
religious ecstasy in her. Besides that, her only and 
beloved son was ill and there was no one who could 
help him. A mother's sorrow, on the basis of re- 
ligious ecstasy, created Rasputin. Rasputin was a 
saint to her. Having a great influence over her hus- 
band, she converted him to her ideas in this matter. 
After I had lived with this family and been closely 
associated with them, I fully understood how unjust 
were the stories and the insults that were heaped 
upon them. They ought to have known that the 
Empress Alexandra, as a woman, had long ago ceased 
to exist. One can imagine how they all suffered in 
reading the Russian newspapers in Czarskoe-Selo. 

They were even accused of treachery in favour of 
Germany. I explained to you before the feelings 
the emperor had towards the Germans* The empress 
also hated Wilhelm. She often said: "I am always 
accused of liking and helping the Germans, but 
nobody knows how I hate Wilhelm for all the evil 
136 



EXAMINATION OF E. S* KOBYLINSKY 

he has brought to my native country/' She had 
Germany and not Russia in mind when she said 
that. Tatischeff told me as an example of her broad 
vision that once when she was talking about the con- 
fusion in Russia, she prophesied that the same thing 
would happen in Germany. The grand duchesses 
had the same bitter feeling towards the Emperor 
Wilhelm. I remember that once the grand duchesses 
distributed amongst the servants the presents they 
received from Wilhelm during his visit on their 
yacht. 

I can not remember anything else. Well, yes, I 
remember the emperor used to keep a diary, though 
I could not say whether the empress kept one or 
not. All the grand duchesses used to keep diaries, 
but before their departure from Tobolsk, Maria and 
Anastasia destroyed theirs. 

I read in a newspaper that while the emperor was 
in prison in Yekaterinburg somebody came to him 
and offered to save him, on certain conditions. After 
the emperor learned that the man was sent by the 
Emperor Wilhelm, he refused to parley with him. I 
can not say from whence the Letts came who ar- 
rived at Tobolsk. But I draw your attention to the 
fact that the Lett detachment which took the chil- 
dren from Tobolsk, never returned. Hohriakoff 
also failed to return. 

Miss Hitrovo visited Tobolsk. She was a young 
girl, and adored the Grand Duchess Olga. Her ar- 
rival created a whole story that was picked up and 

137 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

again shall I see, such a good, friendly and agree- 
able family. 

Now I can say that the time will come when the 
Russian people will realise what terrible tortures this 
very fine family was subjected to, especially when 
they consider how from the first days of the revolu- 
tion the newspaper men insinuated a lot of scandal- 
ous stories about their intimate family life. Take, 
for instance, the story about Rasputin. I had many 
talks about it with Dr. Botkin. The empress 
was suffering from hysteria- This illness induced a 
religious ecstasy in her. Besides that, her only and 
beloved son was ill and there was no one who could 
help him. A mother's sorrow, on the basis of re- 
ligious ecstasy, created Rasputin. Rasputin was a 
saint to her. Having a great influence over her hus- 
band, she converted him to her ideas in this matter. 
After I had lived with this family and been closely 
associated with them, I fully understood how unjust 
were the stories and the insults that were heaped 
upon them. They ought to have known that the 
Empress Alexandra, as a woman, had long ago ceased 
to exist. One can imagine how they all suffered in 
reading the Russian newspapers in Czarskoe-Selo. 

They were even accused of treachery in favour of 
Germany. I explained to you before the feelings 
the emperor had towards the Germans. The empress 
also hated Wilhelm. She often said : "I am always 
accused of liking and helping the Germans, but 
nobody knows how I hate Wilhelm for all the evil 
136 



EXAMINATION OF E. S. KOBYLINSKY 

he has brought to my native country/* She had 
Germany and not Russia in mind when she said 
that. Tatischeff told me as an example of her broad 
vision that once when she was talking about the con- 
fusion in Russia, she prophesied that the same thing 
would happen in Germany. The grand duchesses 
had the same bitter feeling towards the Emperor 
Wilhelm, I remember that once the grand duchesses 
distributed amongst the servants the presents they 
received from Wilhelm during his visit on their 
yacht. 

I can not remember anything else. Well, yes, I 
remember the emperor used to keep a diary, though 
I could not say whether the empress kept one or 
not. All the grand duchesses used to keep diaries, 
but before their departure from Tobolsk, Maria and 
Anastasia destroyed theirs. 

I read in a newspaper that while the emperor was 
in prison in Yekaterinburg somebody came to him 
and offered to save him, on certain conditions. After 
the emperor learned that the man was sent by the 
Emperor Wilhelm, he refused to parley with him. I 
can not say from whence the Letts came who ar- 
rived at Tobolsk, But I draw your attention to the 
fact that the Lett detachment which took the chil- 
dren from Tobolsk, never returned. Hohriakoff 
also failed to return. 

Miss Hitrovo visited Tobolsk. She was a young 
girl, and adored the Grand Duchess Olga. Her ar- 
rival created a whole story that was picked up and 

137 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

exaggerated by all the newspapers. She was searched 
but nothing was found. \ 

My testimony has been read to me and it is writ- 
ten correctly. 

(Signed} EUGENE STEPANOVITCH KOBYLINSKY, 
N. SOKOLOFF. 



138 



IV 



EXAMINATION OF PHILIP PROSKOURIA- 

KOFF 

[The deposition of Philip Proskouriakoff possesses & cer- 
tain amount of psychological interest as the testimony of a 
lad of seventeen who was suddenly confronted with death 
in one of its most violent and terrible forms. Proskouriakoff 
appears to have been a clever, restless youth with a distaste 
for settled employment, and who probably enlisted in the 
Workmen** Guards solely in 'the spirit of adventure. 

His story of the murder of the imperial family is more 
horrible than the accounts given by the older men.* Pros- 
kouriakof's love of the morbid, and his slightly decadent 
mentality, is plainly shown in his account of the events of 
the night, when he was awakened from a drunken sleep and 
ordered to proceed to that sinister bullet-riddled room on 
the ground floor of Ipatieff*s house, But his minute at- 
tention to many of the ghastly and often irrelevant details 
is valuable as documentary evidence, as it goes to prove 
most conclusively that these things actually happened and 
were retained as they happened in the mind of a person 
whose neurotic temperament enabled him to remember them 
accurately and vividly. Editor's Note*] 

\ 

From the first to the third day of April, 1919, 

the Investigating Magistrate for Cases of Special 
Importance of the Omsk Tribunal, N. A. Sokoloff, 
in conformity with Paragraphs 403-409 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, conducted an investi- 
gation in the town of Yekaterinburg, in which the 

139 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

man named below, speaking as the accused, deposed : 
I am Philip Poliektoff Proskouriakoff . At the time 
that the crime was committed I was seventeen years 
old; I am a Russian peasant, belonging to the 
Orthodox Church, and single. For three years I 
went to the Sissert five-class school. My specialty 
is electrical fittings. In answer to your questions, I 
reply as follows : 

For many years my father had been a foreman in 
the iron works, and resided all the time in the Sissert 
Iron Works. This was also my birthplace. I did 
not complete my studies in the Sissert school, and 
attended classes only during three years. It was 
very difficult for me to learn; at the same time my 
father got sick and took me away from school. At 
first he placed me in the blacksmith's shop of the 
factory, so that I might learn the trade. I was 
instructed by Vasily Afanasievitch Belonosoff. I 
left after I had worked for about a year in the shop : 
this work was too hard for me. My eldest brother 
found me a position in the Palais Royal Theatre 
where I began to study for a position of electrician. 
I stayed there for about a year, learned something 
about electricity and started in a business of my own 
installing electric wires in town. Later I got a 
position in the central electric plant in Yekaterin- 
burg. I worked there for about a month and, before 
Easter 1918, went home. 

I remember quite well that on May gth I met 
in the bazaar a friend of mine, Ivan Semenoff Tal- 
140 



EXAMINATION OF P R O S K O U R I A K O F F 

apoff. He told me that a certain commissar, 
Mrachkovsky, had started recruiting amongst our 
factory workmen for a special detachment that was 
intended to guard the czar. Personally, I did not 
see Mrachkovsky. I heard only that he was in com- 
mand of some troops fighting against Dutoff from 
whence he had come. I related to my father Tal- 
apoff's words. Both my father and my mother ad- 
vised me not to enlist. My father's words were: 
"Philip, don't go, think it well over." I was anxious 
to see the czar so I ignored my father's advice and 
on the next day enlisted. The enlistment took place 
in the house of Vasily Erkoff, which is on the Tzer- 
kovnaia Street, close to the soviet. The enlistment 
was conducted by one of our Sissert workmen, Paul 
Spiridonoff MedvedefL Medvedeff told me that we 
should be paid four hundred roubles per month, that 
we should have to perform sentry duty, but that we 
should not be allowed to sleep while doing so ! Such 
were the conditions explained to me, so I enlisted at 
once. 

I heard at the time that thirty Sissert workmen 
altogether had enlisted. Later, some of them with- 
drew, but the number of those who did so was small 
and they were replaced by others, also workmen from 
our factory. 

Eleven of these first thirty men, as I was told, 
belonged to the Bolshevik communist party. 

In the second half of May we arrived altogether 
at Yekaterinburg. At first we were all quartered 

141 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

in the new "Gostiny-Dvor" (bazaar house), where 
the soldiers of the Red army also were located. 
We stayed there a few days without doing any 
work. At the end of May we were transferred to 
the Ipatieff house, where the czar's family lived. 
We were placed in the rooms of the lower floor. 

Alexander Moshkin, a workman from the Zlok- 
asofFs factory, was in charge of the house and our 
guard detachment was under his orders. Medvedeff 
was the senior in our party. He was our chief. No- 
body had elected him, but he was in charge of the 
enlistment of our party from the beginning; he paid 
the wages and changed the sentries. Our salary was 
four hundred roubles per month ; Medvedeff received 
six hundred. Avdeieff remained all the time in the 
house and occupied the commandant's room. Gen" 
erally he arrived at nine o'clock a. m. and left at nine 
o'clock p. m. Moshkin stayed all the time in the 
commandant's room, where he lived. Medvedeff 
also always stayed with those two in the same room 
and spent the night there. 

The sentry posts were as follows: (i) By the 
sentry-box near the gate. (2) By the sentry-box 
near the chapel. (3) Between two fences, by the 
window of the house. (4) In the front court, near 
the entrance to the house. (5) In the back court- 
(6) In the garden. (7) In the entrance room of the 
upper floor, by the commandant's room. (8). Near 
the lavatory, where the watercloset and bath room 
were located. Besides that there were three sentry 
142 



EXAMINATION OF P R O S K O U R I A K O F P 

posts with machine guns : (9) Beside the window of 
the attic. ( 10) On the terrace that faced the garden. 
( 1 1 ) In the middle room of the lower floor. 

We were performing our duties for about a week 
when Avdeieff brought up about fifteen more men- 
all workmen of the Zlokasoff factory. I suppose he 
did it because he thought we were overworked, as 
we were obliged to be on duty four hours at a time; 
it was raining^ and we were not accustomed to this 
sort of duty* 

The Zlokasoff workmen lived with (us an 'the 
upper floor. There were not any women in our 'de- 
tachment. We had our own male cooks, who pre- 
pared our food. At first Ivan Kategoff was the 
cook, later he was replaced by Andrew Starkoff. 

At the end of June or maybe at the beginning of 
July Moshkin was arrested by Avdeieff, as he was 
suspected of stealing a small gold cross belonging to 
the czar. At the same time Avdeieff was also dis- 
missed and replaced by lourovsky. Nikoulin was 
appointed as his assistant. 

Positively I do not know who lourovsky and 
Nikoulin were. Both of them arrived at the house 
together. They always remained in the command- 
ant's room. lourovsky arrived in the morning at 
eight or nine o'clock and left at five or six in the 
afternoon. Nikoulin practically lived in the com- 
mandant's room and spent the night there. Med- 
vedeff also continued to spend the night in the same 
room. About a week after lourovsky and Nikou- 

143 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

lin assumed their duties all the Sissert and Zlokasoff 
workmen were transferred to Popoff's (or Obou- 
kofFs) house, which was opposite the Ipatieff house, 
Instead of us the lower floor of the Ipatieff s house 
accommodated Letts, who were about ten in number* 

Before the arrival of the Letts all the sentry duties 
were performed exclusively by the Sissert workmen. 
After their arrival all the posts on the upper floor, 
where the czar's family lived, were taken up by 
Letts. We, Russian workmen, were not allowed 
to go to the upper floor. Such were the orders of 
lourovsky. 

The machine gun teams, who performed no other 
duty than at the machine guns, were composed of 
our Sissert workmen. 

At the time when Avdeieff was the chief all the 
other posts were occupied by the rest of the work- 
men. But after the arrival of lourovsky and of the 
Letts, we workmen began to occupy only the posts 
outside of the house. All posts inside of the house 
were assigned to the Letts. Before the arrival of 
the Letts I, as well as other workmen, performed my 
sentry duties inside the house about six times, keep- 
ing guard by the commandant's room and the lava- 
tory. I performed this duty in the morning, day- 
time, evening and night. During this time I saw all 
the imperial family: The emperor, the empress, 
czarevitch, as well as the daughters: Olga, Tatiana, 
Maria and Anastasia. I saw them very closely when 
they went for a walk or to the lavatory or passed 
144 



EXAMINATION OF P R O S K O U R I A K O F F 

from one room to another. They all used to walk 
in the garden, except the empress. I never saw her 
walking in the garden. The czarevitch I saw only 
once, as he was carried by the oldest daughter of the 
emperor Olga. The czarevitch was ill all the time. 

I can tell about the way they spent their time 
from tlie words of Medvedeff, who of course saw 
them more frequently than I did. They got up about 
eight or nine o'clock in the morning. They had 
family prayers. They all assembled in one room and 
sang prayers. They had dinner at three o'clock. 
They all dined together in one room ; I mean to say 
that they dined with the servants that were with 
them. At nine o'clock in the evening they had sup- 
per and tea, after that they went to bed. According 
to the words of Medvedeff they occupied themselves 
in the following way : The emperor read, the empress 
also read, or sometimes embroidered or knitted some- 
thing together with her daughters. The czarevitch, 
when he could, made little wire chains for his toy 
ship. They walked every day for about an hour or 
an hour and a half. They were not allowed to take 
any other physical exercise. I remember that Pashka 
Medvedeff once said that the Czar Nicholas Alex- 
androvitch once asked Iourovsky*s permission to 
clean the garden. lourovsky forbade it. 

I heard their singing several times. They sang only 
sacred songs. On Sundays they had divine service, 
performed by a clergyman and a deacon, who I tWnk 
were from the Verhne Vosnesensky church. 

H5 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

At first the food was brought to them from a 
soviet dining-room; two women brought it; their 
cook heated it. Later, they were allowed to prepare 
their meals in the house* 

Besides the imperial family on the upper floor 
of the house there lived with them the following 
persons, whom I have personally seen. There was 
a doctor, a stout man, with grey hair, aged about 
fifty-five. He wore spectacles, that had, as far as I 
remember, gold rims. There was a waiter, aged 
thirty-five, tall, slim, and dark. A cook stayed 
with them. He was aged forty, was short, thin, 
a little bald, he had black hair and small black 
moustache. There was also a maid with them* aged 
about forty, tall, thin, and dark; I did not see the 
colour of her hair, because she always tied a handker- 
chief on her head. There was also a boy with them. 
The boy was about fifteen, his hair was black and 
he wore it parted, his nose was long, his eyes black. 

Two other men stayed with the imperial family. 
As MedvedefF explained to me, they also were serv- 
ants. One of them was tall, thin, about thirty-five; 
his hair was light red, and cut short. He shaved 
his beard and trimmed his moustache; his nose was 
of medium size and straight; I don't remember his 
other distinguishing marks, but his skin was clear 
and looked as delicate as a woman's. The other was 
also tall, about thirty, his hair was black and parted, 
He was clean-shaven. The first man wore a black 
jacket, trousers and shoes. The second man wore a 
146 



EXAMINATION Q F PROSKOURIAKOFF 

jacket, a stiff shirt, with a tie, trousers and shoes- I 
also saw the first man carry away a rubber pillow 
with the urine of the czarevitch. These two men I 
saw only once, when I was on guard in the house 
during the first days. After that I did not see 
them. Medvedeff told me that both of them were 
taken to Number Two Prison, but what reason there 
was for imprisoning them I was not told and I was 
not interested either in knowing. On several occa- 
sions I have seen the Bolshevik Beloborodoff, who 
came to the house probably to inspect the life of the 
imperial family. Anyhow I was told by Medvedeff 
that such was the reason of his visits. Beloborodoff 
I recall very distinctly. He looked about twenty- 
five. He was of medium height, thin, his face was 
pale. Beloborodoff visited the house while Avdeieff 
was on duty there, as well as when lourouvsky was 
on duty. 

Regarding the restrictions and treatment of the 
emperor and his family by the executives and the 
guards, as a matter of conscience I can say this: 
Avdeieff was a simple workman, very poorly de- 
veloped, mentally. Sometimes he was intoxicated. 
But neither he nor the guards during his time of- 
fended or did any wrong to the imperial family, 
lourovsky and Nikoulin behaved themselves differ- 
ently. During their time the imperial family suf- 
fered more. They both used to drink in the com- 
mandant's room and while intoxicated they sang. 
Nikoulia played the piano (that was in the com- 

H7 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

mandant's room) . Sometimes as Nikoulin was play- 
Ing and lourovsky's eyes were bleared with drink 
they both started yelling out songs, as: "Let us 
forget the old world; Let us shake its dust from our 
feet. We do not need a golden idol. We abhor 
the czar's palace/' And so on. Or sometimes they 
sang: "You died as the victim of a struggle* . . ." 
Moshkin also sometimes allowed himself to sing 
these songs but only in the absence of Avdeieff, who 
did not know anything about it; but the first two 
took things easy. In the time of Avdeieff women 
never entered the house, but Nikoulin had a mistress 
who came to see him and stayed with him after 
lourovsky's departure. She was about twenty, was 
short, stout and blonde; her eyes were brown, her 
nose was small and straight. I do not know her 
name. I don't know either where she lived or from 
whence she came. Medvedeff told nothing about 
her. In the time of lourovsky divine service was 
performed less often. 

As a result the guards under the command of 
lourovsky began to behave much worse* Fayka Saf- 
onoff began to behave indecently. There was only 
one lavatory for the imperial family. On the walls 
near this lavatory Fayka Safonoff began to write 
all sorts of bad words, that were very much out of 
place. He was seen writing those words on the 
wall near the lavatory by Alexeeff, who was on 
duty on the upper floor together with Fayka (Fayka 
occupied the post near the lavatory and Alexeeff near 
148 



EXAMINATION OF P R O S K O U R I A K O F F 

the commandant's room). After Alexeeff returned 
from duty he told us all about it. Once Fayka 
climbed up a fence which was quite close to the 
windows of the emperor's rooms and began to sing 
all sorts of vulgar songs. 

Andrew Strekotin drew on the walls of the lower 
room numbers of indecent pictures. Belomoin par- 
ticipated in the drawing and he laughed and taught 
Strekotin how to draw better. I have personally 
seen Strekotin drawing those things. 

Once I was walking near the house when I saw the 
youngest daughter of the emperor, Anastasia, look 
out the window. When the sentry on duty noticed 
it he fired his rifle at her. The bullet missed her 
and lodged above her in the wood-work of the win- 
dow frame. 

All of these unbecoming deeds were known to 
lourovsky. Medvedeff reported to him about Pod- 
kory toff but lourovsky only answered : "They must 
not look out of the window." 

As I said before, from the time that the Letts 
entered and joined the guards, they lived in the 
lower floor of the Ipatieff house, and we, work- 
men, were all transferred to the house opposite, be- 
longing to Popoff (or Obouhoff). In this house 
we occupied all the rooms of the upper floor; the 
lower floor was taken up by tenants. 

The Zlokasoff workmen were placed in the same 
rooms with us. 

The last time I saw the imperial family, except 

149 



THE LAST PAYS OF THE. ROMANOVS 

the emperor, was a few days before they were mur- 
dered. On that day they all went for a walk in the 
garden all of them walked except the empress. 
There were the emperor, his son, his daughters : Olga, 
Maria, Tatiana and Anastasia; there were also the 
doctor, the waiter, cook, maid, and the boy* I ob- 
served distinctly that the heir was dressed in a shirt 
and had a black leather belt, with a small metal 
buckle, around his waist. I saw that very distinctly 
because the Grand Duchess Olga carried him close 
past me. The heir was ill and the boy pushed his 
roller-chair. I could not tell you exactly the date 
when I saw them walking in the garden. But it was 
not long before their death. The murder took place 
the night between Tuesday and Wednesday* I do 
not remember the date. I remember that we received 
our wages on Monday. So it must have been the 
15th of the month of July, reckoning by the New 
Style. The day after we received the wages, at ten 
o'clock in the morning of July i6th, I was standing 
on duty by the sentry-box near to the Vosnesensky 
Prospect and Vosnesensky Lane. Egor Stoloff, with 
whom I lived in the same room, was at the same 
time on duty in the lower rooms of the house* After 
we finished our shift of duty, together with Stoloff 
we went to get some drinks in the house number 
eighty-five of the Vodotchnaia street. 

We returned at dusk, as we had to resume our 
duties at five o'clock. Medvedeff noticed that we 
were drunk and put us under arrest m the bath- 
150 



EXAMINATION OF P R O S K O U R I A K O F F 

house, which was situated in the yard of PopofFs 
house. We fell asleep and slept till three a. m. 
At three o'clock in the night we were awakened by 
Medvedeff who said: "Get up and follow me.'* 
We asked him where and he answered: "They call 
you, so you must go." I am quite -sure that it 
was three o'clock because Stoloff had a watch with 
him, and when I looked at this watch it was exactly 
three o'clock. We got up and followed Medvedeff. 
He brought us to the lower room of the Ipatieff 
house. All the workmen guards were there, except 
those on duty. There was a cloud of powder smoke 
in the room and it smelt of powder. In the rear 
room that had a barred window, which is situated 
close to the store-room, the walls and floor were 
pierced by bullets. In one wall there were an espe- 
cially large number of bullet holes, but there were 
also bullet marks in the others. There were no 
marks of bayonet strokes on the walls. In the 
places where the walls and floor showed bullet holes, 
there was blood around them; there were splashes 
and spots of blood on the wall and small pools on 
the floor. There were drops and spots of blood in 
other rooms that had to be passed on the way from 
the room that had the bullet marks, to the court 
yard. There were also traces of blood on the pave- 
ment of the court yard 00 the way to the gate. It 
was obvious that quite recently before our arrival 
a large number of people had been shot in the 
room with the barred window. After I witnessed 



* jni x, JbASl DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

all that I began to question Medvedeff and Strekotin 
about what happened. They told me that just a 
few moments before, the whole- imperial family 
and the people attached to them had been shot, ex- 
cept the boy. 

Medvedeff ordered us to clean up the rooms. We 
began to wash the floor; several mops were brought 
in to remove the traces of the bloodstains. I can 
not tell who brought them. Medvedeff ordered that 
some sawdust be brought. We washed the floor 
with cold water and sawdust, removing the blood- 
stains. The bloodstains on the wall we washed off 
with a wet rag. All the workmen participated in 
the cleaning except those that were on duty. A 
number of men did the cleaning in the room where 
the imperial family was killed. Amongst others I 
saw there Medvedeff and two Letts. I also helped 
to clean this room. In the same manner, using 
water, we washed the blood from the pavement of 
the court yard. I did not find any bullets. If any 
bullets were found by other people or not I don't 
know. 

When Stoloff and myself came down to the lower 
room we did not find anybody there except a few 
Letts. Medvedeff and our workmen were absent* 
Nikoulin at that time, as it was said by^ Medvedeff, 
was in the upper room, the door of which leading 
to the lower rooms was locked from inside. 

I saw no gold or any other valuable articles taken 
from the bodies of the murdered people in the lower 



EXAMINATION OF P R O S K O U R I A K O F F 

rooms* I now remember that on Tuesday morning, 
when I was on sentry duty, I personally saw lour- 
ovsky come to the house at eight o'clock in the morn- 
ing. Some time after his arrival Beloborodoff 
entered the house. I left my post at ten o'clock in 
the morning; but Medvedeff told me that after- 
wards lourovsky and Beloborodoff went for a ride in 
an automobile. At this time Nikoulin remained in 
the house. They returned before evening. During 
the evening lourovsky told Medvedeff that in the 
night time the imperial family would be shot, and 
ordered him to notify the workmen and to take the 
revolvers from the sentries. 

All this was not clear to me then. I can not tell 
if it was true or not, as I did not think of questioning 
any of the workmen whether Medvedeff took their 
revolvers or not. Personally I don't understand why 
it was necessary; according to MedvedefFs words 
the imperial family were shot by the Letts and they 
all had Nagan revolvers. At this time I did not 
know that lourovsky was a Jew. Being the instiga- 
tor of the crime he may have selected the Letts to 
do the actual killing, having more confidence in them 
than in us Russians. Perhaps for the same reason 
he also wanted to disarm the Russian workmen that 
were on duty. Medvedeff faithfully performed 
lourovsky' s order, took the revolvers from the sen- 
tries, forwarded them to lourovsky and at eleven 
o'clock in the evening notified the workmen that 
the imperial family were going to be shot. At twelve 

153 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

o'clock midnight lourovsky awoke the imperial fam- 
ily, requesting all of them to dress and to go down 
to the lower room. According to Medvedeff, lour- 
ovsky explained to the imperial family that there 
would be danger during the night and that in case 
firing were to take place on the streets it would be 
dangerous to remain in the upper floors* So he 
insisted that everybody should come down. They 
complied with the demand and descended to the 
lower room, accompanied by lourovsky, Nikoulin 
and Beloborodoff. .There were the emperor, the em- 
press, the heir, the four daughters, the doctor, the 
waiter, the maid, and the cook. The boy by order 
of lourovsky about a day and a half before that, 
was transferred to the rooms where we were quar- 
tered, and I saw him there personally before the mur- 
der. All of them were brought into the room that 
bore the marks of bullets. They stood in two rows, 
lourovsky started to read to them a paper. The 
emperor did not hear well, and asked: "What?" 
According to the words of Medvedeff, lourovsky 
lifted his hand with the revolver and showing it 
to the emperor, answered : "This is what," and af- 
terwards added: "Your race must cease to live." 

I remember also that when telling about the paper 
which lourovsky read to the emperor, Medvedeff 
called it a "protocol/' 

As soon as lourovsky finished speaking he, 
Beloborodoff, Nikoulin, Medvedeff and all the Letts 
fired at the emperor and directly afterwards began 
154 



EXAMINATION OF P R O S K O U R I A K O F F 

to shoot at everybody else* They all fell dead on 
the floor. MedvedefE told me himself that he shot 
two or three times at the emperor and other persons 
whom they were executing. 

After all of them were shot, Alexander Strekotin, 
as he told it to me himself, took all the precious 
things from the bodies; these were at once taken 
away from him by lourovsky and carried upstairs., 
After that all the bodies were loaded on a motor 
truck and taken out somewhere. On this truck, 
along with the bodies of the killed, went lourovsky, 
Beloborodoff and a number of Letts. No one from 
our workmen went with them. 

After the cleaning of the rooms was over, to- 
gether with Stoloff, we went to town, and sauntered 
about until evening. We did not meet any 
of our acquaintances and did not tell anybody 
about the murder. In the evening we came back 
to our quarters, had some food, and slept. At six 
o'clock in the morning on Thursday, July i8th, 
Medvedeff ordered me on duty on a post inside of 
the house by the commandant's room. Up to this 
titne, after the arrival of the Letts, not a single 
Workman ever was allowed to do sentry duty inside 
of the house while the ^imperial family was still 
alive. Now, after they were killed, we were again 
ordered on duty inside the house. 

There was no sentry near the lavatory. lourov- 
sky, Nikoulin, Medvedeff and the Letts were already 
in the house when I took up my post. There was 

155 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

nobody from our or ZlokasofFs workmen. I re- 
member very well that when I came to my post lour- 
ovsky was already in the house. Probably he spent 
the night in the house. They were all ransacking 
the emperor's belongings; they were in a great hurry 
and were packing all the things that could be packed. 
I could not hear the conversation between lourov- 
sky, Nikoulin and MedvedefL They were all calm 
but I had the impression that lourovsky and Nikou- 
lin were a little drunk. 

During this day nothing was taken out only 
packing was going on. 

After I left my post I went to the guardroom, 
slept, ate, and went to see my brother Alexander who 
served in the militia. I did'not tell anything about 
the murder to my brother. Until the evening I 
sauntered around the town and in the evening I re- 
turned to the guardroom. In the guardroom Med- 
vedeff announced that we all had to leave Yekaterin- 
burg. 

On July ipth we were sent to the station Yekat- 
erinburg First. Our party was assigned to guard the 
staff of the third Red army. The staff was in rail- 
way cars and we were posted by them. At this timg 
I saw the emperor's belongings, loaded on trucks* 
being shipped to the station. There were the same 
things that had been previously packed in handbags 
and trunks. They were all brought to the station 
and loaded in a train of cars. The cars were big, 
of the American type. 

156 



EXAMINATION OF P R O S K O U R I A K O F F 

I personally saw lourovsky depart. As I remem- 
ber, he left during the night of July 2 1st and pro- 
ceeded towards Perm. His family and Nikoulin 
accompanied him. I also personally saw all the 
Letts who lived in the Ipatieff house and killed the' 
imperial family, departed with lourovsky. We all 
left Yekaterinburg when the staff of the third army 
departed, at the time when the town was already 
being occupied by the Siberian forces. We went to 
Perm, but when the troops of General Pepelaieff were 
taking Perm the staff of the third army and all the 
workmen of our party left Perm and proceeded to- 
wards Viatka. I remained in Perm and after Perm 
was taken, returned to Yekaterinburg and stopped 
with my brother Alexander. The secret service 
learned of my presence and I was ordered to come 
to the police station. An elderly official started 
to question me. I got very much afraid and be- 
gan to lie to him, saying that I had never been 
amongst the guards of the imperial family. After- 
wards, I confessed that I was amongst the guards, 
but I denied knowledge of anything. Now I have 
told you everything I know about this matter. 
# I fully realise how wrong I was not to follow 
the advice of my father and mother and to have 
enlisted in the guards. Now I realise what a wicked 
action it was to kill the imperial family and I under- 
stand that I was also wrong in washing out the blood- 
stains resulting from the crime. I am not a Bol- 
shevik and I never was one. All that I did, I did 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMAXOVS 

because of my youth and stupidity. If at present 
I could help in any way to find and get hold of 
the people who committed the murder, I would spare 
no effort to do it. 

All the workmen that performed duty had Nagan 
revolvers that were distributed by Medvedeff a few 
days before the murder. lourovsky carried a Brown- 
ing pistol; Medvedeff, a Nagan revolver. 

I don't know what happened to the boy who was 
waiting on the imperial family and who was trans- 
ferred to our quarters before the murder. He slept 
on my bed and I spoke to him. I don't know if he 
knew about the murder of the imperial family. He 
did not cry and we did not talk with him about the 
murder. He told me that the commandant intended 
to send him home and mentioned to me some dis- 
trict or other, but I have forgotten its name. At 
the same time he complained to me that lourvosky 
took his clothes from him. I can not name a single 
man among the Letts. 

When I performed duty inside the house I never 
saw the empress enter the commandant's room. I do 
not think it ever happened, as lourvosky treated them 
badly. The empress's rosary, which was found in 
the commandant's room, was probably forgotten 
there at the time of the packing after the murder. 

Usually I saw the emperor wearing a grey or 

black jacket with a standing collar and brass but- 

toms. He wore boots and grey hair was noticeable 

in his beard. When the grand duchesses walked in 

158 



EXAMINATION OF P R O S K O U R I A K O F F 

the garden they wore summer clothes, usually blouses 
and skirts of various colours. 

I can not explain anything more. My statement 
has been read to me and is written correctly. 
Signed: PHILIP PROSKOURIAKOFF. 

N. SOKOLOFF. 
Present at the examination : 

lORDANSKY, PUBLIC PROSECUTOR. 



159 



EXAMINATION OF ANATOLIE IAKIMOFF 

[Anatolie Yakimof whose deposition is now given, was 
a workman, who became one of the senior guards of the im- 
perial family during their last days in Yekaterinburg. His 
statement bears the impress of truth, and one gathers from 
it that he possessed some education and was more enlightened 
and tolerant in his views than were his fellows. Although 
Yakimoff never spake to any of the members of the imperial 
family, we are able to see them vividly by His crude descrip- 
tions of their daily life. This workman~guard denies that 
he was present at the actual execution, but he insists that 
he and the others to whom it was related, were convinced 
that the czar and his family met their deaths in the manner 
described by Medvedejf. 

It is curious to notice the respect with which this peasant* 
workman always mentioned the imperial family. Avdeieff. 
so he says, referred to the imperial family as "TAev," ana 
Yakimoff follows his example, but it is apparent that this 
implies no disrespect on his part. Editor's Note,] 

In 1919 from the yth to the nth of May, the 
Investigating Magistrate for Important Cases of the 
Omsk Tribunal sitting in the town of Yekaterin- 
burg, examined, in accordance with Articles 403-409 
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, Anatolie Alex- 
androvitch lakimoff, peasant, thirty-one years old, 
belonging to the Orthodox Church, married. The 
accused deposed as follows ; 
160 



EXAMINATION OF A. IAKIMOFF 

I am a workman. 

I specialised in work on milling machines; my 
father was also a workman. He was born in the 
Ugovsk factory of the Perm District. My mother's 
name was Maria Nicholaevna. I am the eldest son 
of the family. 

When I was born my father worked at Motoviliha 
works. At eight I began my studies in a school that 
was attached to the ecclesiastical seminary. I went 
to school for three years. When my father died I 
was twelve. My mother sent me to the public 
school, but having passed the third grade, I left the 
school ; we had no money to live on and at the same 
time I was not ambitious enough to study. I wanted 
to get some occupation and mother sent me to the 
Motoviliha works, where I was accepted as a bell 
boy in the drafting room. When I was sixteen I 
was transferred to the machine shop and began to 
learn to work on milling machines. In 1906 I mar- 
ried the daughter of a workman of the Motoviliha 
factory. In 1916 I volunteered in the army and, 
was recruited in the 494th Vereisky Regiment of 
the 124th Division. Our regiment fought on the 
Roumanian front. I participated in several battles 
but I was never wounded. In July, 1917, after the 
revolution, I was elected to the regiment's commit- 
tee. You ask me the reason why I was chosen? I 
was chosen for the regiment's committee, as I under- 
stand, because I was better mentally developed than 
the rest of the soldiers. I never joined any of the 



THE LAST PAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

political parties, but my sympathies were with the 
social democrats. 

At the beginning of November, 1917, 1 got a posi- 
tion in Zlokasoff's factory in Yekaterinburg. The 
factory was still in the hands of its owners, the 
Zlokasoffs, but a committee of workmen existed 
and a commissar was commissioned to the factory 
also. The position of commissar was taken by 
Alexander Drnitrieff Avdeieff, a locksmith by trade. 
He was about thirty-four or thirty-five, was taller 
than the average, thin, his face was thin and pale. 

In December Avdeieff took to prison the owner of 
the factory, Nicholas Theodorovitch Zlokasoff. The 
owners were replaced by an "executive" soviet. 
This soviet began to rule the factory. The leading 
man of the factory was Avdeieff. The following 
workmen were the nearest to him : the brothers Ivan, 
Vasily and Vladimir Loginoff, Sergius Ivanoff Luh- 
anoff and his son Valentine. The Loginoffs were 
from the Kishtym factory of the Yekaterinburg dis- 
trict. All those people were in extremely close re- 
lations with Avdeieff and occupied the privileged 
positions. They were either members of the fac- 
tory's committee and executive soviet or had some 
other "easy" jobs, but did not work. Alexander 
Michailoff Moshkin was also on good terms with 
AvdeiefL As far as I remember, Moshkin was bom 
in Semipalatinsk. He was twenty-seven or twenty- 
eight, short and husky. He was a locksmith. In, 
April it became kaowp, in town that the czar had 
162 



EXAMINATION OF A. IAKIMOFF 

been brought to Yekaterinburg. This was explained 
by the workmen to be quite necessary, as somebody 
wanted to abduct the czar from Tobolsk and, there- 
fore, they had to transfer him to a reliable place such 
as Yekaterinburg. Such were the conversations 
amongst the workmen. In the first days of May, 
shortly after we heard of the arrival of the czar, 
we learned that our Avdeieff was appointed to take 
charge of the house occupied by the czar. At that 
time for some reason or other they used to call this 
house "The House of Special Purpose." It was 
said also that Avdeieff was appointed to be com- 
mandant of the house. 

Shortly afterwards Avdeieff confirmed to us this 
news at a meeting. I can not explain the reason for 
this appointment. Avdeieff was a true Bolshevik. 
He considered that the ideal life could only be 
realised under Bolshevism. On many occasions he 
openly said that the Bolsheviki had destroyed the 
rich bourgeoisie, and had taken the power from 
Nicholas the "Sanguinary/' etc. He always asso- 
ciated in town with the leaders of the local soviet. 
I believe that for this reason, being a violent Bol- 
shevik, he was appointed by the local soviet to be 
commandant of the house of "Special Purpose." 
During the meeting which was assembled by him 
at that time he told us that together with lakovlcff 
he went to bring the czar from Tobolsk. Personally 
I do not know who lakovleff was, but Avdeieff told 
us at the meeting that lakovleff was a workman from 

163 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

the town of Zlatooust. Avdeieff said very bad 
things about him; that lakovleff wanted to take the 
czar out of Russia and, therefore, took him to Omsk. 
But somehow the Yekaterinburg Bolsheviki learned 
about his intentions and also notified Omsk about 
them. Avdeieff raged when he spoke about the czar. 
He slandered him as much as he could, calling him : 
'"The Blood Drinker," War was the main point of 
his denunciation; he said that the czar wanted this 
war and for three years spilled the blood of the 
"workmen" and that during this war a great num- 
ber of workmen were shot for striking. In gen- 
eral he said the things which were always said by 
Bolsheviki. It could be understood from his words 
that for his merits before the "Revolution/* in other 
words, because he did not let lakovleff take away 
the czar, he was appointed commandant of the house 
of "Special Purpose." It was seen that Avdeieff 
was very glad of his appointment. He was much 
pleased when he addressed us at the meeting and 
promised the workmen to show them the czar, say- 
ing : "I will take you all to the house and will show 
you the czar." 

Judging by the words of Avdeieff, at the time 
when he was appointed commandant of the "House 
of Special Purpose," the guards of this house 
consisted of Magyars. Avdeieff spoke definitely about 
this and said he intended to relieve the Magyar guard 
by Russians. He spoke particularly about Magyar 
guards and not any others. Avdeieff kept his word 
164 



EXAMINATION OF A, IAKIMOFF 

to "show the czar to the workmen." Always work* 
men used to visit the house, but not all of them 
only those that were chosen by Avdeieff. He used 
to choose only the workmen who were friendly with 
him, who did not perform guard duties at the house 
of "Special Purpose/' but only "helped" Av- 
deieff, as his assistants. They never came to the 
house all together, but only one or two at a time. 
They did not stay in the house for a long time, just 
a day or two. I think that their main ambition was 
money. For their being at the house brought them 
a special salary, amounting to four hundred roubles 
a month, excluding allowance for rations. Besides 
that they received salary in the factory, being mem- 
bers of the factory or business soviet. Altogether 
these workmen enjoyed their connection with Av- 
deieff and drew from it a lot of advantages. 

On May 3<Dth our factory committee received a 
letter from Oukraintzeff (the same Qukraintzeff 
who previously had been one of our workmen), the 
chief of the central staff of the Red army, wherein 
it was requested to detail ten men to perform guard 
duty in the "House of Special Purpose." Among- 
the number I was selected. 

When we arrived at the Ipatieff house the Magyar 
guard had already left. The guards that were there- 
were workmen from the Sissert factory as well as 
workmen from various other works and factories: 
the Makaroff factory, Isset works and the mint* 
After cmr arrival the Sissert workmen remained in 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

the house, but all the other workmen left. Together 
with the Sissert workmen we all took quarters in 
the lower room of Ipatieff's house. One could enter 
the upper floor from the lobby. 

At the time of our arrival at IpatiefPs house there 
was no special chief amongst us Zlokasoff workmen 
or Sissert workmen- There were only seniors. Dur- 
ing the first week I was the senior of the Zlokasoff 
workmen. The seniors of the Sissert workmen were 
Medvedeff and another man. It looked as if Med- 
vedeff was altogether a leading man amongst the 
Sissert workmen, and I should say that it was he 
that gave them the orders; different questions were 
addressed to him; nevertheless he had no special 
power. Previous to this Nikiforoff occupied this 
position but' soon he got ill and was relieved by 
Medvedeff* Such was the state of affairs only dur- 
ing the first days after our arrival at Ipatieff's house. 
About a week later this order was changed. To begin 
with we were transferred to Popoff's house. Medve- 
deff became Chief of All of Us, in fact, of Zlokas- 
off's and Sissert's workmen. Three seniors were 
elected whose duties were shifting the guards, I 
was such a senior, as well as Benjamin Safonoff and 
Constantine Dobrynin. When shortly before the 
murder Safonoff became ill, he was relieved by Ivan 
Starkoff. In this manner, up till the time of the 
murder of the imperial family, the seniors were: 
Ivan Starkoff, Constantine Dobrynin, and myself. 

The following were the duties of the seniors : We 
166 



EXAMINATION OF A* IAKIMOFF 

were eight hours on duty: from six a. m. till two 
p. m.; from two p, m. till ten p. m.; and from ten 
p. m. till six a. m. When on duty we shifted the 
guards and now and then inspected the sentries. 
Outside of that we were obliged to stay in the com- 
mandant's room and meet all the visitors to the 
house. Their arrival was announced to us by a bell 
rung by the sentry. 

At the time of our arrival at Ipatieff's house there 
were altogether ten posts which were numbered as 
follows : 

Post number one was situated in the first room 
of the upper floor adjoining the lobby. 

Post number two 'was in the corridor that led to 
the bathroom and lavatory. 

Post number three was situated in the court yard 
facing the street by the fence gate. The gate was 
always closed and had a little window to enable 
the sentry to see who came to the gate. 

When we arrived at IpatiefPs house the house was 
already surrounded by two fences. The first fence 
was very close to the wall of the house. It began 
on the side of the Vosnesensky Lane, right from the 
wall of the house and separated the house from the 
Vosnesensky Lane, turning at an angle at the place 
where' th6 Lane crossed the Vosnesensky Prospect; 
after that it separated the house from the Vosnesen- 
sky Prospect and finished near the entrance leading 
to the upper part^f the house. In this way the fence 
made a little court yard in front of the house which 

167 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS* 

could be entered only from the main entrance of 
the house which was facing the Vosnesensky Lane. 
In this court yard, just by the intersection of Vos- 
nesensky Lane and Vosnesensky Prospect, stood an 
old sentry box. 

The second fence also began near the Vosnesensky 
Lane. It started at the first fence and went further, 
also turning at an angle and separating the house 
from the Vosnesensky Prospect. It passed the gate, 
and finally ran into the wall of the house on the 
side that faced Vosnesensky Prospect. In this man- 
ner the second fence covered the main entrance of 
the upper floor of the house, as well as the gate and 
the wicket. This second fence had two gates one 
facing the Vosnesensky Lane, the second right op- 
posite them, in the opposite side of the fence, close 
to the gate of the house. 

Both gates were shut from the inside of the fence. 

There was only the gate which was near to the 
door of the house at the time we began to perform 
guard duty. At that time the gates that faced Vos- 
nesensky Lane did not yet exist. They were built 
when we were there, as it was found that automobiles 
had much difficulty in leaving through the first en- 
trance on account of a steep hill. That was the 
reason why the gates facing the Vosnesensky Lane 
were constructed. The motor cars entered through 
both gates, but they left only through the gate fac- 
"ing the Vosnesensky Lane. 

The fence which was near the gate; and was 
168 



EXAMINATION OF A. IAKIMOFF 

built before our arrival, had a wicket with a little 
window. 

On both angles of the exterior fence sentry boxes 
were constructed. 

Post number four was situated outside of the outer 
fence by the wicket of the gates which were con- 
structed at first. 

Post number five was situated by the sentry box, 
near to those gates, in a way that the sentry might 
observe the whole Vosnesensky Prospect. 

Post number six was situated at the other sentry- 
box, which was outside of the fence at the intersec- 
tion of Vosnesensky Lane and Vosnesensky Pros- 
pect, just by the chapel. 

Post number seven was situated by the old sentry 
box in the outer yard, between the walls of the house 
and the first fence. 

Post number eight was in the garden. The sentry 
had to walk around the whole garden. 

Post number nine was on the terrace, where a 
machine gun was mounted. 

Post number ten was situated in a room of the 
lower floor. 

At the time when we arrived at Ipatieff s house 
there were altogether ten posts. 

We were transferred to Popoff's house at our own 
request* The Sissert workmen were especially in- 
sistent upon it. Their houses were far from town, so 
they were visited by their wives. At the same time, 
as strangers were not allowed at IpatiefFs house, the 

169 



?THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

wives could not stop there. For this particular rea- 
son we were all transferred to PopofFs house. 

Up to the second half of June we ZlokasofPs 
and Sissert's workmen performed guard duty on all 
the ten posts. From the second part of June a cer- 
tain change took place. The reason was that a feel- 
ing of discontent towards Avdeieff grew very strong 
at that time amongst the Zlokasoffs workmen, so 
finally he was discharged from the position of Com- 
missar to the factory. He remained only command- 
ant of Ipatieff's house. His group, consisting of the 
above-mentioned people, was also discharged from 
all the positions they occupied. After that Avdeieff 
took them all to Ipatieffs house. All the people 
mentioned by me came here: The three brothers 
Loginoff, Mishkevitch, Soloviev, Gonihkevitch, Ko- 
riakin, Krashensnnikoff, Sidoroff, Oukrainzeff, KCH 
mendantoff, Labousheff, Valentine Luhanoff and 
Skorohodoff. All of them, except Skorohodoff, who 
got sick and was removed to a hospital, took their 
places in the commandant's room and the lobby. 

From their arrival at Ipatieff's house they began 
to perform duty on posts number one and two* They 
all quartered in the commandant's room and the 
lobby and slept on the floor, for which purpose they 
took two or three mattresses from the storeroom, 

In this way we performed duty until the first days 
of July, approximately until the third or fourth of 
July, when Avdeieff, Moshkin and ithe others were 
discharged. 
170 



EXAMINATION OF A. IAKIMOFF 

This happened in the following way: 
Avdeieff was a drunkard. He liked drinking and 
did not miss an opportunity. He drank a sort of 
yeast paste which he obtained at the ZlokasofFs 
factory. He drank in IpatiefFs house. His fol- 
lowers drank also. When the latter moved to 
the Ipaticff house they began stealing the emperor's 
belongings. Often they used to go to the storeroom 
and take out various things in sacks or bags. The 
bags they took away in a motor car or on horses. 
They took the things to their houses or flats. The 
fact of these thefts soon became the subject of gos- 
sip. Our guards also began to speak about the steal- 
ing going on and especially Paul Medvedeff spoke 
about it. Thefts in the Zlokasoffs factory were 
also investigated and Avdeieff and Luhanoff were 
pointed to as the thieves. This was certainly right, 
as Avdeieff and his gang were suspected by the work- 
men at the time they were in the factory. Even at 
this time all of them stuck to easy jobs in the com- 
mittee or business soviet. They got plenty of money 
and drank yeast. They continued this behaviour 
after they moved to the Ipatieff house: drank yeast 
and stole the czar's belongings* 

About the third or the fourth of July, at the 
time I was on duty, Avdeieff went somewhere out of 
the house. I suppose he was called by telephone 
to the district soviet. Shortly after Moshkin also 
left. I know that he went to the district soviet 
whither he was called by telephone. Vasily Loginoff 

171 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

remained in place of Avdeieff. Some time after Av- 
deieff and Moshkin departed, Beloborodoff, Safaroff, 
lourovsky, Nikoulin and two other men entered 
the house. Beloborodoff asked us who remained in 
the house instead of Avdeieff. Vasily Loginoff an- 
swered that he was staying instead of Avdeieff, At 
that Beloborodoff explained to us that Avdeieff was 
not a commandant any longer and that he and Mosh- 
kin were arrested. The reason of the arrest was not 
explained by Beloborodoff. As far as I remember 
the same thing was told by Beloborodoff to Med- 
vedeff, who at this time came from the Popoff house. 
Beloborodoff also explained to us that lourovsky 
was the new commandant and Nikoulin his assist- 
ant. From this moment lourovsky began to give or- 
ders in the house in the capacity of commandant* 
He immediately ordered Loginoff and others of Av- 
deiefFs party I can't remember which of them, at 
this moment, were in the house to "get out/' 

I remember that all the people mentioned: Belo- 
borodoff, Safaroff, Nikoulin, lourovsky and the two 
men unknown to me, visited all the rooms of the 
house; they were in the rooms occupied by the czar 
and his family, but I did not accompany them to 
those rooms. They did not stay for a long time. I 
believe that Beloborodoff informed the family of the 
appointment of lourovsky and Nikoulin. At that 
time lourovsky questioned Medvedeff about the man 
who perf onfted guard duty on posts numbers one and 
two. (Inside the house.) After he learned that 
172 



EXAMINATION OF A. IAKIMOFF 

those posts were kept by the "privileged" of Av- 
deiefFs party, lourovsky said: "For the present 
you will have to perform duty oh those posts; later 
I will request men from the extraordinary commit- 
tee for them." 

In a few days the men from the extraordinary in- 
vestigation committee arrived at the Ipatieff house. 
They were ten in number. Their baggage was 
brought on a horse. I could not identify the horse 
or tell the name of the coachman; but everybody at 
that time knew that the men came from the "Tchre- 
svytchayka" (Institution of Secret Political Police) 
in the American hotel. 

I can not say why, but we used to call all those 
men Letts. But whether they were Letts none of 
us knew. It is quite possible that they were not 
Letts, but Magyars. 

They took their quarters in the lower floor of the 
house, and had their meals in the commandant's 
room. They were in a privileged position in com- 
parison with us. I think it would be right to say 
that we had three parties: the so-called Letts, the 
Zlokasoff and Sissert workmen. The Letts lourov- 
sky treated as equals. The Sissert workmen he 
treated a little better than us, and us worst of all. 
I account for the difference in his manner towards 
the Sissert workmen by the fact that he considered 
us as workmen from the Zlokasoff factory who had 
been discharged together with Avdeieff. Medvedeff 
also influenced his attitude. He ingratiated him- 

173 



THE LAST DATS OF THE ROMANOVS 

self with lourovsky and Nikoulin and made an effort 
to be very affable. That is why they had a better 
attitude towards the Sissert workmen. 

At the beginning he increased the number of posts. 
He mounted another machine gun in the attic of the 
house and established a post in the rear yard. This 
post in the rear yard was number ten, the post by 
the machine gun, eleven, and the post in the attic 
twelve. Duties on posts numbers one, two and 
twelve, after the arrival of lourovsky, were per- 
formed exclusively by Letts. 

You ask me why I volunteered to guard the czar? 
I did not see at that time anything wrong in doing 
so. As I told you before, I read a little, different 
books. I read party pamphlets and had an idea 
about the views of the different parties. For ex* 
ample, I know the difference between the ideas of 
the social revolutionists and the Bolsheviki. The 
former believe that the peasants are a working-class 
and the latter consider them as bourgeoisie and be- 
lieve that only workmen are real proletarians. My 
sympathies were with -the Bolsheviki, but I did not 
believe that the Bolsheviki could build up by their 
methods of violence a "good'* and "just" life. I 
still believe that a "good" and "just" life will exist 
only when there are not so many rich and so many 
poor people as there are at present; and this will only 
come when all the population are educated to the 
point where they understand that the life they are 
leading at present is not the true one. I believed 
174 



EXAMINATION OF A. IAKIMOFF 

the czar to be the first capitalist who would always 
play into the hands of capital and not into those 
of the workmen. For this reason I did not want a 
czar and thought that he ought to be kept under 
guard, or at least imprisoned, until the time when 
he could be judged by the nation and punished by 
it according to his crimes, after deciding: "Was he 
guilty before his people, or not?" I thought his im- 
prisonment was necessary for the safety of the 
revolution, and if I had known before that he would 
be killed in the way he was, I never would have gone 
to guard him. I believed that he could be judged 
only by the whole of Russia, as he was the czar of 
the entire Russian nation. All that happened I con- 
sider a wicked deed, "unjust and cruel." The mur- 
der of the rest of his family I consider still worse. 
For what reason were his children murdered? I 
must also state that I joined the guards as I wanted 
to earn money. At that time I did not feel well and 
joined the guards because I thought it an easy job. 

In this way we kept guard of the Czar Nicholas 
Alexandrovitch and his family. They all lived 
in Ipatieff's house I mean to say the Czar Nicholas 
Alexandrovitch, his wife Alexandra Theodorovna, 
his son Alexis and his daughters, Olga, Tatiana, 
Maria and Anastasia. 

Of the others who lived with them there were: 
Dr. Botkin, Demidova, "Freylina" we used to call 
her, Haritonoff, the cook, and Troupp, the waiter. 
The name of the waiter I remember very well bc- 

175 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

cause the list of all the people who lived in Ipatieff's 
house was hung up in the commandant's room. 

Botkin was an aged man, stout, grey-haired and 
tall. He wore a blue suit: jacket, waistcoat and 
trousers, stiff shirt and tie; he always wore shoes. 

Demidova was a tall and stout blonde; she was 
thirty to thirty-five, dressed herself very cleanly and 
nicely, not like a servant, wore a corset; and it was 
seen by her figure that she was very tight-laced. 

The cook was about fifty. He was small, strong 
and had brown hair. 

The waiter was about sixty; he was tall and thin. 

There also lived with the imperial family a boy 
about fourteen, whose name I don't know. He was 
tall for his age, thin and his face was pale. He 
wore a dark grey jacket, with a high collar. 

I can not tell you anything as to how the imperial 
family lived and spent their time. I never entered 
the rooms where they lived, and I could not see 
anything from a distance, as the door from the 
lobby to their first room was always shut* 

I don't know how the imperial family spent their 
time in the house. Dinner was brought for them by 
some women from the soviet dining-room that is lo- 
cated at the crossing of Vosnesensky and Glavny 
Prospects, in the place occupied now by the motion 
pictures and the Cafe Lorange. But later, during 
Avdeieff s time, permission was given to them to pre- 
pare their dinner in the house* For this purpose the 
provisions were brought to them from the district 
176 



EXAMINATION OF A. IAKIMOFF 

soviet by some special man. Nuns used to bring 
them from the monastery milk, eggs and bread. The 
only thing I personally observed in the life of the 
imperial family was their singing. I heard some- 
times sacred songs which they sang. They sang the 
"Herouvimskaya" (cherubims) song. But they sang 
also a secular song. I could not get the words, but 
the tune was sad. This was the name of a song: 
"A Man Died in a Soldier's Hospital." I never 
heard men's voices singing only women's. 

The divine service was performed in the house, 
but during the whole time I was there divine service 
was performed only three times. Twice the clergy- 
man Storogeff officiated at the service and once the 
clergyman Meledin. But there were services also 
before our arrival. I know this because I had to get, 
a priest to officiate at the service. The first time 
I was sent to get a priest by Avdeieff he named the 
church from which the clergyman was to be asked. 
He did not give me the name of the priest. At the 
church I learned that it was Meledin who officiated. 
I wanted to get him but at this time he was busy. 
After that I called up Storogeff. I called him also 
later a second time. When I was looking for a 
priest I used to address myself to the churchwarden 
who stood near the candle-box. I can not tell who 
he was. But once he asked me if he couldn't offi- 
ciate instead of a deacon, saying: "I would like 
so much to see the czar." In the time of Avdeieff, 
when I was in the house, two services were held. 

177 



THE LAST PAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

While lourovsky was there, only one. Personally 
I was never present at divine service. We were not 
allowed in the room. Avdeieff and lourovsky were 
present at the service. From the distance I heard 
men's and women's voices during the service; prob- 
ably they sung themselves. I saw all the members 
of the imperial family, as well as all the people who 
lived with them. 

I saw them in the house when they passed to the 
toilet room, or went for a walk in the garden, as 
well as during the walk itself. They passed near 
the commandant's room and close to post number 
one as they went to the toilet room. They could 
also go to the toilet room through the kitchen* I 
don't know the reason, but they never did it. If 
the heir was not with them, they used to go for their 
walk by the staircase that led down from the toilet 
room, through the lobby that led into the yard and 
from the yard to the garden. Sometimes when the 
heir went with them to walk they all went through 
the main entrance of the house to the street, then 
through the gate (and not the wicket) to the yard, 
and then to the garden. He was probably ill and 
he was carried out to his roller chair, which was 
brought up to the main entrance. The czar used 
to carry him personally. I never saw him carried 
by anyone else. 

Personally I could not observe the attitude of 
other people towards the emperor and his family, 
though I watched Avdeieff, who had to deal with 
178 



BXAMIN ATION OF A. TAKIMOFF 

them* Avdeieff was a rough and uncouth man and 
a drunkard; his soul was not kind. If on any oc- 
casion during the absence of Avdeieff any member 
of the imperial family asked Moshkin for a favour, 
he always used to answer that they would have to 
wait the return of Avdeieff. When Avdeieff returned 
and their plea was made to him, Avdeieff's answer 
was : "Let them go to hell." Sometimes returning 
from the imperial family's room, Avdeieff used to 
say that they asked him for something or another 
and he refused. Apparently the process of refusal 
gave him much pleasure. He spoke about it, looking 
very happy. For example, I remember that he was 
asked once for permission to open the windows tell- 
ing us about it, he said that he forbade it. I can 
not say how he addressed the czar, but in the com- 
mandant's room he referred to the imperial family 
as: "They"; the czar he used to call "Nikolashka." 
I have told you already that as soon as he got into 
the house he began to bring in his favourite workmen, 
who moved into the house altogether, after being dis- 
charged from the committee and soviet. All those 
people had a merry time with Avdeieff in the Ipatieff 
house. They drank and stole the emperor's belong- 
ings. Once Avdeieff got so tight that he fell in one 
of the lower rooms of the house. At the same time 
Beloborodoff arrived and called for him. Someone of 
Avdeieff's favourites lied to Beloborodoff that Av- 
deieff had gone out of the house. It appeared that he 
fell drunk in the lower floor directly after he had 

179 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

visited the imperial family, whom he went to see in 
that state. The drunkards made a great noise in the 
commandant's room; they shouted, slept one on the 
other as they toppled over and were very dirty in 
their habits. The songs they chose for their singing, 
of course, could not have been agreeable to the 
czar. They all sang: "You fell as a victim 
in the struggle," "Let us forget the old world," 
"Get cheerfully in step, comrades." Ouk- 
rainzeff could play the piano which was in the com- 
mandant's room and accompany the singers. Know- 
ing Avdeieff was a Bolshevik and also a harsh man, 
who was always drunk, I believe that he treated the 
imperial family badly. He could not treat then 
well, as it was against his nature and behaviour. Af- 
ter I watched him in the commandant's room I be- 
lieved the way he treated the imperial family was 
insulting. I also remember that Avdeieff spoke with 
his friends about Rasputin. He spoke about the 
same things which other people discussed and which 
were written a number of times in the newspapers. 
Not a single time did I speak with the czar or any- 
one of his family. I met them only occasionally* 
and we never spoke. Only once I saw and heard the 
czar speaking to Moshkin. They were walking in 
the garden. The czar walked in the garden. Mosh- 
kin sat in the garden on a bench. The czar ap- 
proached him and said something about the weather- 
Though I did not speak when I met them I still 
got an impression, that entered my soul, of all of 
.180 



EXAMINATION OF A. IAKIMOFF 

them. The czar was not young any more; he had 
grey hair in his beard. I have seen him wearing a 
"gimnasterka" (soldier's shirt), an officer's belt, 
with a buckle, around his waist. The buckle was 
yellow and the belt was yellow, not of a light yel- 
low color, but of a dark one. The color of the gim- 
nasterka was khaki. His trousers were the same 
colour and he had old worn-out boots. His eyes were 
kind and he had altogether a kind expression. I 
got the impression he was a kind, modest, frank and 
talkative person. Sometimes I felt that he would 
speak to me right away. He looked as if he would 
like to talk with any one of us. 

The czaritza was not a bit like him. Her look was 
severe. She had the appearance and manners of a 
haughty and grave woman. Sometimes we used to 
speak about them amongst ourselves, and we all 
thought that Nicholas Alexandrovitch was a modest 
man, but that she was different and looked exactly 
like a czaritza. She seemed older than he was. 
There was grey hair on her temples and her face 
was not the face of a young woman. He looked 
younger when they were together. I can not de- 
scribe the way she used to dress. 

Tatiana looked like the czaritza. She had the 
same serious and haughty look as her mother. The 
other daughters: Olga, Maria and Anastasia, had 
no haughtiness about them. One had the impression 
that they were modest and kind. I also can not de- 
scribe the way they dressed, as I did not notice it. 

181 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

The czarevitch was sick all the time. I can tell 
you nothing about him. The czar used to carry him 
up to his roller chair, and there he lay covered with 
a blanket. I cannot describe his clothes either. 

I thought a great deal about the czar after I 
stayed a certain time amongst the guards. After I 
personally caw them several times I began to feel 
entirely different towards them: I began to pity 
them- I pitied them as human beings, I tell, you 
the entire truth. You may believe me or not* I 
had the idea in my head to let them escape, or to 
do something to allow them to escape. I did not tell 
anybody about this, but I had an idea to tell it 
to Dr. Derevenko, who visited them at that time, 
but I was doubtful of him. I can not tell you why 
I was doubtful. I just thought: "I don't know 
what type of man he is." When he left them his 
face did not express anything, and he never spoke 
a single word about th&n, so I got doubtful. I am 
relating to you the exact truth. I had in my head 
the thoughts I am expressing now. Prevously, 
when I first entered into the guards, I did not see 
them and did not know them. I was also a little 
guilty before them. When Avdeieff and the "To- 
varistchy" (comrades) used to sing the revolutionary 
songs, I also used to join a little in the chorus, but 
after I learned how the matter stood, I stopped it 
and all of us, or if not all then a great number, con- 
demned Avdeieff for his behaviour* 

In the time of lourovsky we were uot allowed into 
182 



EXAMINATION OF A. IAKIMOFF 

the house. I never used to stay longer than necessary 
in the commandant's room, as I did during, the days 
of AvdeiefL Whenever a bell rang "(an electric bell 
was connected with the commandant's room and 
PopofPs house), one used to come to the command- 
ant's room, get an order and immediately retire. We 
seniors did not have to go to the commandant's room 
to answer the bell ring. It was always Medvedeff 
who went and we were asked for through him. lour- 
ovsky was always with Nikoulin; Medvedeff also 
made his best efforts to be in their company. The 
Letts from the Tchresvytchayka were also near to 
them. That is why I can not describe to you how 
lourovsky felt about the czar. Avdeieff was nearer 
to us, as he was the same sort we were a workman, 
and he lived with us. lourovsky behaved himself 
like a chief and did not let us in the house. 

I can only say that immediately after he got in 
command of the house he mounted a machine gun 
in the attic and established a new post in the rear 
yard. He stopped all drunkenness and I never saw 
him drunk or intoxicated. Nikoulin was visited by 
a girl whose name was "Seveleva" but she was never 
let into the commandant's room. But on one occa- 
sion lourovsky either changed or forbade altogether 
the donation of the nuns to the imperial family; he 
did something that made the position of the im- 
perial family worse, but what he changed or for- 
bade, I do not remember. Something that I could 
not understand happened also in regard to the priest, 

183 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

As I remember, in the time of lourovsky there was 
only one divine service. I was called by lourovsky, 
who ordered me to get "any" priest. At first he 
asked me who were the priests that officiated, I 
named Father Meledin and Father Storogeff. After 
that he ordered me to get one of them. As Father 
Meledin happened to be the nearest, I called him 
up the same day, on Saturday evening. In the even- 
ing I told lourovsky that I called up Meledin. Next 
day, in the morning, lourovsky called me up and 
again asked me the name of the priest I had told to 
come. I answered that I called up Father Meledin, 
Hearing that, lourovsky asked me: "Is that the 
one who lives on the Vodotchnaya in the place where 
Dr. Tchernavin lives'?" I answered that it was 
the same one, after which lourovsky sent me to in- 
form Meledin that he should not come. "Go and 
tell Meledin that there won't be any service, service 
is postponed. If he should ask you who postponed 
the service, you will say that they did it and not 
myself. Instead of Meledin, fetch Storogeff." 
Well, I went to Meledin and told him there 
would be no service. He asked me why? 
I answered in the way I was ordered by lourovsky : 
that "they" postponed it. Directly after I went to 
Storogeff and asked him to come. What the reason 
was for all that, and why lourovsky preferred Storo* 
geff to Meledin, I don't know. Towards me also 
he acted very arbitrarily, neglecting the desires of 
the men. On July 12th the men elected me instead 
184 



EXAMINATION OF A. IAKIMOFF 

of Medvedeff to be chief. On Sunday, July 14th, I 
returned after my leave later than it was allowed, so 
lourovsky dismissed me and appointed Medvedeff in- 
stead to be chief. So it continued till the end. 

The last time I saw the czar and his daughters 
was on July i6th. They were walking in the gar- 
den about four o'clock. I don't remember whether 
I saw the heir. The czaritza, I did not see, as she 
did not walk at that time. 

On Monday, July 15th, the boy who lived with 
the imperial family and used to push the roller chair, 
appeared in our quarters at Popoff's house. I spe- 
cially noticed this fact. Probably the other guards 
also noticed it. But nobody knew why the boy was 
transferred to our house. There is no doubt that 
it was done on lourovsky' s orders. On July i6th I 
was on duty. My hours at that time were from two 
p. m. up till ten p. m. At ten o'clock I placed the 
sentries on all the eight posts (duties on posts num- 
bers one, two, eleven and twelve were not performed 
by us). The sentries that I placed at ten p. m. had 
to be relieved at two a. m. by the new senior, Con- 
stantine Dobrynin, to whom I shifted my duties. 
After I was relieved I went to our quarters. I re- 
member that I had tea and afterwards, at about 
eleven o'clock, went to bed. Klescheeff, Roman- 
off and Osokin were in the same room with me. 
About four a. m., when it began to be daylight, I 
was wakened by Klescheeff s voice, Romanoff and 
all the other men, including Osokin, who slept in 

18.? 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

the same room with me, were also awakened. Kles- 
cheeff was saying in a nervous voice: "Get up, fel- 
lows, I will tell you the news; get out into the other 
room/* We got up and followed him to the next 
room where there were more men, and when we all 
got assembled, Klescheeff announced: "Today the 
czar was shot." We all started to ask how it hap- 
pened and he and Deriabin told us the following, 
mutually completing each other's narrative. 

At two a. m- a notice was given to them by Med- 
vedeff and Dobrynin whilst they were standing on 
their posts, that they would have to perform their 
duty longer than two o* clock a, m., as during the 
night the czar was going to be shot. After receiving 
the notic? Klescheeff and Deriabin approached the 
windows : Klescheeff, to the window of the lobby of 
the lower floor which was opposite to the door that 
led to the room where the murder took place; and 
Deriabin to the window of the room that faced the 
Vosnesensky Lane. Shortly afterwards, they say 
it was a little past midnight by the Old Time, or a 
little past two by the New Time (instituted by the 
Bolsheviki, who changed the time two hours ahead), 
some persons entered the lower room and proceeded 
to the room where the murder took place. The pro- 
cession was seen very well by Klescheeff. lourovsky 
and Nikoulin went ahead and were followed by the 
emperor, empress and the daughters Olga, Tatiaaa, 
Maria and Anastasia, as well as by Botkin, Dcmi- 
dova, Troupp and Haritonoff, the coot The heir 
186 



EXAMINATION OF A. IAKIMOFF 

was carried in the arms of the emperor. Behind 
them went Medvedeff and the Letts, the ten men 
that lived in the lower room and were requested by 
lourovsky from the "Tchresvytchayka." Two of the 
number carried rifles. When the imperial family 
were in the room, they placed themselves as follows: 
In the middle of the room stood the czar; the heir 
was seated on a chair to the right of the czar; to 
the right of the heir stood Dr. Botkin; behind 
them against the wall stood the empress with her 
daughters; at one side of the empress stood the cook 
and the waiter; on the other Demidova. 

Besides them, the following people were in the 
room: lourovsky, Nikoulin, and the Letts. Behind 
the Letts stood Medvedeff. 

Deriabin couldn't tell the words with which 
lourovsky addressed the family, he didn't hear them, 
but Klescheeff positively affirms that he heard 
lourovsky's words and that lourovsky said to the 
czar: "Nicholas Alexandrovitch, your relatives 
are trying to save you, therefore we are compelled 
to shoot you." The same minute several shots were 
heard. All the revolvers were fired. 

A woman's scream and loud cries of several wom- 
en's voices were heard after the first shots. They 
executed the victims one after the other. The em- 
peror fell first, after him fell the heir. Demidova 
was tossing herself about, but was dispatched by 
bayonets. After they all fell they were examined 
and some of them who gave signs of life were again 

187 



THE LAST PAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

shot and pierced by bayonets. Of the members of 
the imperial family they mentioned Anastasia as 
being pierced by bayonets. After that they again 
started to examine the dead: unbuttoned their 
clothes, looking for jewelry. All the things found 
on the dead persons, lourovsky took himself and car- 
ried ugstairs. Somebody brought from the upper 
rooms a few bed sheets and the dead were wrapped 
in those and carried out into the yard through the 
same rooms through which they had passed to their 
execution. From the yard they were carried to a 
motor truck which was standing behind the gate of 
the house. All of them were transported on a truck; 
some cloth was taken from the store room and spread 
on the truck; the bodies were put on the cloth and 
covered with the same cloth. Sergius Luhanoff was 
the driver. The truck with the bodies was taken 
out by Luhanoff through the gates that opened on 
the Vosnesensky Lane. lourovsky and about three 
Letts went out with the bodies. After the bodies 
were taken out of the house two Letts began to mop 
up the blood and wash it with water and sawdust* 

The narratives of Klescheeff and Deriabin about 
the murder sounded so much like truth and they both 
were so excited by everything they had seen, that no- 
body had even a shadow of a doubt that they were 
speaking the truth. Deriabin felt especially upset 
about It; he swore and called them murderers, butch- 
ers, and spoke about them with profound disgust, 

On one of the following days, either Medvedeff 
188 



EXAMINATION OF A. IAKIMOFF 

or somebody who heard him, told me that Luhanoff 
took the bodies to the Verkh-Issetsk Works. The 
truck went through a wooded country. The ground 
began to get soft and swampy. The car was proceed- 
ing with difficulty, as its wheels sank into the mud. 
With many difficulties the automobile arrived at its 
destination, where a hole was already dug. All the 
bodies were laid in the hole and covered. 

All that I am telling is the exact truth. Neither 
myself nor any other of our Zlokasoff workmen knew 
anything in the evening about the intended murder. 
After that evening Medvedeff did not come to our 
quarters and did not explain anything to us. I ad- 
mit that some of the Sissert workmen may have 
known about it through Medvedeff, but the Sissert 
workmen were holding themselves aloof from us, 
and we from them. Among the Sissert workmen 
there was a greater number of Bolsheviki than 
among us. 

Regarding the weapons, I can say the following: 
lourovsky had two revolvers; one of them was a big 
Mauser and the other a Nagan. Besides that I have 
seen a big revolver in the commandant's room and 
it is possible that it was a Colt. All the Letts had 
revolvers and judging by the holsters they had Na- 
gans. Besides that a few more revolvers were 
brought from some place at the time lourovsky was 
commandant. 

The description of the murder of the czar and his 
family impressed me very much. I was sitting trem- 

189 



THE LAST PAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

bling. I did not go to bed, and at eight o'clock in 
the morning I went to see my sister, Kapitolina, with 
whom I was on very good terms. So I went to her 
to share my feelings with her. I was deeply pained 
in my soul. I found my sister alone; her husband 
was working in the commissariat of justice. When 
my sister saw my distressed expression she asked me : 
"What is the matter?" I answered her: "The 
czar is shot." My sister asked me: "Is it possible 
that you were there?" I told her the same thing 
I am telling you, but not in such detail. I told her 
the imperial family were shot by decision and order 
of the "district soviet of workmen deputies." I have 
the same opinion at present; it could not be possible 
that lourovsky did it on his own decision. As at 
that time all the power was in the hands of the dis- 
trict soviet, I believe that the murder was done by 
the order of the soviet. 

Previously among the Red Guards there was the 
following conversation: "What will happen if the 
Czechs enter the town? What will they do with 
the imperial family?" Some suggested that they 
would execute the family. 

I remember that Deriabin said that Demidova had 
about thirty bayonet wounds. I told that to my 
sister* 

At about ten o'clock in the morning I returned 
from my sister's to the Popoff house. I do not re- 
member what I did until two p, m*, when my duty 
commenced. I placed the guards on all the posts 
190 



EXAMINATION OF A. IAKIMOFF 

and entered the commandant's room. There I met 
Nikoulin, two Letts and MedvedefL They were not 
gay, any of them; they 'looked preoccupied and de- 
pressed. None of them was speaking. A large num- 
ber of precious things were placed on the table. They 
were pins, stones, ear-rings, beads and all sorts of 
jewels. A part of them lay in boxes, which were 
all open. The door from the lobby leading to the 
rooms where the imperial family used to live was 
closed as before, but there was nobody in the rooms; 
not a single sound was heard. Before, when the 
imperial family used to live there, sounds of life 
were always heard in those rooms. There was not 
any life there at present. Only their little dog was 
standing near the door in the lobby, waiting to be 
let into those rooms. I remember very well that I 
thought at the time: "You are waiting in vain/' 
Before the murder there was a bed and a couch in 
the commandant's room. On this day at two o'clock 
of July lyth, 'when I came to the commandant's 
room, I noticed there two more beds, on one of 
which a Lett was lying. Later Medvedeff told us 
that the Letts did not want to live any longer in 
the room where the murder took place (they had 
lived before in this room). Obviously this was the 
reason why the two beds were transferred to the 
commandant's room. 

From two o'clock p. s m. up till ten o'clock p. m. 
on July lyth I performed duty. On this day I did 
iiot see lourovsky in the house. 

191 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

The same day Medvedeff told us that all of us 
guards would be sent to the front. So, on July i8th, 
I went in the morning to the Zlokasoff factory for 
the purpose of drawing the money that was due me. 
At two o'clock of the same day I again went on duty. 
On this day the czar's belongings were being taken 
from the Ipatieflf house and loaded on an automobile. 
Beloborodoff was sitting in the automobile* A num- 
ber of things were also taken away on carriages. 

On July 1 8th I saw lourovsky in the house about 
six o'clock in the evening; he was constantly com- 
ing and going. At about eight o'clock in the even- 
ing he called up Medvedeff and gave him the money 
for our wages. On July l8th all the things had been 

taken out of the house. 

i 

On July 2oth, during the night, together with 
the other guards, I was sent to the station Yekater- 
inburg First. A part of the guard remained in the 
Ipatieff house. 

At the end of July we arrived at Perm and about 
a week after our arrival we were joined by the re- 
mainder of the guards from the Ipatieff house. All 
were assigned to the command of the commissar of 
supplies of the third army, by the name of Gor- 
bounoff, and taken on a steamer to Levshino. Kless- 
cheeff alone did not go with them to Levshino as 
he had to stay in Perm owing to illness from venereal 
disease. 

For about a month I was guarding the steamer 
and railroad cars of the commissar Gorbounoff. On 
192 



EXAMINATION OF A. IAKIMOFF 

November 1st, of my own will, I went to Moto- 
viliha and remained there. After the place came 
under the rule of the supreme ruler I was mobilised, 
participated in battles with the Reds and finally 
was arrested. 

I remember another fact in the life of the em- 1 
peror. On one occasion I entered the command- 
ant's .room and met there Nikoulin and KabanofL 
I heard Nikoulin asking Kabanoff what he spoke 
about with the czar during the time of his walk. 
Kabanoff replied that the emperor asked him if he 
had not been previously in a certain cuirassier regi- 
ment. Kabanoff answered that he had been and 
added also that once, during the time he was in the 
regiment, the regiment was reviewed by the czar. 
We were all surprised at the czar's memory. 

I can not say what became of the boy who stayed 
with the imperial family. On one of the days im- 
mediately following the murder I saw the boy from 
a distance; he was sitting in the room where the 
Sissert workmen were dining and was weeping bit- 
terly so that his sobs were heard by me. I did not go 
towards him, nor did I ask him any questions. I 
was told that the boy learned about the murder of 
the imperial family and began to cry. 

On July the iyth, after I became calmer, I went 
to Medvedeff's room. In this room I met another 
man who had previously obtained the supplies for 
the imperial family and the guardsmen. I began 
to question Medvedeff about the murder. Medvedeff 

193 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

told me that shortly after twelve in the night, lour- 
ovsky woke up the imperial family and said to the 
czar: "An attack is being prepared on the house, I 
must transfer you all to the lower room." They 
all came down. In reply to my question who did the 
shooting, Medvedeff answered that it was the Letts. 
When I asked where the bodies were taken, he told 
me that the bodies were taken by lourovsky and the 
Letts on an automobile to the Verkh-Issetsk Works 
and there in a wooded place by the swamp all the 
bodies were put in one hole that was previously pre- 
pared and covered with earth. I remember he said 
that the automobile sank and only with great diffi- 
culty arrived at the grave. 

I know that Avdeieff, before being appointed com- 
mandant of the Ipatieff house, went to Tobolsk to 
get the czar and his family. He was accompanied 
by Hohriakoff, who was afterwards killed at the 
front and buried with great ceremony in Perm by 
the Bolsheviki. 

I also remember that when I went to Yekaterin- 
burg I heard in the car two workmen saying that 
the czar had left Yekaterinburg. All of us who 
were of the guards began to tell them that the czar 
had been shot. 

I can't explain anything else. My testimony has 
been read to me, and is correct. 
(Signed) ANATOLIE ALEXANDROVITCH 
N* SOKOLOFF. 



194 



VI 
EXAMINATION OF PAVEL MEDVEDEFF 

[The deposition of Pavel Medvedeff* the former work' 
man at the Sissert Factory 9 reveals a more hardened charac- 
ter than that of Yakimoff. He regards events in the cold 
light of reason* and offers no comment either of pity or of 
dislike. As he informed the member of the District Court* 
the fate of the czar and his family did not "interest" him. 
But it is worthy of notice that this unemotional workman 
insists that he took no part whatever in the actual murder* 
which implies that the tragedy was repugnant even to a 
man of his type. * 

His account also bears the imprint of truth. It is evident 
from it that Medvedeff possessed no imagination* and he 
describes the blood-stained room* and the bleeding corpses 
exactly as everyday occurrences. There is no attempt to 
impress his interrogator. His standpoint is: "I saw these 
things* this is how they happened. I have nothing more 
to say." 

His account of the disposal of the corpses differs from 
that of Yakimoff. It agrees* however* that the route taken 
by the motor lorry was in the direction of the Verkh-Issetsk 
Works. Editor's Note.] 

On February 21, 1919, in the town of Yekater- 
inburg, a member of Yekaterinburg district court, 
J, Sergeeff, examined the person named below as 
one of the accused, in accordance with Article No. 
403-409 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The 
accused deposed as follows : 

I am Pavel Spiridonovitch Medvedeff, thirty-one 

195 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

years of age, and belong to the Orthodox Church; 
able to read and write; born a peasant of the Sissert 
factory of the Yekaterinburg district. I have a 
house belonging to me at the factory. 

In September, 1914, 1 was mobilised and assigned 
to the Opolchenskaia Drujina (33rd territorial bat- 
talion), located in the town of Verhotourie. I 
stayed with the battalion for two months. I was 
then discharged and exempted from military serv- 
ice, on account, I believe, of being employed as a 
munition worker. 

After the February revolution, in April, 1917, I 
joined the Bolshevik party, as the majority of the 
workmen in our factory did. During three months 
I paid to the party treasury one per cent of my 
wages. Then I ceased to pay because I was not 
willing to participate in the activities of the party* 

After the October revolution, in January, 1918, I 
was enlisted in the Red army and in February they 
sent me to the front to fight against Dutoff. Com- 
missar Sergius Mrachkovsky was in command of my 
detachment. We were fighting in the vicinity of 
Troizk, but our fighting was not a success, as we 
did more wandering on the steepes than actual fight- 
ing. In April I came home on leave and spent three 
weeks there. In the second half of May the above- 
mentioned Commissar Mrachkovsky came to our fac- 
tory and began to recruit workmen for a special de^ 
tachmeut which was assigned to guard the house 
where the former emperor, Nicholas II, and his f am- 
196 



EXAMINATION OF P. MEDVEDEFF 

ily lived. The conditions appeared attractive to me 
and I enlisted. Altogether thirty workmen were 
enlisted. 

On May 19, 1918, the detachment recruited by 
Commissar Mrachkovsky came to Yekaterinburg and 
was quartered in the Novy Gostiny Dvor (new mar- 
ket house), where we lived till May 24th. Accord- 
ing to the order of the Ural district soviet, we elected 
from amongst our number two seniors. Alexis Ni- 
kiforoff and I were elected. On May 24th our de- 
tachment was transferred to new quarters, to the 
lower floor of the Ipatieff house. The same day 
the former emperor with his family arrived. They 
were placed in the upper floor of this same house. 
The whole upper floor of the house was at theii; dis- 
posal, except one room (to the left from the en- 
trance), which was occupied by the commandant of 
the house and his assistant. Alexander Avdeieff, 
workman of the Zlokasoff factory, was the com- 
mandant. Moshkin (I don't remember his Christian 
name) was his assistant. Two other men were also 
quartered in the commandant's room. I do not know 
their names, but I know they were Zlokasoff work- 
men. 

As soon as our party arrived at the Ipatieff house 
the commandant ordered me, as I was senior, ta 
receive the prisoners. Together with Avdeieff and 
Moshkin I entered the corner room (the czar's bed* 
room). The following persons were there: The 
emperor, his wife, son, four daughters, Dr. Bot* 

197 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

kin, the cook, the waiter and a boy. (I do not know 
their names.) After having counted the party and 
finding that they were twelve in number, we left, 
without having spoken to them. In the room adjoin- 
ing the czar's bedroom were placed the czar's 
four daughters. At first there were no beds for them. 
After two or three days the beds were put in. The 
commandant was in charge of the internal life in the 
house; the guards performed only sentry duty. At 
first the guards were on duty in three turns, but 
later in four. We stayed in Ipatieff's house two 
or three weeks, after- which we were transferred to 
PopofFs house, which was exactly opposite IpatiefPs 
house. In a few days after this the guard was aug- 
mented by fourteen more workmen from the Zlokas- 
off factory, which is situated in Yekaterinburg. 
These Zlokasoff workmen also elected their senior, 
by the name of lakimoff. There were altogether 
eleven sentry posts; two were inside the house; two 
by the machine gunsj and four outside the house. 
Every day the czar's family used to walk in the 
garden. The heir was sick all the time and the 
emperor carried him to his wheel chair. At the be- 
ginning, dinner for the family was brought from the 
Soviet's dining-room; but afterwards they were al- 
lowed to prepare their own dinner in the kitchen 
of the upper floor. The seniors' (guard captains') 
duties were to take charge of the food and supplies 
of the guardsmen, to change the sentries, and super* 
vise them. When on duty the senior had to stay in 
198 



EXAMINATION OF P. MEDVEDEFF 

the commandant's room. At first the seniors took 
turns every twelve hours in performing their duties. 
Then the third senior was elected, Constantine Dob- 
rynin, and after this we did duty in eight-hour shifts. 
At the end of June or at the beginning of July (I 
don't remember exactly), the commandant, Avdeieff, 
and his assistant, Moshkin were removed (it. seems 
that they were suspected of stealing the czar's be- 
longings). A new commandant was assigned; his 
name was lourovsky. The new commandant's as- 
sistant arrived with him. His name I do not re- 
member. In the evening of July i6th the time of my 
duty had just begun, when between seven and eight 
p. m. the commandant, lourovsky, ordered me to 
take all the Nagan revolvers from the guardsmen 
and to bring them up to him. I took twelve re- 
volvers from the sentries as well as from some other 
guardsmen and brought them to the commandant's 
office. lourovsky announced to me : cc We will have 
to shoot them all tonight; notify the guardsmen not 
to be alarmed if they should hear the shots." I un- 
derstood that lourovsky had in mind to shoot the 
whole of the czar's family as well as the doctor and 
servants who lived with them, but I did not ask him 
where or by whom the decision was made. I must 
tell you that the boy who assisted the cook, in accord- 
ance with lourovsky' s order, was transferred in the 
morning to the guardsmen's rooms in the Popoff 
house. The lower floor of IpatiefFs house was oc- 
cupied by the Letts from the Letts commune wtu> 

199 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

took up their quarters there, after lourovsky was 
made commandant. They were ten in number. At 
about ten o'clock in the evening, in accordance with 
lourovsky's order, I informed the guardsmen not to 
be alarmed if they should hear firing. About mid- 
night lourovsky woke up the czar's family. I do 
not know if he told them the reason they were wak- 
ened and where they were to be taken, or not, I 
positively affirm that it was lourovsky who entered 
the rooms where the czar's family was. lourovsky 
had not ordered me or Dobrynin to waken the fam- 
ily. In about an hour the whole of the family, the 
doctor, maid and two waiters got up, washed and 
dressed themselves. Just before lourovsky went to 
wake the family up, two members of the extraordi- 
nary commission arrived at IpatiefFs house. Shortly 
after one o'clock in the night the czar, czaritza, their 
four daughters, the maid, the doctor, the cook and 
the waiter left their rooms. The czar carried the 
heir in his arms. The emperor and heir were dressed 
in "Gimnasterkas" (soldiers' shirts) and wore caps. 
The empress and the daughters were dressed, but 
their heads were uncovered. The emperor with the 
heir proceeded first. The empress, her daughters and 
the others followed him. lourovsky, his assistant, 
arid the two above-mentioned members of the ex- 
traordinary commission were accompanying them- I 
was also present. During my presence nobody of 
the czar's family asked anybody any questions. They 
did not either weep or cry. Having descended the 
200 



EXAMINATION OF P. MEDVEDEFF 

stairs to the first floor, we went out into the court, 
and from there by the second door (counting from 
the gate) we entered the lower floor of the house. 
When the corner room, adjoining the storeroom with 
a sealed door, was entered, lourovsky ordered chairs 
to be brought. His assistant brought three chairs. 
One chair was given to the emperor, one to the 
empress, and the third to the heir. The empress 
sat by the wall with the window, near the back 
pillar of the arch. Behind her stood three of her 
daughters (I knew their faces very well, because I 
saw them every day when they were walking, but 
I didn't know them by name). The heir and the 
emperor sat side by side, almost in the middle of 
the room. Dr. Botkin stood behind the heir. 
The maid, a very tall woman, stood by the left 
post of the door leading to the storeroom; by her 
side stood one of the czar's daughters (the fourth). 
Two servants stood at the left from the entrance of 
the room, against the wall separating the storeroom. 
The maid had a pillow. The czar's daughters 
also brought small pillows with them. One pillow 
was put on the empress's chair; another on the heir's 
chair. It looked as if all of them guessed their fate, 
but not a single sound was uttered. At the same 
time eleven men entered the room: lourovsky, his 
assistant, two members of the extraordinary com- 
mission, and seven Letts. lourovsky ordered me to 
leave, saying: "Go to the street, see if there is any- 
body there and if the shots can be heard." I went 

201 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

out to the court which was enclosed by a fence, and 
before I could get out to the street I heard the firing. 
Immediately I returned to the house (only two or 
three minutes having elapsed), and on entering the 
room where the execution took place, I saw all the 
members of the czar's family lying on the floor, 
having many wounds in their bodies. The blood 
was running in streams, the doctor, the maid and 
the waiters were also shot. When I entered the 
heir was still alive and moaned. lourovsky went up 
and fired two or three more times at him* The 
heir grew still. 

The aspect <rf the murder and the smell and sight 
of the blood made me sick. Before the assassina- 
tion lourovsky distributed the revolvers; he gave me 
one also, but, as I said before, I did not take part 
in the murder. After the assassination lourovsky 
said to me that I was to bring some guardsmen to 
wash up the blood in the room. On the way to 
PopofPs house I met two seniors, Ivan Starkoff and 
Constantine Dobrynin. They were running in the 
direction of IpatiefFs house. Dobrynin asked me: 
"Has Nicholas II been shot?" I answered that 
Nicholas II and the whole of his family had been 
shot. I brought twelve or fifteen guardsmen with 
me. These men carried the bodies to the motor 
truck that stood near the entrance of the house. The 
bodies were carried on stretchers that were made 
from bed sheets and shafts of sledges taken from the 
court. When loaded on trucks they were wrapped 
202 



EXAMINATION OF P. MEDVEDEFF 

in soldiers' clothing. The driver was Luhanoff, a 
Zlokasoff workman. The members of the extraor- 
dinary commission sat on the truck and the truck 
went away. I do not know in what direction the 
truck went, neither do I know where the bodies 
were taken. 

The blood in the room was washed out and every- 
thing was put in order. At three o'clock in the 
morning everything was in order. Then lourovsky 
went to his room and I went to the guardroom. 

I woke up after eight o'clock and went to the 
commandant's room. I met there the president of 
the district soviet, Beloborodoff and Commissar 
Goloschekin and Ivan Starkoff; the last-named was 
on duty (he had been selected to be senior two or 
three weeks before). All the rooms in the house were 
in disorder. Things were scattered. Suit-cases and 
trunks were opened. Piles of gold and silver things 
were laid on the tables of the commandant's room. 
Objects of jewelry which were taken from the mem- 
bers of the czar's family just before the murder, 
were also there; as well as things that were on 
them after their death, such as bracelets, earrings 
and watches. The precious objects were put into 
trunks that were brought from the coach house. 
The assistant commandant was present. In one of 
the rooms I found under the Holy Bible six ten- 
rouble bank notes and appropriated them. I took 
also several silver rings and a few other trifles. 

On the morning of the i8th my wife arrived and 

203 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

I went with her to the Sissert factory. I was in- 
structed to distribute wages to the guardsmen's fami- 
lies. On July 2 ist I returned to Yekaterinburg. 
All the czar's belongings were already taken from 
the house and the guards relieved. On July 2ist 
I left Yekaterinburg together with the commissar, 
Mrachkovsky. In Perm the Commissar Goloschokin 
assigned me to the party that was in charge of 
preparations for the destruction of the stone bridge, 
in case of the appearance of the White troops. I 
had not time enough to blow up the bridge, accord- 
ing to the instructions received by me, and further- 
more I did not wish ,to do it either, as I was 
to surrender myself voluntarily. I received the order 
to blow up the bridge when it was under the fire of 
the Siberian troops and I surrendered voluntarily. 

Answering the question as to where the bodies of 
the killed were taken, I can say only the following: 
On the way from Yekaterinburg railway station to 
the Alapaievsk I met Peter Ermakoff and asked him 
where the bodies had been carried. Ermakoff ex- 
plained to me that the bodies were thrown down the 
shaft of a mine near the Verkh Issetsk works and after 
that the shaft was destroyed by bombs or explosives 
in order to fill it up. I do not know and never heard 
anything concerning the wood piles that were burned 
near the shaft. I do not know anything more as 
to where the bodies are. It did not interest me on 
whom depended the fate of the czar's family and 
who had the right to dispose of them. I executed 
204 



EXAMINATION OF P. MEDVEDEFF 

only the order of those in whose service I was. 
The above is all that I can tell in reference to the 
accusation that is made against me. I can not say 
any more. My testimony has been read to me and 
it is taken correctly. 

(Signed} MEDVEDEFF. 

Member of the Yekaterinburg District Court, 

J. SERGEEFF. 

RESOLUTION: 

On February 22, 1919, in the town of Yekater- 
inburg, a member of the District Tribunal, Sergeeff, 
having questioned the peasant, Pavel Medvedeff, 
prosecuted as an accomplice in the assassination of 
the former emperor and the members of his family, 
and considering what measures must be taken to pre- 
vent his escape from further inquiry has found : 

( 1 ) That Medvedeff is indicted for a crime that 
may be punished by a very serious penalty; (2) that 
before having been arrested, he was hiding himself 
in the Red army; and, previous to that, he escaped 
from Yekaterinburg just before the said town was 
taken by government troops. On account of the 
foregoing, it was resolved to put Pavel Medvedeff, 
thirty-one years old, under arrest in the Yekaterin- 
burg prison. 

(Signed) 

Member of the Yekaterinburg District Court,, 

J. SERGEEFF* 
205 



VII 



RECEIPT OF BELOBORODOFF FOR THE 
ARRESTED RUSSIAN IMPERIAL FAMILY 

THE WORKMEN'S AND PEASANTS' GOVERNMENT 

OF THE 
RUSSIAN FEDERATIVE REPUBLIC OF SOVIETS 

URAL DISTRICT SOVIET 

OF THE 

WORKMEN'S, PEASANTS* AND SOLDIERS' DEPUTIES 

Presidio 

Yekaterinburg, April 30, 1918. 
On the 3oth of April, 1918, I, the undersigned, 
Chairman of the Ural District Soviet of Workmen's, 
Peasants' and Soldiers' Deputies, Alexander Georgi- 
evitch Beloborodoff, received from the Commissar 
of the All Russian Central Executive Committee, 
Vastly Vaselievitch lakovleff, the following persons 
transferred from the town of Tobolsk: (l) The 
former czar, Nicholas Alexandrovitch Romanoff; 
(2) former czaritza, Alexandra Theodorovna Ro- 
manova; (3) former grand duchess, Maria Nicho- 
206 



RECEIPT OF BELOBORODOFF 

laevna Romanova all of them to be kept under 
guard in the town of Yekaterinburg. 

(Signed} A. BELOBORODOFF, 
Member of District Executive Committee^ 

D. DlDKOVSKY, 



207 



THE NARRATIVE OF 
MR. ROBERT WILTON 

CHAPTER I 
PROLOGUE 

The true story of the martyrdom of Nicholas 
II., ex-Tsar of Russia, and of his wife and family 
is told below, 

It is based upon evidence obtained by a properly 
constituted legal investigation. The signed depo- 
sitions of eye-witnesses are in the writer's posses- 
sion, but he does not disclose their identity because 
many of the deponents are still in the power of the 
Soviets. The day will come when the guilty will 
be called to account, but a long time may elapse 
before the day of retribution dawns. The writer 
has sought to present the opening for the prosecu- 
tion, fully confident that the eventual hearing of 
the evidence before a Court of law will substantiate 
his statement and impose a verdict of "Guilty." 

At Ekaterinburg, on the night of July 16, 1918, 
the Imperial family and their faithful attendants 
eleven persons in all were led into a small room 
in the house where they had been imprisoned and 
shot to death with revolvers. There had been no 

211 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

trial of any kind. Before their death, the captives 
were subjected to ill-treatment, amounting to hor- 
rible torture, mental if not physical. After death, 
the bodies were taken to the woods and completely 
destroyed. These acts had been premeditated and 
the murders elaborately prepared. 

The actual arrangements for the crime began 
some weeks before the advent of anti-Bolshevist 
forces. Neither fear of rescue by the Whites nor 
plots to release the captives the existence of which 
is doubtful can be reasonably alleged in explana- 
tion of the slaughter. 

The official statement issued by the Moscow Gov- 
ernment on July 20 four days afterwards spoke 
of the shooting of Nicholas as an act of necessity, 
but categorically affirmed that the ex-Empress and 
the children had been conveyed out of the city. 
These deliberately concocted reports of the safe 
removal of the family were intended to circumvent 
any investigation and did so at first. 

It is established beyond doubt that the ex-Tsar 
fell a victim to his loyalty. He had refused offers 
from the enemies of Russia's Allies, proposing that 
he should endorse the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk. 1 

*C1 Ludendorff's "War Memories", Vol. II., page 658. "We 
could have deposed the Soviet Government, which was thoroughly 
hostile to us, and given help to other authorities in Russia which 
were not working against us, but indeed anxious to cooperate 
with us* This would have been a success of great importance 
to the general conduct of the war. If some other Government 
were established in Russia, it would almost certainly have been 
possible to come to some compromise with it over the Peace of 
Brest." 

212 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

Attempts to inveigle him into an uriholy alliance 
undoubtedly preceded the murder. All the Ro- 
manovs who died violent deaths were, like the 
Tsar, inconvenient to German as well as to Inter- 
nationalist plans. So many tales have been circu- 
lated regarding the fate of the Romanovs, in most 
cases without the slightest approach to the truth, 
that I consider myself bound to relate the circum- 
stances which have ( i ) placed in my possession the 
complete history and documents of the case; and 
(2) imposed upon me a moral obligation to publish 
them to the world. 

In March, 1919, returning from Omsk for a short 
visit to Vladivostok, I met General Diterichs, an 
old acquaintance, of the Russian Western Armies. 
After the Revolution he had piloted the Czechs to 
Siberia and then taken charge of the Uralian front. 
By one of the fateful blunders that have marred 
intervention in behalf of Russia he had been super- 
seded by inferior leaders, and was devoting his 
energies to the investigation of the Tsarskoe delo 
(Tsar case). Knowing Diterichs, I felt sure that, 
sooner or later, he would again become commander- 
in-chief of the armies, then fighting the Reds with 
British and Allied assistance. Personal regard and 
journalistic considerations equally prompted me to 
follow his fortunes, good or bad. I have not had 
cause to regret my decision. General Diterichs was 
found to be indispensable and recalled to his com- 
mand, when it was too late. From the first he had 

213 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

seen only too clearly the rocks ahea'd and warned 
everybody concerned, and he knew that the fate of 
Kolchak's attempt to restore Russia was sealed. 
Yet he accepted the leadership. With equal per- 
spicacity he had also long ago realised the enormous 
importance of the Tsar case. Thanks to his efforts 
much was accomplished before the Reds, having 
recaptured the Urals, could obliterate all traces of 
the crimes committed there. He continued to fol- 
low the case even after his appointment as Com- 
mander-in-Chief and after the debacle. 

On my arrival at Ekaterinburg a month later, I 
met the investigating magistrate who had been 
specially appointed by the Supreme Ruler (Kol- 
chak) to conduct the inquiry into the Tsar case 
Nicholas Alexeievich Sokolov. He had left his 
home and family in Penza to avoid service under 
the Reds, and had managed, after innumerable 
hardships and hair-breadth escapes, to cross, dis- 
guised as a peasant, into Siberia. He walked the 
last twenty-five miles foodless, his feet one mass of 
sores and blisters. An ardent sportsman, he had lost 
an eye through the carelessness of a comrade. He 
had made a name for himself in the investigation of 
famous criminal cases. He was relentless, tireless, 
full of resource in the pursuit alike of murderers and 
beasts of prey. The Tsar case called for the exer- 
cise of all the skill that the most genial and 
courageous of magistrates could display. Sokolov 
never faltered. It is thanks to him that an over* 
214 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

whelming mass of evidence has been built up into 
a structure that cannot be overthrown that still 
continues to grow. 

At all the centres of interest for the investigation 
Ekaterinburg, Perm, Omsk, in field or forest, 
amid the disused iron mines which hid so many a 
gruesome record of Bolshevist "justice" I was for 
many months in constant touch with the course of 
the inquiry, and personally took part in the search 
for the remains of the victims. Besides Sokolov and 
Diterichs only two persons signed the more impor- 
tant proces-verbaux I was one of the two. 

When the fall of Omsk appeared to be imminent, 
N. A. Sokolov departed eastward, taking with him 
all the documents, material clues, etc., which by 
right could be in no other hands save his. I fol- 
lowed later with General Diterichs, after he had 
resigned his command, in despair over Kolchak's 
suicidal decision to defer the evacuation of the city 
a decision that entailed- the loss of countless lives 
and the death of the Supreme Ruler. We found 
Sokolov at Chita, persecuted by the myrmidons of 
the redoubtable Ataman because they personally 
desired that the Romanovs should be alive for cer- 
tain obscure purposes of their own, and therefore 
wished to get rid of Sokolov for proving the con- 
trary. After many vicissitudes and adventures he 
reached Harbin, whither I had also made my way, 
and was joined by General Diterichs. 

The ultimate fate of the dossier there had to be 

215 



THE LAST PAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

decided. On all sides were hostile or doubtful 
organizations. To leave the originals behind and 
take away only duplicates was, to say the least, 
risky. Sokolov's life being in danger, he hid the 
dossier in my car, which had the protection of the 
British flag. General Lokhvitsky rendered invalu- 
able assistance in bringing about a decision. I must 
express my feelings of gratitude and personal re- 
gard for this very gallant soldier and gentleman, 
who here in the midst of a veritable bedlam pre- 
served his unruffled courtesy and calm just as he 
had done in the turmoil of battle in France and of 
disaster in Siberia. 

With the knowledge and approval of the three 
distinguished men above-mentioned representing 
the Russia that was and that we all hope will be 
again I took charge of the dossier, it being under- 
stood that, given certain contingencies, I should be 
free at my own discretion to make it public in 
whole or in part. The contingencies have arisen^ 
and I am free. But that is not all. I consider the 
circumstances of today render it an imperative duty 
to let the Allies and the Russians know the truth* 
Too many hostile interests are served by deliberately 
concocted lies and legends regarding the fate of the 
Romanovs. It is time to let the light of day into 
this tragic and gruesome history. 

When I first came into personal touch with the 
Tsar case many points were still obscure. I refer 
to the actual circumstances of the murder itself,, 
216 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

not to extraneous aspects political and inter- 
national that were only vaguely hinted at, and 
that have since attained extraordinary proportions. 
The confusion then existing was due to two causes : 
first, to the inexperience of the officials who took 
charge of the investigation; secondly, to the ac- 
tivity of Bolshevist agents who remained in the 
city or were concealed among the ranks of the 
White Administration. 

The official version of the events of July i6th- 
lyth, given out by the Reds before they fled from 
Ekaterinburg, was that Nicholas Romanov had been 
executed "after trial," but that the family had been 
removed "north." This legend became engrafted 
upon the minds of a great many people and still 
continues to exercise its luring appeal. Every 
sympathiser with the Soviets considered himself or 
herself bound to foster this version, since no Rus- 
sian, however hostile to the ex-Sovereigns, could 
find the slightest excuse or pretext for "executing" 
a whole family of five children who had never, 
taken, or been able to take, the slightest part in 
politics. The Russians who still belonged to the 
German "orientation" were also curiously enough 
disposed to credit any tale of a miraculous escape. 
They seemed to think that a restoration of the 
Monarchy which formed the basis of their polit- 
ical creed would be furthered by the "miracle" 
theory. Some of them had more practical aims, as 
will be shown later on. 

217 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

N. A. Sokolov was not deceived for an instant. 
If, supposing, the family had been removed, their 
death was, to him, none the less a moral certainty. 
He had precise information that every other mem- 
ber of the Romanov kin had been murdered, 
although they were just as unconcerned in politics 
as the boy Alexis and his sisters. But the evidence 
of eye-witnesses, coupled with and corroborated by 
countless material proofs, could leave no doubt as 
to the fact of a wholesale murder at Ekaterinburg. 
All the efforts of the organisers and the supineness 
of the earlier investigators could not completely 
tangle the threads. But it became a harder task to 
assemble the evidence that would secure a convic- 
tion in a Court of law. 

I visited the house where the victims had livedL 
It belonged to a certain Ipatiev, a merchant who 
held the rank of captain in the Engineers. By one 
of the ironies of Fate he bore the name of the 
monastery whence the first Romanov sallied to as- 
sume the Crown of All the Russias. The Ipatiev 
of Ekaterinburg was, however, of Jewish origin. 

The Engineer Department of the Siberian Army 
was installed in the upper story. Directly after 
the occupation of the city by the Czechs General 
Gaida had forcibly taken possession of the premises, 
despite the vehement protest of the judicial authori- 
ties, alarmed by the risk of losing possible clues. 
The rooms underwent extensive alterations. This 
218 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

was, of course, a flagrant violation of the most 
elementary principles of criminal investigation. 

The lower floor was tenanted by Ipatiev himself, 
on the understanding that no strangers should be 
admitted. The small basement room the scene of 
the murders was sealed up. I saw it a few days 
later. Sokolov took me over the premises, explain- 
ing step by step the enactment of the tragedy. We 
stood in the little room, noted the trace of the 
bullets, the direction of the bayonet thrusts, and 
the splashes of blood on the walls. The room had 
been a shambles, and all the washing and scouring 
that, according to the evidence, had followed the 
murders could not remove tell-tale signs. We 
knew from the depositions of witnesses and the 
mute, gruesome language of the death-chamber 
where each of the victims sat or stood when the 
assassins fired their revolvers. The bullet-holes in 
the walls and in the floor had been carefully cut 
out; human blood had been found in the wood and 
on the bullets. 

Obscene drawings and inscriptions covered the 
upper walls. Obviously they were the work of un- 
cultured peasants. Their character showed only 
too clearly how deeply the conscience of the people 
had been revolted by the Razputin scandal. There 
were other inscriptions in Hebrew, in German, in 
Magyar. Regarding them I was to learn much at 
a later date. 

Soon afterwards I was in the woods, ten miles 

219 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

north of the city, where the peasants had found 
jewelry and other relics of the murdered family. I 
saw the tracks, still clear, of heavy lorries crashing 
through the trees to a group of disused iron-ore 
shafts. All went in one direction, ceasing near a 
pit round which a vast collection of clues had been 
discovered; precious stones, pearls, beautiful set- 
tings of gold and platinum, some hacked, broken, 
bearing traces of fire; metal buckles, hooks, buttons, 
corset-frames, pieces of charred leather and cloth, 
a human finger intact, a set of false teeth. The 
character, condition, and numbers of these various 
articles were in themselves sufficient to indicate the 
sex and ages of the victims and the manner in which 
their bodies had been disposed of. 

First on the scene had been the peasants. For 
three days and nights they were cut off from the 
city by a cordon of Red Guards placed around the 
wood. Knowing that the Whites were at hand, 
they thought the Reds were burying arms. Vague 
rumours had reached them of the death of Nicholas 
II. As soon as the cordon had been removed they 
rushed to the spot. Woodcraft and native astute- 
ness quickly opened their eyes. "It is the Tsar that 
they have been burning here," they declared. On 
this very spot, a year later, I found topaz beads, 
such as the young Princesses wore, and other gems, 
by scratching the surface of the hardened clay sur- 
rounding the iron pit. 

Led off on a false scent, the earlier investigator 
220 



HARRATIVE OF MR* ROBERT WILTON 

had neglected the unerring sagacity of the peasants 
and had even failed to make an immediate examina- 
tion of the wood and pits perhaps afraid to leave 
the city, because Red bands were reported to be in 
the neighbourhood. He was following the red- 
herring trailed by Soviet agents, that, to wit, the 
family had escaped or been removed. These agents 
did not know the truth themselves. They merely 
related what they had been instructed to say. The 
local Soviet had not known the facts. There had 
been no trial. The murders had been the work of 
a separate organization which directed everything 
from a distance. Misled by the versions thus 
spread, the investigator had lost himself in the maze 
of conflicting rumour in Ekaterinburg. 

When Sokolov took over the case in the early 
months of 1919 it was almost at a standstill 
because of the initial mistakes and incapacity of the 
investigator. Yet evidence had come from another 
quarter that should have compelled him to take the 
right course. From one of the Imperial servants 
who had escaped from a Red shooting squad it be- 
came known that several grand dukes and the Grand 
Duchess Elizabeth had been murdered immediately 
after the Ekaterinburg shooting, and that some of 
the bodies had been found in disused iron pits. In no 
case had there been any semblance of a trial. It was 
evident the wholesale extermination of the Romanovs 
had been pursued, and that all theories of the miracu- 
lous survival of the children should be abandoned. 

221 



CHAPTER II 
THE STAGE AND THE ACTORS 

Some idea of the crime of Ekaterinburg is now in 
the reader's possession; but, in dealing with the 
evidence in all its aspects, it is necessary to give an 
account of conditions that prevailed in the country 
then, and of the chief actors in the drama. The 
murder of the Tsar and his family, even after his 
abdication, may not be regarded as a simple act of 
vengeance or casual precaution. 

In I0i7j the Germans had sent Lenin jylth a 

r \^*-~3ff "**-" "*-."" *"f " ' " """" -"""^ i***-**- 1 *"*"**'**- 

horoe ox Jewish revolutionaries to take possession 

ff .*~, -*""'"' " * """"'"''. , " ' f ,, ,,!," ^'H^^ 

of Hussia. A Red Government, composed of per- 
sons selected in Berlin, was now in power; but they 
were vassals. Count Mirbach, representing the 
suzerain State, figured in Moscow as the virtual 
ruler, before whom the apostles of Karl Marx bowed 
the knee. At the period under review, the Reds had 
displayed no overt disposition to throw off the Ger- 
man yoke. They conformed with all the humili- 
ating clauses of the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, 
dutifully sending the tribute gold to Berlin which 
had been demanded as "war indemnity," plundering 
the national Exchequer and resources by order of 

222 



NARRATIVE OF MR, ROBERT WILTON 

their German masters. Apparently everything was 
going well with the German plan of "peaceful" 
conquest, whatever secret hopes the Red leaders may 
have nurtured. Instead of a redoubtable foe, Russia 
was now a willing handmaid. 

Ludendorff has related frankly, disingenuously, 
how simple and wonderful had been this operation. 2 
Not only was Russia out of the war; the foodstuffs 
obtained from the Ukraine had literally saved Ger- 
many and her allies. Hetman Skoropadsky already 
ruled the Ukraine for Germany. * Krasnov, at the 
head of the Cossacks, and Alexeiev with the gallant 

* Ludendorff. "War Memories," Vol. II, page 509: 
, "From October, 1917, onwards, Bolshevism in Russia obtained 
an even firmer hold. 

"I could not doubt that the disintegration of the Russian Army 
and nation involved an extraordinary risk for Germany and 
Austria-Hungary. All the greater was my anxiety when I thought 
of the weakness of our Government and theirs. 

"By sending Lenin to Russia our Government had, moreover, 
assumed a great responsibility. From a military point of view 
his journey v^as justified, for Russia had to be laid low. But 
pur Government should have seen to it that we also were not 
involved in/ her fall." 

Vol. Ilypage 654: 

"In Russia events had developed along lines of their own, 
illustrative of the lying propensities of the Soviet Government. 
With the consent of the Government the Entente had formed 
Caecho-Slovak units out of Austro-Hungarian prisoners. These 
were intended to be used against us, and were therefore to be con- 
veyed to France by the Siberian railway. All this was sanctioned 
by a Government with whom we were at peace, and we actually 
took it lying down! At the beginning of June I wrote to the 
Imperial Chancellor specially on the subject, and pointed out the 
dangers which threatened us from the Soviet Government." 

Vol. II., page 656: 

"I had got into touch with him (General Krasnov) in order 
to prevent his joining the Entente. The situation was complicated 
by the fact that I could not put difficulties in _the way of the 
home Government's pro-Bolshevik policy, of which, of course, I 
was informed, and Krasnov regarded the Soviet Government, 
and not the Entente, as his enemy." 

223 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

Volunteer army remained neutral. Ludendorflt 
hoped to lure them into his net a radiant combi- 
nation that assured dominion over Russia and her 
vast resources. He explains why it was not realised. 
The German Government was to blame, it appears. 
There was a divergence of views between Berlin and 
GJH.Q. The latter considered that the Reds had 
"done their work"; so the Reds "must go," and 
Krasnov and Alexeiev be diverted at once from 
their sympathies with the Entente in order to pre- 
clude any possibility of a revival of the Eastern 
front. For this purpose it was necessary to order 
the German divisions in the South of Russia to 
march on Moscow. Ludendorff felt quite sure that 
even Alexeiev would not be able to resist the 
temptation to join hands with the enemies of 
Sovietdom. But the obstinate, slow-witted bureau- 
crats in Berlin could not adapt themselves to these 
lightning changes. Ludendorff stormed at them: 
Were they blind not to see that the Reds were 
hoodwinking them? Did they want proofs? 
Were the Czech prisoners of war not proceeding 
eastward with the avowed object of reinforcing the 
French army? 

Thi's concrete accusation could not be denied, 
Lenin's organization had promised Professor 
Masaryk to permit the Czecho-Slovaks to leave the 
country by way of Siberia provided they went peace- 
fully. It was an easy riddance of possible enemies. 
The Czechs were proceeding quietly to Vladivostok, 
22/1 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

carefully abstaining from violence even when sorely 
tried by the impudence of local Soviets, giving up 
their arms to bribe the Reds. 

Mirbach received instructions to call his Red 
henchmen to account; at the same time messages 
were conveyed from the two Kaisers to their war- 
riors imprisoned in Siberia, enjoining upon them 
the duty of organising resistance to the "invaders." 
How the German and Magyar officers enrolled Rus- 
sian convicts and flung themselves athwart the 
Czech retreat with the energetic concurrence of the 
Soviets is a matter of history. But the connection 
between this circumstance and all that preceded and 
followed is less known. Ludendorffi feared above 
all the re-establishment of the Eastern front, yet it 
was Ludendorff and his Government that brought 
about the very consequences that they least wanted* 

Had the Czechs been allowed to depart it is cer- 
tain that there would have been no military help 
from the Entente side, and the chances of seducing 
the Russian anti-Bolshevist leaders might not have 
been still-born. As it was, the whole edifice of 
guile, duplicity, and deceit, raised with such labour 
and cost, fell to the ground. The murder of Mir- 
bach sounded the call of its collapse. 

But at the time when the fate of the Tsar and his 
family hung in the balance, Germany was absolute 
mistress of the situation, and, had there been unity 
of method as well as of purpose between the German 
High Command aad Berlin, the fate of Russia and, 

22 f 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

perhaps, of the war would have been changed. 
Berlin wanted to continue to rule Russia through 
the Soviets under Mirbach; Ludendorff aimed at the 
overthrow of the Soviets in order to enlist the sup- 
port of the Cossacks and Volunteers. As might be 
expected, the conflict between them resulted in a 
fatal compromise an attempt to run with the 
White hare and hunt with the Red hounds. 

LudendorfFs plan was to substitute a more agree- 
able form of government in the place of the Soviets 
and to modify suitably the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk. 
Here we have the key to the removal of Nicholas 
II. from Tobolsk. But all that subsequently hap- 
pened was conditional upon another set of forces. 
Sovietdom asserted itself. The working and 
organization of the Soviets fitted in admirably with 
German requirements, and incidentally subserved 
the plans of the murderers. New names, devised to 
appeal to the fancy of the mob, concealed familiar 
institutions. There were three principal bodies 
Sovnarkom, Tsik, and Chrezvychaika, these names 
being abbreviations of Soviet narodnykh kommisa- 
rov (Council of People's Commissaries), Tsentrcdny 
ispolnitelny komitet (Central Executive Commit- 
tee), and Chrezuychatnaia komisia dlia borby x 
kontr-revoliutsiei (Extraordinary Commission for 
Combating Counter-revolution). Under the old 
regime the Duma, the Council of Ministers, and the 
Okhrana had occupied the same relative positions. 
Instead of the former ranks and dignities there weie 
226 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT W I L T O KT 

komisary^ all supposed to be elected, but in reality- 
appointed by an inner and occult body. Sovdeps 
(Councils of Deputies) and Komitety bednoty 
(Poor Commissions) took over the functions of the 
old zemstvos and municipalities, grouped into- 
regional communes, just as it had been proposed to 
group the zemstvos according to separate oblasti 
(regions). Sovietdom (in Russian Sovdefia) had 
invented no new forms. It is still in the grip .of the 
Red Okhrana, 

As there was no apparent authority, the local 
bodies often acted independently; indeed, Lenin en- 
couraged this tendency. Vlast na mestakh (every 
place its own master) was his motto. Lenin did 
not rule; the Soviet system was governed by other 
people, the fellow-passengers who came with him 
under German auspices. Though he delivered im- 
passioned harangues before the Sovnarkom and 
received deputations from minor Soviets, the real 
power was elsewhere in the Tsik and % Chrezvy- 
chaika; and, just as it had been in the Old Russia, 
the last word was always with the Police-Okhrana 
organisation. 

Mirbach received his daily report from the 
Chrezvychaika. He was murdered by two men who 
said they came from that office. Lenin had as little 
to do with his death as he had with the murders, 
a week later, of the ex-Tsar and his family. The 
Red Okhrana and the inner circle of the Tsik were 

227 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

the veritable authors of the crime of Ekaterinburg, 
and probably of Mirbach's assassination. 

Nonentities, figureheads of the Sovnarkom, do 
not interest us. We are concerned with great, if 
maleficent, personages in the Red world. Most of 
them are still unknown outside the ranks of the 
professional revolutionaries. 



of the hundred Jews,whq CJH&^ 
Lenin, and the hundreds who jcame from Chicago, 
deserve to be 'included in this gallery,~Tor~ they 
undoubtedly held Russia under their sway. To 
enumerate and describe them would require a small 
volume. I need sketch only those who act promi- 
nently in the drama of Ekaterinburg. The most 
important were: Sverdlov, Safarov, Voikov, and 
Goloshchekin, and the murderer-in-chief Yurovsky. 
The names of Safarov and Voikov figure in the 
list of Lenin's fellow-passengers. Both are very 
powerful Bolshevists, holding high places in the 
executive and police branches. Sverdlov is I use 
the present tense because all these persons continue 
to wield their influence to the present day the 
uncrowned Tsar of the Soviets. His authority is 
really much higher than that of Lenin or even 
Trotsky. He dominates the Tsik, and his creatures 
rule the Chrezvychaika. Sverdlov's name appears 
in the Bolshevist Government as approved by G6r- 
many. The direct connection between Sverdlov and 
the murders of Ekaterinburg is established beyond 
doubt. 
228 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

Goloshchekin was the representative of the above- 
named conclave in the regional soviet of the Urals 
and kept that rather recalcitrant body under secret 
subjection to his chiefs. The Uralian Reds were 
particularly self-willed and jealous of Moscow 
because the population consisted almost entirely of 
miners and metal-workers a very advanced and 
independent class, having little in common with the 
peasant-farmer, for whom they professed contempt* 
Goloshchekin did whatever Sverdlov wished. A 
stratagem had given him absolute power. The 
president of the regional soviet was a Russian 
named Beloborodov. He was arrested by the 
Chrezvychaika and imprisoned on a charge of appro- 
priating 30,000 roubles. The punishment would be 
death. Together with Safarov and Voikov, Golo- 
shchekin arranged to release him. Beloborodov 
resumed the presidency of the regional soviet as if 
nothing had happened. Dishonesty was so rampant 
among the Komisars that the transition surprised no 
one. But after that, Beloborodov gave up all 
attempts to resist Moscow if he had ever done so. 
He was henceforth a mere man of straw, kept in 
his place to deceive the obstreperous Uralian miners, 
who did not wish to be ruled from Moscow, much 
less by Jews. 

The closest personal bonds had existed for many 
years between Goloshchekin and Sverdlov. They 
had been together in prison and exile. Goloshchekin 
ranked as an internationalist of the most pronounced 

229 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

type. He had been selected for the rulership of 
the Urals with an eye to other than political activi- 
ties. He was bloodthirsty in an abnormal degree, 
even for a Red chieftain. People who knew him at 
Ekaterinburg describe Goloshchekin as a homicidal 
sadist. He never attended executions, but insisted 
upon hearing a detailed account of them. He 
huddled in bed shivering and quaking till the exe- 
cutioner came with his report, and would listen to 
his description of tortures with a frenzy of joy, 
begging for further details, gloating over the expres- 
sions, gestures and death-throes of the victims as 
they passed before his diseased vision. 

Yurovsky had a humbler task; he was not one 
of the mighty ones of the Soviet. When the Ger- 
man plan to restore Nicholas as a vassal sovereign 
had failed, and the Jewish conclave in Moscow was 
free to carry out its vengeful purpose, Yurovsky was 
installed as chief gaoler and tormentor of the 
doomed family. The Russian commandant and 
guards were dismissed, ostensibly because they were 
pilfering. Magyarised-German soldiers under a 
Jewish commandant took their places and were able 
to rob wholesale the unfortunates whom they were 
supposed to protect. 

The origins of Yurovsky have been fully investi- 
gated. His parents and relatives all poor Jews 
Temained in Siberia after the murderer and his 
chiefs and accomplices had fled from Ekaterinburg. 
He had been a watchmaker at Tomsk, scarcely able 
230 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WlLTON 

to make ends meet. Naturally ambitious, he 
despised the people around him. He was waiting 
for an opportunity. It came suddenly and mysteri- 
ously. Yurovsky disappeared. This was before 
the war. He is next heard of in Ekaterinburg as a 
photographic dealer. It leaked out that he had been 
to Berlin and become possessed of some capital. 
When war came, he evaded service in the trenches 
by qualifying as a red-cross assistant (feldsher) and 
remained in Ekaterinburg. When the Bolshevists 
seized the government, Yurovsky became one of the 
local agents of the new power. 

At a time when he was seeking any and every 
means of advancement, Yorovsky had been baptised 
into the Lutheran church. He used to attend 
prayers in Ipatiev's house. He even chatted pleas- 
antly with the sick boy Alexis, whom, a few days 
later, he shot with his own hand. 



231 



CHAPTER III 
NO ESCAPE: ALEXANDRA MISJUDGED 

Apart from the bald assertions of parties inter- 
ested in spreading false reports, there is no evidence 
of any attempt on the part of the Romanovs to 
escape from any of their prisons. All the com- 
promising "documents" produced by Soviet apolo- 
gists on this subject are transparent fabrications. 
Loyal Russians wished to save the Tsar from the 
Soviets, knowing full well the danger of treachery 
that he incurred, and there were several organisa- 
tions, working independently, but none ever began 
putting a plan into execution. 

During the captivity at Tobolsk some money 
reached the prison-house secretly. It helped the 
prisoners to eke out the starvation allowance 
ordained by the Soviets. Attempts to render further 
aid were frustrated by a German-Bolshevist agent 
stationed at Tiumen. This person, a Russian 
officer who had married a daughter of Razputin, 
ingratiated himself with doubtful travellers for 
Tobolsk and betrayed them to the Soviet* The Ger- 
mans had thus taken elaborate precautions not to 
allow the ex-Tsar to slip out unawares. Perhaps 
they thought that the Allies of Russia migfrt try to 
232 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

rescue him! At Ekaterinburg nothing could be 
done. The Reds claim to have intercepted some 
letters between the captives and conspirators. But 
it may be pointed out that not a single person was 
arrested there for conspiracy to help the exiles. 
Remembering the lavish repressions ever applied by 
the occult powers of the Chrezvychaika, it will be 
conceded that they would have missed no opportu- 
nity to exert them in such a cause. The British 
Consul (Mr. Preston), remaining gallantly at his 
post throughout the Red terror, and rendering in- 
calculable service to the victims of Bolshevist 
oppression, was unable. to do anything to alleviate 
the sufferings and torture of the Romanovs. Yet, 
strange to relate, a monarchist organisation had its 
agents in the city. It even succeeded in conveying 
some food and comforts through the nuns of the 
local monastery. Beyond that, it was unable to go. 
There is no evidence to show that at any time during 
the captivity was any active attempt made to rescue 
the Romanovs. This applies equally to the ex* 
Sovereigns and to their kinsmen. At Tobolsk, Eka- 
terinburg, Perm, and Alapaievsk the pretext for 
wholesale murder was always the same; an alleged 
attempt to escape or rescue. And from the testi- 
mony of persons who were in daily intercourse with 
the imprisoned family, it is clear that, had any 
serious efforts to procure their escape been made, 
they would have met with no encouragement. 
Nicholas IL reueatedly said that he would not leave 

233 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

Russia; Alexandra hated above everything the idea 
of going to Germany. At that time Russia offered 
no sure place of refuge. 

The Razputin propaganda had poisoned the 
minds of the people, but not all the people. In the 
villages, among the old folk, feelings of loyalty 
still held sway, ready at the first signal to assert 
themselves openly. The volumes of evidence in my 
possession prove this statement. Many of the wit- 
nesses were peasants who, consciously, willingly 
risked their lives in order that the truth about the 
fate of the Tsar should be established. Who knows 
how many of these simple souls have been martyred 
for their boldness ? 

Among the obscenities that disfigured the walls 
of the Ipatiev house, one inscription struck an oppo- 
site note. In uncouth peasant writing and spelling 
the author evidently one of the guards asked 
how long were the people going to put up with the 
komisars, and urged the Tsar to come forward and 
drive away the horde of usurpers that were ruining 
the country! 

I cannot help thinking that the Razputin legend 
did not suffice to kill the people's faith in the Tsar. 
It certainly discredited Alexandra, and he shared 
her disgrace ; but that was not enough to account for 
the virulence of popular clamour against Nicholas 
II. His fate would not have been so much a matter 
of indifference to the multitude had the vile story of 
Razputin not been preceded by blunders that deeply 
234 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

incensed the popular conscience. J recall the dread- 
ful murder of women and children before the Win- 
ter Palace on Bloody Sunday. That crime was 
prepared by the Okhrana and attributed to the Tsar. 
It seems to me that had it not been for that hideous 
slaughter of innocents no one would have ever dared 
to raise a hand against the Tsar and his children. 
I wish to be quite fair to the Russians, without in 
any way extenuating the heinousness of the crime 
of Ekaterinburg. 

The ex-Empress was the object of special hatred. 
She completely dominated her spouse in the imag- 
ination of the people, and occupies a place apart 
in the evidence. Many new facts have been brought 
to light substantially modifying the current estimate 
of her life and character. Several trunks full of 
papers and effects belonging to his victims were 
taken by Yurovsky to Moscow after the murder. 
Sverdlov then announced that all would be pub- 
lished, so that the people should see what manner 
of persons had ruled them. That promise has not 
been kept, and for a good reason: the diaries and 
correspondence of Nicholas and Alexandra con- 
tained no hint of treachery. They proved two 
things unbounded loyalty to Russia and to the 
Allies ; and, alas ! complete subserviency of Nicholas 
to his wife. But neither of these matters interested 
the Soviet leaders, and most of these priceless docu- 
ments have been suppressed in Moscow. Many 
others were overlooked or forgotten in Ekaterin- 

235 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

burg, and figure in the dossier of the Tsar case. 
Among them is a collection of Alexandra's letters 
to her maid-of -honour. There are also the depo- 
sitions of servitors and members of the household. 
Analysing this mass of first-hand evidence, one ob- 
tains a true picture of Alexandra, Proud, domineer- 
ing, self-restrained, gifted, mystical she had been 
from youth. Her troubles, mental and physical, 
had distorted these characteristics. Nicholas fell in 
love with her when she was fifteen, and waited pa- 
tiently for her eight years. Even as a girl she domi- 
nated him. After their marriage there was never any 
doubt who was master. Her dominion was not 
even challenged. Nicholas never acted without his 
wife's approval, except when he was separated 
from her for instance, when he signed the writ of 
abdication. These were not the best qualifications 
for Tsardom at a time of transition. Alexandra 
could not attain popularity, nor would she admit 
the necessity of it for herself or the Tsar. Indeed, 
as th>e years passed she became less and less respon- 
sive to the demands and requirements of public 
opinion, which cannot be defied with impunity even 
by an autocrat. 

Many Russians attributed these failings to the 
Hesse disease (bolezn GessenskikJi), the hereditary 
taint that had carried off many of Alexandra's rela- 
tions.* The fact that her only son suffered from 

Haemophilia, the disease from which the Tsarevich suffered, 
is as a general rule transmitted through the females to the males. 
The females do not suffer from it themselves. 

236 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

and might at any moment die of it only made her 
own trouble worse. The disease is dangerous to 
boys and adult women; girls do not feel its effects 
till they are grown up, whereas boys become im- 
mune after reaching manhood. In the case of 
women it is apt to prey on the mind, aggravating 
and intensifying any morbid predisposition. Hys- 
teria in its worst forms is an almost invariable 
accompaniment. She also suffered intensely from 
heart trouble* Her life must have been one long 
agony. 

Alexandra was not normal. Her belief in Raz- 
putin indicated as much. The evidence of Dr. 
Botkin is explicit. People who suffer from hysteria 
in an acute congenital form repel and estrange all 
persons that do not blindly accept their domination. 
Razputin had to be treated as a saint because Alex- 
andra imagined him to be one. The Court of Russia 
became peopled with time-servers and nonentities., 

I shall deal with Razputin presently. The new 
materials in my possession show that he was simply 
a peasant afflicted with a pathological condition. 
The legend that has grown up regarding his occult 
powers can be traced not to Razputin, but to his 
f e f riends." He was a mere tool. Alexandra wanted 
him to cure her son; others used him for personal 
or political intrigues because Alexandra, the verit- 
able Autocrat of All the Russias, had need of him. 
In the tragedy of the Romanovs every thread leads 
us to this Woman of Destiny. 

237 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

The very exhaustive records of their life before 
and after the Revolution give a true presentment of 
the family, such as no individual could furnish even 
if he or she had been in the closest intimacy with 
Nicholas or Alexandra. One is struck by the almost 
superhuman secretiveness of the ex-Sovereigns. 
They did not trust anyone completely. Most of the 
persons who were supposed to be particularly 
attached to them knew little or nothing of their 
inner life and thoughts. This explains, perhaps, 
why so few decided to follow them into exile. Only 
between themselves does there appear to have been 
no reserve. 

Alexandra's personality is reflected in her family 
Nicholas, like herself, an embodiment of all the 
domestic virtues, religious to the verge of mysticism, 
expert in dissimulation, never showing anger, per- 
haps never really feeling angryj, incapable of a 
decision so utterly had he surrendered himself to 
his wife; the daughters relegated to the background 
entirely unprepared to take their proper place in 
the world; Alexis monopolizing all the care and 
attention of his mother; the children ashamed of 
her belief in Razputin, yet not daring openly to 
resent it. 

Among the Court favourites, male or female, 
nobody exercised any real influence except in so 
far as it suited the Empress. Only one person ap- 
pears to have been admitted for any length of time 
to the Imperial confidence. That person was Anna 
238 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

Vyrubova. Regarding her Razputin used to speak 
in the crudest terms to the companions of his tavern- 
revels, who, of course, repeated his drunken boasts. 
That was the origin of her infamous notoriety. She 
herself could not have Hevised a surer way of 
retaining Alexandra's favour. The detractors of 
Vyrubova had also dared to retail the foulest stories 
about Alexandra, alleging the same source. Alex- 
andra rightly considered herself a victim of slander, 
and naturally included Anna under thev same 
designation. 

The fact is, Anna Vyrubova was Razputin's 
accomplice nothing more. She kept him in touch 
with everything, especially with the boy's health. 
It was at her house that Razputin saw the Emperor 
and Empress when it became too scandalous for him 
to appear daily in the Palace after the dismissal 
of governesses who had raised an outcry against 
Razputin' s familiarities with their charges. 

Another person deserves mention. It is not posi- 
tively shown how far his influence was felt, but 
certainly he played an important part in the Rom- 
anov tragedy. He was in many ways a mystery 
man a doctor of Thibetan medicine, by birth a 
Buriat, named Badmaiev. Besides dispensing nos- 
trums that cured all ill& often bringing relief 
where modern science had failed he dabbled in 
politics, and who knows what dark forces were 
served by him? Razputin was one of his best cli- 
ents* According to Razputin one could immediately 

239 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

regain all the vigour of youth by swallowing a 
powder composed of Thibetan herbs; another kind 
of powder made one quite indifferent to worry. 
Badmaiev reserved these specifics for people whom 
he could trust. The first-named kind was for Raz- 
putin, but who was the recipient of the "dope" 
that "made you forget" who if not the hapless 
Nicholas? And once it is admissable that the peas- 
ant had taken to drugs for unmentionable purposes, 
one may seriously entertain other accusations 
against him and his accomplices. 

According to indications contained in the evi- 
dence, Anna Vyrubova arranged the "miracles" of 
healing that Razputin performed on the sick boy. 
It was not difficult. The malady always followed 
the same course. A slight bruise set up internal 
hemorrhage. The patient suffered terrible pain 
while the blood flowed, clotted, and finally began 
to be reabsorbed. Anna knew from experience how 
to read the symptoms. Razputin would come to 
pray when the crisis was over, so that it should 
seem as if his intercession had brought relief. Things 
happened in this way on several known occasions. 
Razputin did not wish to lose the Empress's favour. 
He and Vyrubova took their precautions. And Bad- 
mafev's powders may here also have been used with 
benefit to all concerned. Alexandra's eyes were 
never opened to the fact that Razputin' s prayers 
did not affect the disease. 

It will be argued by those who knew Vyrubova 
240 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

that she was too garrulous to keep a secret, too 
child-like to conceive or carry out any intrigue, and 
still less any act affecting the Empress in whose 
hands she was as wax. To have lived for twenty 
years in the confidence of such a woman as the Em- 
press presumes the possession of no ordinary facul- 
ties, whether of extreme innocence combined with 
serpent wisdom or of profound guile hidden under 
an appearance of candour. Vyrubova's apologists 
would have us believe that she was nothing better 
than an idiot. The skill with which she crept into 
the good graces of the Imperial family, ably second- 
ing all the moves of the practised courtier Taneiev, 
her father, shows the absurdity of such a theory and 
sufficiently denotes her real disposition. 

Woman-like, the Empress regarded all things 
from a personal standpoint. Her malady only 
served to intensify her likes and dislikes. One of 
her particular aversions was Wilhelm of Prussia, 
first, because the Hohenzollerns had been exalted at 
the expense of her own House; secondly, because 
Wilhelm had not counted with her. Germany, 
ruled by Wilhelm, was ever the foe of Russia ruled 
by Alexandra. She could not admit the possibility 
of a compromise or truce with Wilhelm's Germany, 
any more than she would permit the Tsar to summon 
a Ministry composed of Razputin's detractors and 
enteinies. A complete and ludicrous misapprehen- 
sion prevailed in Russia and among the Allied peo- 
ples about the alleged pro-German tendencies of the 

241 



THE LAST PAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

ex-Empress. She hated Germany with a bitterness 
and a fervour equalled only by her contempt and 
loathing for the Russians always excepting the 
peasants, whom she "imagined" to be endowed with 
all the virtues and qualities that Razputin was sup- 
posed to possess. 

Wilhelm was described by her as "that low come- 
dian" and "man of falsehood," who had "stooped 
to associate himself with Bolshevists." With fierce 
and joyful anticipation, she foresaw his punishment: 
"The day will come when they will destroy him!" 
She did not live to see her vision fulfilled. 

Such was the so-called pro-German Empress. It 
is easy to recall the outcry that was raised in En- 
tente countries in the spring of 1917 when it be- 
came known that the Romanovs would be permitted 
to come to England. "How can we tolerate this 
friend of Germany in our midst?" The public had 
been so deeply affected by the Razputin propaganda, 
that they would not hear of Alexandra coming to 
this country. And as the family could not be dis- 
united, they had all to remain in Russia. The ex- 
Tsar's servants had even prepared his English uni- 
forms. Sorrowfully, without understanding the 
reasons, they obeyed the order to pack them away. 
Thus, after depriving them of the throne, Razputin's 
foul influence took from the Romanovs their hope 
of an asylum and left them to suffer a shameful 
death. 



242 



CHAPTER IV 
RAZPUTIN THE PEASANT 

The walls of Ipatiev's house epitomised the Revo- 
lution. One name and one effigy predominated : the 
name of Grishka, the silhouette of Razputin, loath- 
somely caricatured, One met, here and there, allu- 
sions to the ( / ^tsar-bloodsucker'^ and other catch- 
phrases of the Revolution, but one felt that they 
were perfunctory. The one and only unpardonable 
crime in the eyes of the Red guards had been the 
preference shown by the Empress for a peasant 
a common man like one of themselves. What a 
commentary on the blindness of the unfortunate 
Alexandra ! 

Political propaganda had represented Razputin 
as a monster of iniquity and occult powers, whereby 
he held the Empress under his thraldom. The dos- 
sier kills this legend it is nothing more. 

Gregory Razputin was forty-five at the time of his 
death (1916). Till the age of thirty-four he had 
lived as an ordinary peasant in his native village of* 
Pokrovskoe, between Tobolsk and Tiumen. He had 
a wife and three children, a comfortable home, and 
enough land to feed himself and family. Grishka 
to use the familiar diminutive of his Christian name, 

243 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

as is customary in the villages was a fair type of the 
Siberian peasant-farmer. They are endowed with an 
abundance of mother-wit, wield the vernacular with 
consummate skill, and are fine, upstanding fellows, 
able to do a day's work or celebrate a festival equally 
well. Such was Gregory Razputin. Nothing indi- 
cated a future for him different from the rest. He 
might be expected to plough, drink vodka, beat his 
wife, trick his neighbours, and pray before the Holy 
Ikons in the usual sequence till one day the Voice or 
the Reaper gathered him in. 

One day he heard the Voice. It happened to peas- 
ants now and then in youth, sometimes in the prime 
of life, and often in their old age. After that they 
left their mundane affairs, and prepared themselves 
for Eternity. Grishka had been "called" when he 
was fourteen, and in an ecstasy had tried to mutilate 
himself. But he had fallen from grace. Now 
twenty years later, the call came again. Grishka 
was "converted'* by Dmitri Pecherkin, a strannik 
(wanderer), who had deserted his home in the same 
province of Tobolsk to pray at the Holy Places. In 
1905 Razputin turned over his farm to his wife, son, 
and daughters, and joined Dmitri in his wanderings. 
Together they visited Mount Athos, Jerusalem, 
Kiev, Moscow, and Petrograd. 

I have a copy of his work, "My Thoughts and 
Reflection^ (published in Petrograd, 1915), de- 
scribing his pilgrimages. It is an assortment of ster- 
eotyped phrases^ texts from Scripture, homely pro- 
244 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

verbs just the conversation of an ordinary 
strannik. One is struck with wonderment that the 
"author" of such utter commonplace should have 
influenced the destinies of a vast Empire, or could 
for one moment impose upon the cultured intellect 
of an Empress. 

I believe that Razputin was quite sincere in fol- 
lowing Pecherkin, and that during his earlier days 
in the capital he was still an earnest devotee. Bishop 
Feofan met him in Petrograd and was impressed by 
his sincerity. But even at this time (about 1907) 
he was already inclining once more towards wordly 
things. Pecherkin tried in vain to persuade him to 
take the vows and join him in a monastery. Raz- 
putin had a fancy for the drawing-rooms of the great 
city, where he was petted and paraded by hostesses 
in search of a sensation. And thus it came to pass 
that, with the help of Feofan and the Grand Duch- 
esses Militza and Anastasia (the Montenegrin Prin- 
cesses who had already introduced various "saints" 
to the mystically disposed sovereigns), Razputin 
came to the Court. 

The diaries and depositions of his daughter 
Matrena form part of the dossier. Amidst a mass 
of verbiage one is able to discover here and there 
precise landmark of the Razputin history. One 
sees the "saint" gradually drawn into the multiple 
cog-wheels of Court intrigue; bound firmly to the 
family chariot, as his daughters are put to fashion- 
able schools; having to make money for the girls; 

245 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

obliged to remain a peasant in garb and language to 
please his protectress. But a peasant who is di- 
vorced from his normal occupation and has dis- 
obeyed the Voice takes to drink. There is no 
alternative. 

The unhealthy life of the city set its mark on 
him. "Fish-soup, bread and kvass with onions, 
were his daily fare, but he drank red wine and 
Madeira , . . always jolly in his cups, singing and 
dancing as the villagers do" ; "whenever we remon- 
strated with him, he would say that he could never 
drink enough to drown the sorrow that was to 
come." That is the description given by his daugh- 
ter of Razputin "at home" in Petrograd. But these 
mild debauches were constantly supplemented by 
swinish orgies outside. Many a peasant, placed in 
the same position, would have acted in the same 
way. 

Razputin was just an ordinary peasant, except for 
a certain pathological propensity, traceable to his 
attempted self-mutilation. He was rustic even in 
the measure o,f his "perquisites." In his native 
Pokrovskoe it was not considered dishonourable to 
cheat one's neighbour, but always in a small way, of 
course. So here, this man, who could have amassed 
a colossal fortune, contented himself with dabbling 
in small "affairs" that brought in a few hundred 
roubles. His whole estate at the time of his death 
did not much exceed 10,000. Matrena declares 
most positively that he never possessed or attempted 
246 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

to display at home any occult gift of mesmerism, 
healing, or clairvoyancy. 

This drunken immoral peasant nevertheless 
played a political role. He gave advice to the Tsar 
on all sorts of important matters. He even had the 
audacity to stamp his foot at Nicholas for not heed- 
ing it. We know that at least on one occasion he 
directly influenced the Tsar to take a fatal decision. 
For the Imperial fete day, December 6/19, 1916, 
all political Russia, nobles, burgesses, and peasants, 
expected the Tsar to go to the Duma and announce 
the formation of a Ministry enjoying public confi- 
dence. Alexandra was, of course, violently opposed 
to any concession, but she feared the influence of 
the Army on Nicholas, and Razputin was produced 
for the occasion. He succeeded in dissuading the 
hapless Monarch, to his undoing and to the ruin of 
the Army and of Russia. 

I do not propose to rehearse the well-known 
stories about Razputin's influence on the dismissal 
or appointment of Ministers or prelates. Those 
stories are true only in so far as they represent 
Grishka acting as the instrument of another per- 
son's will, in most cases Alexandra's. He was too 
ignorant, too petty, to understand political ques- 
tions. For instance, he was always urging the Em- 
peror to come into direct contact with the people. 
"Get rid of the Ministers. They lie to you. Address 
yourself direct to the people. You will then know 
the truth and everything will right itself." Nicholas 



THE J.AST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

became rather tired of this parrot-like 'repetition. 
He had heard it all so often from his wife. One 
day he told Razputin: "It sounds very nice, but 
how is it to be done? You know quite well that if 
I took your advice I should very soon lose my life." 
"No, never," was the reply. "You will be killed 
by an intellectual, not by a peasant" not a .con- 
vincing or cheerful response. 

On one point Razputin took what seemed tq be 
a line of his own : he was against the war with Ger- 
many. "She is too strong. We must be friends," 
he declaimed. This view did not reflect the mind 
of the Empress. Who had instilled it into him? It 
is not difficult to guess. His daughter and her hus- 
band are known to have been acquainted with one 
of the secret agents of Germany. Besides, there 
were also Badmaiev and a number of other doubtful 
personages around him. When war broke out Raz- 
putin was lying wounded at Pokrovskoe. The Tsar 
telegraphed to him about the war. Grishka fell into 
such rage that his wound reopened. 

He served the German interest in a more subtle 
and redoubtable manner. His very existence was 
bringing about the collapse of Russia by destroying 
the faith of the people in the Tsar. All the fore- 
most supporters and friends of the "saint" were of 
the* German orientation. That was not a coinci- 
dence. Every one who even tolerated Razputin was 
helping the enemy. 

It being pretty veil established that Razputin. 
248 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

was the direct cause in the Empress's hands of 
the Revolution and the downfall of Russia, I would 
ask what the Ludendorffs and their Russian dupes 
have to say in justification of the argument that it 
was the Entente that brought about the Revolution. 
Razputin's relationship to the defeatists was so clear 
to everybody in Russia that people Russians as 
well as Allies fell naturally into the mistake of 
supposing that the Empress must be pro-German, 
since she supported Razputin. Who magnified Raz- 
putin before the war? The Cologne Gazette. Who 
was his arch-apologist? The pro-German Witte. 
The Germans had almost as much to do with the 
Razputin scandal as they had to do with Lenin and 
the exploits of his hundred Jews. 4 

The murder of Razputin evoked the greatest out- 
burst of popular rejoicing that any act had ever 
produced. "Ubili!" (they have killed) was the 
universal greeting. People did not stop to ask who 
had been killed. They knew. The whole nation 
had desired his death, and one wonders that he so 
long survived. But his murder was, none the less, 
a mistake, since he was merely an ignorant tool, 
and the circumstances of his end the lawless joy 

4 Ludendorff. "War Memories/' Vol. II., page 4.13 : 
". . . The Tsar was overthrown by the Revolution, which was 
favoured by the Entente, The Entente's reasons for backing the 
Revolution- are not dear. At all events, it is certain that the 
Entente expected the Revolution to bring them some advantage 
in the war. They wished at least to save anything that could be 
saved and, consequently, did not hesitate to act. The Tsar, who 
had begun the war in order to please the Entente, had to be 
removed." 

249 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

that it evoked only helped the revolutionaries. 
Thenceforth, the Empress's name was in the gutter, 
and there was only one hope of salvation for the 
Tsar to dissociate himself from his wife. To do 
that to put her away into a monastery as Tsar 
Peter Alexeievich would have done was quite be- 
yond the capacity of a gentle soul like Nicholas 
Alexandrovich. . . . 

It had been suggested before the Revolution that 
she should go alone to England "on a visit." This 
argued complete ignorance of the inner life of the 
Sovereigns. The Razputin scandal had arisen be- 
cause Alexandra morbidly imagined that the des- 
tinies of Russia depended upon their joint faith an,d 
prayers hers and the "saint's." Also she was con- 
vinced that without her constant presence and sup- 
port Nicholas would be lost. Sooner would she 
have died than go away, particularly after the death 
of her "saint." 

There had been plots to kill Alexandra and even 
the Tsar. It is curious, indeed, that her life should 
have been spared. One must bear in mind the 
probability of German "protection." It is evident 
that Alexandra's death would have put an end to 
the Razputin scandal and therefore been unprofit- 
able for Germany. As for Nicholas, the people 
were on his side to the last till the Revolution ex- 
tinguished in men's minds the last vestige of all 
that was seemly. 

The manner of Razputin's murder is known to 

2JO 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

all. The man who killed him is no more. His diary 
has been published. It gives almost a complete 
account of the murder. One feature has escaped 
attention, and I mention it because it gives point to 
the true version of Razputin's character as related 
above. The accomplices had prepared a most 
elaborate scheme for killing him, yet in the end it 
was Purishkevitch with a vulgar revolver that 
effected the deed. Poisoned tarts, "doctored" wine, 
and even a revolver shot had been in vain. The 
conspirators had innocently administered an anti-* 
dote with the poison; the shooter's hand had 
trembled so that he had failed to hit Razputin 
standing a few paces away. But why all this rig- 
marole? The fact is the conspirators were affected 
by the Razputin propaganda ; they also believed that 
the man was more than mortal. Purishkevich 
thought that the devil was in him till the third 
bullet brought him down. That was an epoch- 
making shot. 

Razputin was fond of identifying his own well- 
being with that of Russia. In this, as in other 
things, he merely copied the Empress. When 
Khionia Guseva, incited by the monk Iliodor, who 
had fallen out with Grishka, stuck a knife into the 
"saint," he announced that "much blood would 
flow" and that there would be "woe unutterable if 
and when he died." But he was ever prophesying 
all sorts of things, good and bad, like the proverbial 
tipster. It suited the interested or superstitious to 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

proclaim him infallible. Anyhow, it did not require 
much acumen to read the signs of coming disaster 
in Russia. Grishka was no fool, and he must have 
had a shrewd idea what his own friends and sup- 
porters were doing. But charlatanism "paid," and 
he had a family to support and lots of "friends" 
coming for assistance, all of which flattered 
Grishka's cheap little soul and kept him on his daily 
round of prayer and debauch. 

Razputin the monster is a fiction, bred in the 
busy brains of politicians and elaborated by the 
teeming imagination of sensational novelists. Raz- 
putin the saint is an imaginary product of a woman's 
diseased mind. Even the stories of the sanctifying 
baths and other khlyst (flagellant) doctrines, sup- 
posed to have been applied by a demoniacal Grishka, 
turn out to be imaginary. It is not unusual for the 
peasants in certain parts of Russia to take the steam 
bath in common. No strangers are admitted, and 
there is nothing unseemly in the practice. It was 
quite appropriate for a native of Tobolsk. / In this 
and in his gross familiarities with the other sex 
Grishka was merely Razputin the peasant, a village 
satyr. 



252 



CHAPTER V 
CAPTIVES IN A PALACE 

> 

Before the Revolution, propagandists of all de- 
scriptions aimed their poisoned shafts at the Em- 
press. Her fatal belief in Razputin rendered her 
an easy prey. The revolutionary section watched 
over Grishka, just as their German accomplices 
"protected" Alexandra. Nicholas was left alone, 
comparatively speaking. After the Revolution all 
the energies of the dark forces involved were con- 
centrated upon him. It was not enough that he had 
voluntarily abdicated; he had to be shorn of all 
prestige, so that the inveterate devotion and loyalty 
of the people, which had formed the very foundation 
of Russia's existence, should be swept away for ever. 
"The Tsar was a traitor; he and his wife had been 
in secret communication with the Germans." In 
city, village, and camp this poisonous rumour 
spread. 

Blindly, the Provisional Government did nothing 
to stop it. The Order of the Day to the Annies, in 
which Nicholas, bidding good-bye to his soldiers, 
proclaimed his unshaken loyalty to the sacred cause 
of Russia, and besought them never to lay down 
their arms to Germany, was suppressed by telegram 

253 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

from the War Office in Petrograd. 5 Evil deeds 
come back to roost whence they have issued. The 
people who besmirched the Tsar to please the revolu- 
tionaries were themselves punished. One does not 
undermine the faith of a whole nation without de- 
stroying all authority. 

When the Empress and her sick children were 
proclaimed prisoners of state, and a few days later 
Nicholas arrived under custody at Tsarskoe, this 
foul charge of treachery hung over them, poisoning 
their lives by the mental and even physical torture 
that ensued. It was because of this abominable lie 
that the ex-Sovereigns were first treated like com- 
mon malefactors, kept in separate rooms, and for- 

5 Here is the text of the suppressed document: 

"My dearly loved troops, I address you for the last time. After 
my abdication, for me and for my son, from the Russian Throne, 
the power is transferred to the Provisional Government which 
rose on the initiation of the Duma. God help them to lead Russia 
on the way of glory and prosperity. God help you also, valiant 
troops, to hold our native land firmly against the evil enemy. 

"During two and a half years you endured, daily, the hardships 
of active service. Much blood has been shed, many efforts have 
been made, and the hour is already near when Russia, bound 
to her valiant Allies, by one general impulse to victory, will 
break the last efforts of the adversary. 

"This unprecedented war must be brought to a full victory. 
He who thinks now of peace, who wishes it that man is a be- 
trayer of his Fatherland, a traitor. I know that every honest 
soldier thinks thus. Then fulfill your duty, defend our native 
land valiantly, submit yourselves to the Provisional Government, 
obey your commanders, remember that every weakening of dis- 
cipline in the service is only an advantage to the enemy. 

"I firmly believe that the infinite love of our great native land 
has not died out of your hearts. May God bless you and Saint 
George the great Vanquisher and Martyr guide you. 

"NICHOLAS." 

The Order was counter-signed by General Alexeiev, Chief of 
Staff. 

254 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

bidden to see or communicate with each other; and 
the soldiers and officers of the guard considered 
themselves justified in persecuting and insulting 
them, and even their followers deserted them. 

After the overhauling of all their private papers 
by a special court of inquiry instituted by order of 
the revolutionary chieftain, Kirbiss-Kerensky, even 
he had to amend his demeanour. "Tsar chist" (the 
Tsar is clean), he declared. The Russian phrase 
means more than "innocent"; it is really fc beyond 
reproach." But the Jewish Press and the Soviet did 
not recant their foul slanders. No justice could 
be shown to the man whom they hated. Captivity 
lost some of its worst forms after the innocence 
of the ex-Tsar had been established. But Tsarskoe- 
Selo was only a prelude to worse martyrdom. 

I do not wish to go over the details of the first 
captivity, a good deal being already known about 
the five months at Tsarskoe-Selo. Only the more 
important episodes are given here, based upon the 
depositions of members of the Imperial household. 
But before relating these sad memories, I would 
take the reader a little farther back, and touch upon 
fateful incidents that have not yet been recorded 
in their proper bearing. 

I have referred to the estrangement of nearly 
everyone of the ex-Empress's friends as a conse- 
quence of her malady. This exodus of intimates 
included kinsfolk as well as humbler people. Even 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

the Montenegrin Princesses Anastasia and Militza 6 
were no exceptions to the rule. Coldness between 
the wives in this case was bound sooner or later to 
affect the husbands. Alexandra resented the popu- 
larity of the Grand Duke Nicholas as a personal 
affront. In the end she succeeded in persuading her 
husband to dismiss him and to assume the Chief 
Command. But she punished herself. The Tsar at 
the Stavka (G.H.Q.) began to do things without 
her knowledge and consent. He actually listened 
to dreadful stories about the "saint," dismissed 
Stuermer, and might go further. Razputin's death 
helped the Empress to reassert her usual influence. 
Then, once more, the Tsar went off to Moghilev, 
and anxiety crept again into the mind of Alexandra. 
The illness of the children they all contracted 
measles in a very bad form caused her worry of 
another sort. For a time the Autocrat was forgotten 
in the mother; and so, when the rumbling of the 
Revolution was already loud, she did not discern 
it. Protopopov, the friend of the departed "saint," 
was assuring her that nothing serious had occurred. 
When the children were out of danger, she had 
leisure to take stock of affairs. Realizing that 
Protopopov was not to be trusted, she sent for the 
Grand Duke Paul. Rumours about the Tsar tor- 
mented her. He was going to abdicate. The idea 

*They are the wives of the Grand Dukes Nicholas and his 
brother Peter and sisters of the Queen of Italy. At one time they 
were very friehdly with the Empress and through them Kazputin 
came to the notice of the Court. Afterwards they became enemies 
of Razputin. 

256 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

of such a surrender made her frantic. Paul could 
not help. She tried to get into communication with 
her husband by aeroplane. A trusty flying officer 
was summoned, but even this venture failed. 

Remaining outwardly calm, she showed the 
measure of her anxiety by abandoning the reserve 
that she had always displayed. Thus she herself 
came out to the guards battalions and units that had 
been concentrated around the Palace, and actually 
made a speech to them. 

On the morning of the 2 1st of March, General 
Kornilov came to inform Alexandra "that upon him 
had fallen the painful duty of announcing the ordi- 
nance of the Council of Ministers that from that 
hour her Majesty must consider herself to be under 
arrest." This announcement was made to the Em- 
press in the children's play-room in the presence of 
Colonel Kobylinsky, the new commandant of the 
Palace. Then General Kornilov asked to speak to 
the Empress alone. He assured her that there was 
no danger, and then gave instructions for the treat- 
ment of the prisoners, based upon kindness and 
courtesy. 

The meeting between husband and wife was a 
very affecting one. Nicholas came straight to the 
nursery. They embraced each other tenderly, "for- 
getting the world and its troubles in the joy of re- 
union with their children." Prison rules, rigorously 
applied, thenceforth prevented any communication 

257 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

with the outside, and for a time even between the 
prisoners. 

Kerensky set about trying to discover some evi- 
dence of collusion with the enemy. Alexandra was 
isolated. A creature of Kerensky's, named Koro- 
vichenko, came to search the Imperial papers. The 
Tsar politely offered to help him, but met with a 
rude rebuff, after which he left Korovichenko alone. 
Having satisfied himself that no such evidence ex- 
isted Kerensky somewhat altered his demeanour. 
At his first meeting with the ex-Tsar, he had adopted 
a tone of haughty familiarity. Later, he became 
polite, even respectful, addressing him as "your 
Majesty," instead of plain "Nicholas Alexandro- 
vich." 

Although the soldiers guarding the Palace were 
not supposed to enter its precincts, the prisoners did 
not enjoy immunity from their prying gaze and 
offensive curiosity. They broke into the palace and 
pilfered, ransacking trunks. On one occasion they 
rushed into the sitting-room where the family had 
assembled. One of the girls sat between the light 
and the window, doing some sewing. Her move- 
ments silhouetted outside had been suspected to be 
signals. 

An officer accompanying the Minister of War 
(Guchkov) on one of his visits loudly accused the 
occupants of the Palace of being "sold to the 
enemy" (Vy vsie prodazhnyie). The fact that he 
was intoxicated did not lighten the insult. It 

258 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

showed what unworthy suspicions animated people 
in the Ministries. The ignorant soldiers who im- 
bibed their daily dose of revolutionary lore from 
the Soviets were not better or worse than their chiefs. 
By dogging the ex-Tsar's footsteps when he went 
out for exercise, by shooting the boy's pet goats, and 
taking away his toy rifle, and by other acts of the 
same kind the soldiers were merely copying their 
officers. These demonstratively donned red badges 
and ignored the Tsar's salute. 

Senseless clamour had led to daily espionage of 
the family. Officers of the guard went into the 
dining-room at lunch time to see if the prisoners 
were all in the Palace. The Tsar always greeted 
them. On one occasion an officer declined the ex- 
tended hand. Nicholas, deeply hurt, asked him: 
"Why?" The man, putting his hand behind his 
back, declaimed: "I am of the people. When the 
people stretched their hands out to you, you did 
not meet them !" 



At the end of July the captives heard that they 
would shortly go away. It was impossible to leave 
them there any longer. The Soviets of Petrograd 
and Kronstadt had tried to obtain possession of 
them by force and by stealth. Once an individual 
attired in uniform, styling himself Colonel Mas- 
lovsky, had made his appearance, and, producing a 
paper signed Chkeidze, demanded, in the name of 
the Soviet of Petrograd, the transfer of the prisoners 

259 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

to the Fortress of SS. Peter and Paul, threatening 
to call in the troops if his demands were not imme- 
diately complied with. It was with the greatest 
difficulty that Colonel' Kobylinsky averted the 
danger. The Provisional Government could not 
afford to let the Soviets obtain the custody of such 
valuable hostages. It had to remove them to a place 
of safety above all to a place where the Soviets 
could not easily reach them. Perhaps this explains 
the selection of such a remote place as Tobolsk. It 
was chosen by Kerensky without the knowledge of 
the captives. They thought, till the train was con- 
veying them eastward, that they were bound for 
the south. The ex-Tsar did not like his destination. 
He suspected a trap, though what should have made 
him suspicious is not known. 

Permission had been given to the banished sov- 
ereigns to choose the persons who were to accompany 
them into exile. Nicholas selected his aide-de-camp 
Naryshkin, but as this favourite hesitated, he at 
once crossed out his name and proposed Ilya Leon- 
idovich Tatishchev, who, with Prince Vasily 
Alexandrovich Dolgoruky remained with him to the 
end, paying for their loyalty and devotion with their 
lives. In a separate chapter I shall describe the 
heroism, sufferings, and end of those who were 
faithful unto death of the two whom I have just 
named, of Dr. Botkin and of young Countess 
Anastasia Vasilievna Hendrykova, angel of purity 
and grace, whose mere presence at the Court of 
260 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILT OK 

Alexandra should have kept away all things evil> 
and of devoted Mile. Schneider, and of the humbler 
servitors. The ex-Empress was not permitted, for 
some unexplained reason, to take her favourite maid* 

The evil genius of the household, Anna Vyrubova^ 
had been locked up in the fortress. She and 
Voeikov, the ex-palace commandant, had been sub- 
jected to the most searching interrogation by the 
members of the "Extraordinary Commission of In- 
quiry regarding the Dark Forces." Such was the 
high-sounding title invented by Kerensky to mobil- 
ise all methods of bringing home to the Tsar the 
abominable charges invented against him. Nothing 
could be proved, because there was nothing to prove. 
But Kerensky had his spies all the time at the palace 
and sent one to Tobolsk. 

Young Alexis celebrated his thirteenth birthday 
on the eve of departure. The family attended a spe- 
cial service and afterwards offered up the customary 
prayers for a safe journey. They were going into 
the unknown. Here in their own familiar surround- 
ings life had not been so terrible towards the end 
of their captivity. What had the future in store? 
The war was still in progress. They could not leave 
the country. Perhaps when peace came, some quiet 
refuge would open its gates, and they could live 
happily together. The girls and the boy were de- 
lighted like all young things over the prospect of a 
journey. Alexis and his sisters had quite recovered 
from their illness. 

261 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

At midnight of the 13th August Kerensky came 
to the palace, assembled the soldiers who had been 
selected to escort the family, and made them a 
speech. "You have guarded the Tsar's family 
here," he said, "you also will have to guard them 
in the new place where they are going by order of 
the Council of Ministers. Remember, one does not 
hit a man who is down. Bear yourselves like men, 
not like cads." 

He then entered the palace. The ex-Tsar's only 
brother, the Grand Duke Michael, had been per- 
mitted to come' to say good-bye. Kerensky gave 
him ten minutes with Nicholas, remaining in the 
room with them. The brothers were never to meet 
again. Michael did not see any other member of 
the family. 

Learning that the Tsar's family was to be re- 
moved from Tsarskoe-Selo the men employed at the 
railway station refused to let out the engine. All 
night the exiles waited for the train. It came at six 
o'clock in the morning. 



262 



CHAPTER VI 

EXILE IN SIBERIA 

The period between autumn, 1917, ^id the fol- 
lowing spring furnishes much material for this tragic 
history. It was during their exile in Siberia that the 
fate of the Romanovs was decided not in the 
Urals. It was at Tobolsk, in the close intimacy that 
misfortune naturally brings, that the true character 
of each captive, high and low, asserted itself. Thus, 
invaluable data has been obtained for the historian. 

At first the captives enjoyed the respite of remote- 
ness from the storm centre of Petrograd. But many 
circumstances gradually impaired this advantage. 
They began to suffer privations even before the 
Reds captured the government. The remittances 
promised by Kerensky did not arrive. After the 
Bolshevist usurpation, the captives were allowed 
starvation rations, and had to eke out their liveli- 
hood by needlework, drawings, etc. Then the boy 
fell ill with one of his periodical attacks, aggravated 
by the exhausting effects of the Siberian winter and 
inadequate diet. 

At Tobolsk Alexandra showed herself to be 
strong, brave, gentle. Adversity seemed to bring 
out all that was best in her nature. Yet here the 

263 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

family physician, who had followed them into exile 
and afterwards shared their fate in Ekaterinburg, 
became entirely convinced that she was not quite 
normal. It required only a chance remark on politi- 
cal topics to provoke a hysterical outburst. As 
usual, she could see nothing bad in the peasants, 
even when the peasant soldiers of the guard were 
constantly behaving "like cads" despite Keren- 
sky's exhortations. 

Nicholas sawed wood and gave lessons to the 
children. Indeed, with the help of Mr. Sidney 
Gibbes and M. Gilliard and other teachers, they 
were making up for time lost in their education. 

With so many and such powerful influences inter- 
ested in their existence, it was only to be expected 
that efforts would be made to enter into communi- 
cation with the exiled monarchs. Each of the par- 
ties then fighting for power in Russia had its spies 
and emissaries in Tobolsk. It is certain that the 
Germans were represented in many ways. It is 
equally certain that the Entente had nobody. The 
talk of a rescue by some bold Englishman ascending 
the Ob and Irtysh from the Arctic Ocean and waft- 
ing away the prisoners is not only unfounded, it is 
the merest moonshine. Winter in Siberia lasts 
seven months, during which time there is no means 
of reaching the northern shores except on sleighs. 
Any attempt to enter or leave the country would 
have been easily discovered and notified by tele- 
graph, which was wholly in the hands of the Soviets. 
264 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

One comfort was not denied to the captives 
they sent and received letters, in some cases without 
censorship. They were also able to get newspapers 
and other literature. Thus they were in touch with 
the happenings of the outer world. These did not 
bring them much consolation, it must be admitted. 
Nicholas never recovered from the blow of learning 
in this manner of the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk. Up 
to that time he had, in spite of everything, kept alive 
some hope for the future of his country. Thence- 
forth he was a man without hope, and all that hap- 
pened afterwards left him indifferent. If he could 
have died without causing pain to his wife and 
children, he would have died gladly, unable to live 
down the stain of dishonour. 

The exiles suffered unconsciously from the sense- 
less if not traitorous behaviour of a man in whom 
they naturally trusted the local priest,' Father 
Vasiliev. Base cupidity may have been his only 
motive, but it is certain that he caused incalculable 
harm and must be held accountable for the tales 
of alleged plots to escape from Tobolsk. The Reds 
used him as their tool. Perhaps he was not alto- 
gether blind. There were other "friends" who 
proverbially, proved to be worse than enemies. On 
the other hand, many instances of disinterested 1 
loyalty and devotion consoled the captives in their 
afflictions. 

From Tsarskoe to Tobolsk, the journey under 
normal conditions required not more than a week. 

265 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

The Imperial exiles reached their destination on 
August igth, within six days of departure. They 
travelled in comfort in sleeping cars with a whole 
retinue of servants. The list of the passengers as 
officially approved numbers forty-five all told. Two 
trains conveyed them and their effects. Stoppages 
were not made at the large stations because local 
workmen and Soviets were disposed to interfere. 
They had done so at Zvanka, the first important sta- 
tion on the Vologda- Viatka route, by which the party 
travelled. The deputy Vershinin, who had brought 
the Tsar a prisoner from Moghilev, acted again in 
the capacity of representative of the Provisional 
Government during this journey. He had the 
greatest difficulty in overcoming the resistance at 
Zvanka. The workers did not wish to allow the 
trains to pass. 

At Tiumen two steamers awaited the party for 
the river trip to Tobolsk. They passed by the vil- 
lage of Pokrovskoe. Alexandra called the children 
to look at the birth-place of the "saint" on the banks 
of the stream in which he had fished. She was fond 
of comparing him to the fishermen of Galilee, 
bwmble men like him. The children dutifully com- 
plied and joined their mother in prayer not be- 
cause they liked or regretted Grishka, but out of 
love and -obedience to their mother. To her 
diseased imagination this coincidence between the 
scene of their exile and the home of Razputin had 
a mystical meaning. 
266 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

The voyage had been as pleasant as it could pos- 
sibly be. The tedium of the long days of travel had 
been relieved by frequent stoppages amidst 
forest or field. All who wished could alight and 
walk, while the train followed slowly. Such com- 
forts are possible only in Russia. Descending the 
tributaries of the mighty Irtysh, the exiles had a 
wonderful picture of the Siberian autumn, with its 
splendour of colouring and teeming bird life. At 
Tobolsk they had to remain a whole week in the 
steamers, because the houses intended for them were 
not ready. They were, of course, under constant 
guard, but allowed to take exercise ashore. 

On August 26th they moved into their new prison. 
Alexandra was suffering more than usual from heart 
trouble. She drove in a comfortable carriage. The 
Tsar and the family and household walked. With 
the exception of a few servants, all found accom- 
modation in two houses : one a warm, roomy stone 
building, formerly the residence of the Governor; 
the other adjoining it and known as the Ko'rnilov 
house. The ex-sovereigns and their children took 
up their quarters in the upper storey of the Gov- 
ernor's house. Here were the Tsar's study and the 
bed-chambers of the imperial couple, of Alexis and 
of the grand-duchesses. Here also was the drawing- 
room. Downstairs were the school-room, servants* 
rooms, and the quarters of the commandant and 
officers on guard duty. The suite and other 
servants lived in the Kornilov house. Later, the 

267 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

soldiers expelled many of these occupants without 
reason, and, as some of them had to be accommo- 
dated in the Governor's house, there was no small 
discomfort from over-crowding. 

Both houses faced the main street, which had 
been renamed Ulitza Svobody (Liberty-street). 
People passing by could see into the lower rooms. 
It became a custom to bow to any member of the 
family who happened to be visible, and some of the 
citizens would demonstratively make the sign of 
the Cross. Behind the Governor's house was an 
immense enclosure, surrounded by a high wooden 
fence. Here the family took their exercise; here the 
ex-Tsar chopped and sawed wood, and with his own 
unaided efforts built a sort of wooden terrace, where 
the captives loved to sit whenever the weather per- 
mitted. 

Early rising was the rule. All except the ex- 
Empress were ready for breakfast by 8 130. Alexan- 
dra's health was so bad that she seldom left her 
room before lunch-time. Breakfast, as usual among 
Russians, was a slight meal of tea and bread. The 
ex-Tsar had it in his study with his eldest daughter 
Olga, who of. all the children most resembled him 
in character. The other children and members of 
the household assembled in the dining-room, situ- 
ated on the ground floor of the Governor's house. 
The Empress had coffee in bed. 

Till eleven o'clock Nicholas read or wrote his 
diary, while the children had lessons. From eleven 
268 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

till noon father and children were in the courtyard. 
He worked with axe or saw and the young folks 
played games. At twelve o'clock all went to the 
school-room and had sandwiches, after which the 
Tsar left his children to continue their lessons. The 
family and household met at one o'clock at lunch 
a simple meal after which they were in the open 
air, weather permitting, till four p. m. The Em- 
press seldom left the house. Olga and Tatiana, the 
two elder grand duchesses, helped their father in his 
manual work. Alexis generally had a short sleep 
after lunch, and then followed the others into the 
courtyard with his tutors. 

Five o'clock tea was served in the Tsar's study. 
Then followed an interval for reading or games, 
then two hours for preparation of lessons. Dinner 
at eight consisted of soup, fish, meat, sweet-dish, and 
coffee. It was prepared by the Imperial cook, 
Haritonov, and during the earlier period differed 
little from the customary repast of old times. 
Everybody met in the drawing-room after dinner. 
There were reading and conversation, Court eti- 
quette being forgotten. Alexis retired to rest early. 
At eleven o'clock tea was served, and soon after- 
wards all lights were out 

Despite her poor health, Alexandra was seldom 
idle. In the .morning she gave lessons to the chil- 
dren and did needlework. When she remained alone 
in the house she would play the piano. Often, when 

269 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

the heart trouble was severe, she had dinner also 
in her room, and then Alexis kept her company. 

The company at table included besides the family 
only the persons already mentioned as forming the 
household namely, Countess Hendrykova, Mile. 
Schneider, Prince Dolgoruky, General Tatishchev, 
Mr. Gibbes, M. Gilliard, and Dr. Botkin. On Sun- 
days came Dr. Derevenko and his son Kolia. 

The Tsar gave lessons to Alexis in history, a 
favourite subject, in which Nicholas was extremely 
well versed. Alexandra instructed all the children 
in religion, and taught her favourite daughter 
Anastasia German a language that none of the 
children understood. Anastasia was ambitious to 
know everything. She studied history with the help 
of Countess Hendrykova. Another teacher, Mme. 
Bittner, came afterwards to help in the school-room. 
To relieve the monotony of their lives, the children 
were encouraged to take up private theatricals. 
Several plays, English and French, were produced 
with great success. 

To the Empress's intense joy, they were permitted 
to attend church. Her greatest sorrow at Tsarskoe 
had been the interdict on church-going, the nearest 
place of worship being outside the precincts of the 
palace and therefore inaccessible to the prisoners. 
Here at last they could go to church, after a lapse 
of more than four months. But the sacred edifice 
was closed to other worshippers when the exiles 
attended it* 
270 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

Unhappily, this source of spiritual comfort was 
not unalloyed with temporal drawbacks. Father 
Vasiliev, the incumbent, did a very rash thing one 
day. Without consulting anybody, he suddenly 
intoned the prayers for the sovereigns, as if they 
were still on the Throne. The exiles were power* 
less to interfere. Of course, the incident came to 
the knowledge of the whole garrison immediately 
afterwards, and led to the sort of reprisals that one 
might have expected : church-going was stopped for 
ever, and, what was worse, the soldiers insisted upon 
having a representative inside the house at all re- 
ligious services, to see that the above named practice 
was not repeated. Thus all the efforts of Colonel 
Kobylinsky, the good-hearted commandant, to keep 
the soldiers out of the house were defeated. 

Within a month of their arrival in Tobolsk the 
exiles were placed under the observation of special 
emissaries of the Provisional Government: the 
Komisar Pankratov and his assistant, Nikolsky. 
The former enjoyed high confidence and renown in 
revolutionary circles, having spent fifteen years in 
the Fortress of Schlusselburg and twenty-seven years 
in exile in Siberia. A typical theorist, dangerous in 
his teachings, he was personally the best-hearted of 
men. He adored children, and was the playmate of 
the young Romanovs, whom he literally enthralled 
with stories of his prison years. His particular fa- 
vourite was Maria. Nikolsky, on the other hand, was 
uncouth, uncultured, brutal, and stupid, and took an 

271 



THE LAST I)AYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

apparent delight in bullying the young folks, es- 
pecially Alexis. With permission from the Gov- 
ernment, some medicinal wine had been sent to 
Tobolsk from Tsarskoe. Nikolsky took the bottles 
and smashed them. 

As a matter of fact, the delightful but not very 
far-sighted Pankratov caused much more harm than 
the bestial Nikolsky. True to his revolutionary 
principles, he immediately proceeded to indoctrinate 
the soldiers. Perhaps he feared the personal influ- 
ence and charm of the ex-Tsar. Pankratov talked 
with them by the hour on the wonders of the 
Socialist-Revolutionary programme, and, as so often 
happened in Russia, the ignorant listeners became 
not Socialist-Revolutionaries but Bolshevists. Any- 
how, they very soon lost all respect for authority 
in the persons of their commandant and officers, and 
began to ill-treat the prisoners. They sank so low 
that even the young grand duchesses suffered insult. 
Lewd drawings and inscriptions disfigured the posts 
of the swing that was their only outdoor pastime. 
Later, these hooligans broke up the ice-hill that the 
girls and their father had put up in the yard. 

The day came when they included the ex-Tsar in 
their deviltries. Nicholas wore the simplest garb 
a soldier's khaki shirt and overcoat, retaining only 
his colonel's shoulder-straps and his Cross of St. 
George. Suddenly the soldiers decided that he must 
take off his badges of rank. In vain Kobylinsky 
remonstrated with them. They threatened violence 
272 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

if their "orders" were not carried out at once. It 
hurt the ex-Tsar to the quick to cut off his shoulder- 
straps. Thenceforth the cross alone remained to 
symbolise his fidelity to Russia and her allies. He 
kept it ever on his breast to his dying day. 

Some of the old soldiers remained immune from 
Pankratov's influence, and when the time came for 
them to be relieved, they visited the ex-Tsar by 
stealth to bid good-bye. These were affecting scenes. 
The men fell on their knees and prayed, and then 
embraced the captive and blessed him. Of course, 
Nicholas related all this to Alexandra, whereby her 
invincible belief in the peasants gathered new 
strength. 

On several occasions violent disputes arose be- 
tween Alexandra and one of the ladies, because the 
latter spoke of the horrible behaviour of the soldiers. 
Alexandra lost all control over herself, and cried: 
"They are all good ! They are all good! They are 
led astray by Jews. . . . The people will come to 
their senses, and there will be order. . . . The sol- 
diers are all right. I wish the officers were more 
energetic." 

In November, while Kerensky was still at the 
head of the Government, no money had as yet been 
received, in spite of all his promises. The funds 
of the household had run out, and Dolgoruky and 
Tatishchev, having expended their own substance, 
had to borrow from charitable souls in the town, 
giving their note of hand in return. Two months 

273 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

later, word came from the Soviet Government that 
it had no money to spend on the prisoners. They 
would be allowed to occupy their houses free of 
charge, would receive soldiers' rations, and have to- 
work if they wanted anything more. Sorrowfully, 
they faced the situation. One-third of the servants 
were at once released, each receiving a certain sum 
out of the scanty remnants. Nicholas and Alexan- 
dra never knew how their faithful followers had to 
pinch and contrive in order to keep the household 
from starvation. 

Alexis astonished the household by his precocious 
understanding. "I begin to know the truth here. 
At Tsarskoe everybody told lies/* he remarked one 
day. "If I become Tsar, no one will dare to tell 
me lies. I shall make order in the land/' He com- 
bined his mother's will with his father's charm. 
Those who came to know the boy at Tobolsk are con- 
fident that he would have justified his words. 

To a visitor at his bedside when he was ill, he 
spoke his thoughts about Razputin. The "saint's" 
portrait had been placed by Alexandra near her sick 
son's pillow. The visitor accidentally upset it. 
"Do not pick it up!" cried Alexis. "The floor is 
the place for it." 

** 

Towards the end of their exile, some, if not all, 
of the captives realised the desperate nature of their 
position, and had scant hope of surviving Bol- 
shevist rule for any length of time. Pathetic evi- 
274 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

dences of their attitude were found among the 
papers that remained at Tobolsk and came into the 
hands of the investigating magistrate. Among them 
are two prayers written in verse apparently com- 
posed by Countess Hendrykova and transcribed by 
the Grand Duchess Olga. Here is an approximate 
rendering of some of the verses: 

Grant us Thy patience, Lord, 
In these our woeful days, 
The mob's wrath to endure, 
The torturers' ire; 
Thine unction to forgive 
Our neighbours' persecution, 
And mild, like Thee, to bear 
A blood-stained Cross. 
And when the mob prevails, 
And foes come to despoil us, 
To suifer humbly shame, 
O Saviour aid us! 
And when the hour comes, 
To pass the last dread gate, 
Breathe strength in us to pray, 
"Father forgive them!" 



275 



CHAPTER VII 
THE LAST PRISON 

The intimate connection between Berlin and 
Moscow yielded many living examples among the 
visitors to Tobolsk. Many, if not all, of the spies, 
emissaries, and other agents appearing there had 
been at one time or another in the German capital. 
Yakovlev, the special commissary sent to remove 
the prisoners from Tobolsk, was no exception to 
the rule. 

His appearance was preceded by certain events 
which must be related here. The soldiers forming 
the guard at Tobolsk grew tired of Pankratov and 
his everlasting speeches. By the end of the first 
week in February (1918) they had decided to get 
rid of him and of Nikolsky. On the Qth they turned 
them out of the Kornilov house and drove them out 
of the town. They then telegraphed to Moscow, 
reporting what they had done, and asked that a 
proper commissary not an appointee of Kerensky 
should be sent. But Moscow remained obstin- 
ately silent. The time for action had not yet 
arrived. Meanwhile, the Soviet at Omsk, represent- 
ing Western Siberia, sent a representative to 
Tobolsk. He arrived on March 24th. This man was 
276 



NARRATIVE OF MR* ROBERT WILTON 

a certain Dutzmann, a Jew. He did not interfere 
with the prison regime; indeed, he never came near 
the governor's house. 

At the end of March, Alexis had a severe attack 
of his illness the worst ever known. Both legs 
were paralysed. The pain was excruciating and 
unremitting. Day and night he cried aloud in his 
agony, and the aged and infirm mother had to sit 
by and comfort him. After a whole month of 
suffering the patient began to improve and the pains 
grew less, but he was still a cripple and could not 
be moved without serious danger. At this juncture 
appeared the Soviet emissary, Yakovlev. Neither 
the soldiers nor the captives were surprised. Only 
a few days later they understood what an important 
part he had come to play in their lives. 

Yakovlev reached Tobolsk with an escort of 150 
horsemen late in the evening of April 22nd and un- 
obtrusively took up his residence in the Kornilov 
house. Colonel Kobylinsky saw him next morning. 
Yakovlev handed him an order from the Tsik, 
signed by Sverdlov, intimating that the bearer was 
entrusted with a mission of the highest importance 
and that he must be implicitly obeyed, but no hint 
was given as to th$ nature of the mission. Yakov- 
lev then had the men of the guard mustered and 
showed them a similar document, by which they 
were informed that any disobedience to him would 
be punished with death. To sugar the pill, 
Yakovlev told them that he had brought them a 

277 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

lot of money, the Soviet having decided to pay at 
the rate of three roubles a day instead of fifty ko- 
pecks, the rate fixed by the Kerensky Government. 
Altogether, Yakovlev showed himself to be an expert 
in the art of handling peasant soldiers, but he had to 
overcome opposition of a more subtle kind from a 
Jew named Zaslavsky, who had insinuated himself 
among the guards as the representative of the 
Uralian Soviet. This man had previously caused no 
end of trouble by "discovering^ "plots," and had 
almost persuaded the soldiers on one occasion to 
insist that the Imperial captives should be trans- 
ferred to the town lock-up- In fact, here once more 
it was only the coolness of the resourceful Koby- 
linsky that had saved the situation. 

But this noxious individual did not have things 
all his own way. The Omsk Soviet also had its rep- 
resentative among the guard a Russian named 
Degtiarev. Now the two Soviets that of Omsk 
and the one at Ekaterinburg being constantly at 
odds, their emissaries were naturally jealous of each 
other. Thus it was enough for Zaslavsky to take 
one view in order that Degtiarev should take the 
opposite one. Zaslavsky had for some reason im- 
mediately stirred up opposition to Yakovlev and 
tried to persuade the soldiers that he was a spy come 
to deliver the prisoners. With Zaslavsky was an 
Ekaterinburg workman named Avdeiev, who figured 
prominently in subsequent events. It is noteworthf 
that Yakovlev came to Tobolsk by way of Ufa a 
278 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

roundabout journey from Moscow apparently in 
order to avoid Ekaterinburg. Yakovlev had friends 
in Ufa* It is probable that he had met Avdeiev 
there. He appears to have imagined that Avdeiev 
might help him to prevent or allay suspicion in 
Ekaterinburg. In this he was mistaken. 

At a meeting of the soldiers on the 24th, Degtia- 
rev, backed by Yakovlev, attacked Zaslavsky with 
such vim that the men threw him out, and he made 
haste to escape to Ekaterinburg to relate a purely 
imaginary story of Yakovlev 5 s designs to release the 
Romanovs. But there is evidence to show that he 
first communicated by wire with Sverdlov. Zas- 
lavsky's poisonous character may have been the only 
prompting necessary, but it is not impossible that 
he may have been "inspired" from Moscow to play 
a part in the intricate conspiracy that was to ex- 
terminate the Romanovs. Certainly Yakovlev 
underrated his capacity for mischief, as will appear 
later. Sverdlov tried to make the world believe 
that Nicholas II. was to be brought to Moscow for 
trial. But this may have been only an after- 
thought. In any case, it was easy to have him inter- 
cepted by playing upon local ignorance and sus- 
picion through Zaslavsky. 

Meanwhile, during these two days (the 23rd and 
24th), Yakovlev had been repeatedly inside the 
governor's house, and on each occasion had gone to 
the boy's room, appearing suddenly, looking fixedly 
at the patient, and then going away. Nobody 

279 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

noticed his strange behaviour at the time. They 
remembered it afterwards. No one knew as yet 
what he had come for. On the night of the 24th 
Yakovlev went to the telegraph office, taking with 
him an expert operator who had come with him 
from Moscow, and had a long conversation over the 
wire with Sverdlov, the substance of which as 
transpired later dealt with the boy's sickness and 
the impossibility of moving him. Sverdlov gave 
him "new instructions" to the effect that he was to 
bring Nicholas and that since the boy could not 
come he would have to be left behind for the pres- 
ent. 

From the telegraph office, Yakovlev went straight 
to Colonel Kobylinsky and, for the first time, dis- 
closed the object of his mission. "But what about 
Alexis?" remonstrated the commandant. "That is 
the trouble," was the reply. "I have satisfied myself 
that he is really too ill to travel, so my orders now 
are to take the ex-Tsar alone and leave the family 
here for the present. I propose to start tomorrow. 
Arrange for me to see him at once." It should be 
explained that as the roads would, in a few days, 
become impassable, and the river-ice break up any 
moment, owing to the advance of spring, it was: 
necessary to leave Tobolsk at once or wait several 
weeks till the rivers were clear of ice. Hence 
Yakovlev's haste. But as he was apparently well 
acquainted with the character of the Empress, he 
insisted that Nicholas should receive him alone. 
280 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

The ex-Tsar appointed two o'clock on the follow- 
ing day for the interview. Alexandra became furious 
on learning that she was not to be present. When 
Yakovlev entered the drawing-room, she met him 
with flaming eyes and asked him how he dared to 
separate husband and wife. Yakovlev, with a shrug 
of the shoulders, addressed himself to Nicholas: 
"The Moscow Central Executive Committee have 
sent me as Commissary Extraordinary with power 
to remove the whole family, but as Alexis Nikolaie- 
vich is ill I have received orders to leave with you 
alone." The Tsar replied: "I shall go nowhere." 
Yakovlev remonstrated:, "You must not say that. 
I have to carry out orders. If you refuse to go, I 
must either use force or send in my resignation, and 
then someone else will come who will be less 
humane. Have no anxiety; I answer for your life 
with my head. If you do not wish to go alone take 
anybody you like. Be ready to leave tomorrow at 
four." Yakovlev thereupon left without addressing 
the Empress. 

Kobylinsky remained in compliance with a 
request from the ex-Tsar. Alexandra and Tatish- 
chev and Dolgoruky stood by. "Where do they 
want to take me?" asked Nicholas. "To Moscow," 
was the reply, "Yakovlev let it slip out when I 
inquired how long he would be away before return- 
ing to fetch the family." The ex-Tsar nodded, as 
if the news confirmed his own knowledge. Turning 
to his followers he declared: "You see they want 

281 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

me to sign the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk. But I 
would rather cut off my hand than do so." 

Alexandra, much agitated, interposed : "I am also 
going. Without me they will persuade him into do- 
ing something, as they did once before. . . ." And 
she fired a volley of abuse at Rodzianko for his part 
in the abdication. But in the stress of the moment 
she had forgotten her sick boy. The hours that fol- 
lowed will ever be recalled by all who survive as 
the most painful of their memories. This distracted 
mother, too feeble to stand for more than five 
minutes, paced her room like a caged tigress. She 
summoned her favourite daughter Tatiana and burst 
into a storm of weeping. For the first time her 
attendants saw her lose all self-control. In broken 
sentences she disburdened herself of her sorrow, re- 
vealing in her distress the innermost thoughts of her 
mind: "The Germans know that their treaty is 
valueless without the Tsar's signature. . . . They 
want to separate him from his family in order to 
frighten him into some disgraceful act. . . . He 
will be afraid to refuse on our account. . . . It will 
be a repetition of Pskov. . . " She wrestled with 
herself, praying that she might not have to choose 
between her husband and her son, hoping that' the 
river might suddenly open and prevent any travel- 
ling. At last she came to a decision, and, jumping 
up, cried: "It is enough, I go with the Emperor." 
Nicholas entered the room. She greeted him with 
282 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

the words : "I shall not let you go alone." "As you 
will," was his reply. 

Volkov, the Empress's confidential man-servant, 
deposes that he saw her in the Tsarevich's room, 
and as she was going out inquired what was the 
matter. Alexandra replied: "Gosudar (the Tsar) 
is to be taken away to Moscow. They want him to 
conclude peace. But I am going with him. I shall 
never permit such a thing. What would our Allies 
say?" 

Madame Bittner spoke to the Tsar at this same 
juncture. She suggested that "they," meaning the 
Germans, would take him "out of the country." He 
replied: "God grant that it be not so. Only not 
abroad!" This witness deposes that the whole 
family dreaded the idea of being sent abroad, i.e., 
to Germany. 

In this connection I recall a remarkable passage 
in one of the depositions. Some member of the 
household at Tobolsk was reading out of a news- 
paper the statement that the Brest-Litovsk treaty 
contained a clause assuring the safety of the Im- 
perial family. The Empress broke in with an angry 
exclaimation in French : "I had rather die in Russia 
than be saved by the Germans." ( Je prefere mourir 
en Russte que d'etre sauvee par les allemands.} 

It was then settled th^t the party with the Tsar 
should include: Alexandra, the Grand Duchess 
Maria, Prince Dolgoruky, Dn Botkin, and the serv- 
ants Chemodurov, Demidova, and Ivan Sednev. On 

283 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

receiving the list, Yakovlev said : "It is all the same 
to me." The soldiers were again assembled on the 
evening of the 25th to be informed of the Tsar's 
removal. To forestall any objections, a number of 
them were selected to accompany the party. 


The vehicles that were to convey the travellers 
to Tiumen, where they would find a train, did not 
differ from the ordinary Siberian tarantass a large 
basket swung upon long flexible poles uniting two 
springless axles, the baskets being filled with straw. 
Into these vehicles the travellers tumbled and dis- 
posed themselves as best they could. Alexandra 
had a troika, the others a pair of horses. She beck- 
oned to the Tsar to mount with her, but Yakovlev 
sent Maria to join her mother, and shared his 
tarantass with Nicholas. 

The roads were terrible. No traveller who has 
not experienced springtime travel in Russia can have 
any idea of them. At some places the party had to 
alight and walk through deep slush. The Empress 
was better off than the others as she had a stronger 
team. Yakovlev was hurrying as fast as horseflesh 
could go. Relays waited at stated intervals. The 
travellers passed from one tarantass into another. 
It was better to lose no time as every day the roads 
became worse, but there was another reason: 
Yakovlev was evidently afraid of being stopped by 
the local Soviets and wished to rush past before they 
had had time to oppose him. 
284 



NARRATIVE OF MR, ROBERT WILTON 

Throughout the trip he conversed with the ex- 
Tsar on politics, endeavouring to talk him over to 
a certain point of view but the Tsar would not 
give way. This much the coachman who drove 
them could swear to, although he could not catch all 
the details of the conversation. He noticed that 
Nicholas did not "scold the Bolsheviks," but some- 
body else. 

They reached Tiumen on the 28th at 9 p.m. A 
special train was in waiting. They started west- 
ward, but had not travelled far when at a wayside 
station Yakovlev heard that Ekaterinburg would 
intercept him. What he feared had happened. The 
only hope lay in circumventing Ekaterinburg. For 
this purpose it was necessary to return, go east as 
far as Omsk-Kulomzino, and thence switch on to 
the Cheliabinsk-Ufa railway. But he was too late. 
The soviet at Ekaterinburg had wired to Omsk that 
the ex-Tsar was escaping eastward, and a cordon of 
Red guards stopped the train at Kulomzino. 
Yakovlev detached the engine and went across the 
Irtysh to Omsk, and there, with the help of his pri- 
vate telegraphist, spoke with Moscow. He was 
ordered by Sverdlov to proceed via Ekaterinburg. 
As might be expected, they were met by a strong 
force of fanaticised Red guards at the station at 
Ekaterinburg (April 3Oth). Yakovlev' s authority 
was flouted and the escort and guards that were with 
him imprisoned till he had departed empty-handed 
on his way to Moscow. The unfortunate Romanovs 

285 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

thus came into the hands that were to massacre them 
and take their belongings. 

Yakovlev had no hand in this foul conspiracy. 
He had been quite sincere and consistent in his 
efforts to bring the whole family safely to Moscow. 
There is no indication whatever, in all he said, that 
the object of this removal was to bring the Tsar to 
trial. On the contrary, the conversations with the 
Tsar, continued in the railway carriage, where, 
again, he was separated from Alexandra, gave addi- 
tional colour to the version already given by 
Nicholas himself that it was intended to restore 
the monarchy under certain conditions. 7 Speaking 
of Yakovlev, the ex-Tsar afterwards said: "Not a 
bad sort evidently sincere." Alexandra did not 
cease to bewail her misfortunes, weeping over her 
son and her husband. 

On reaching Moscow, Yakovlev must have had 
some doubts about the sincerity of the Tsik. Any- 

7 It must be borne in mind that the virtual ruler in Moscow was 
Count Mirbach (see chapter 2), the Bolshevist leaders being ap- 
pointees and vassals of Germany, though, perhaps even then, 
secretly conspiring against their masters. Further, it is known 
that many influential Russians were intriguing with Mirbach 
(May, 1918) to restore the Monarchy. This movement collapsed 
because the two "orientations" German and Entente could not 
agree. The "Germans" wanted Alexis; the "Ententes" favoured 
Michael. 

"We could have deposed the Soviet Government, which was 
thoroughly ^ hostile to us, and given help to other authorities in 
Russia, which were not^ working against us, but indeed anxious to 
cooperate with us. This would have been a success of great im- 
portance to the general conduct of the war. If some other Gov- 
ernment were established in Russia, it would almost certainly 
have been possible to come to some compromise with it over die 
Peace of Brest." 

286 



N A R R A_TJ[ VE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

how, he resigned his commissaryship and eventually 
joined the White forces, and then mysteriously dis- 
appeared. An interview with him, published in a 
Red organ at the time of his journey in charge of 
the Imperial captives, contains some very instructive 
features. It passes over in silence the attempt to 
evade Ekaterinburg and falsifies the dates of arrival 
and departure at Tiumen so that the glaring dis- 
crepancy between this and the arrival at Ekaterin- 
burg (two days instead of half a day) should not be 
noticed; ignores, in fact, all the local soviet in- 
trigues and protests, quite needlessly, that he did not 
mention politics in his conversation with Nicholas. 
Vasily Vasilievich Yakovlev had been a naval 
officer and was therefore of Russian noble blood, 
He had committed some political offence, had spent 
many years abroad in Berlin. Who were his real 
chiefs? It is not difficult to guess. 

Two other commissaries went to Tobolsk to re- 
move the remainder of the family Tatiana had 
been left in charge of the invalid and household. 
Olga, the eldest daughter, did not enjoy her 
mother's confidence in the same degree. She took 
far more interest in literature than in the practical 
affairs of life, and woulcl hide herself in a corner 
with a book or tell stories to the soldiers, utterly 
forgetting domestic trifles. Anastasia, still a child, 
and rather backward, could be left in Tatiana's care. 
Maria went with the Imperial couple because she 
was too grown-up to remain under her sister's care. 

287 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

She was a very attractive girl, and it used to be 
rather a joke among the grand duchesses to twit her 
on her "conquests" among the Komisars. 

The two successors of Yakovlev were: A sailor 
named Hohriakov and a certain Rodionov. The 
latter was afterwards identified as a former gend- 
arme officer. He used to inspect the passports at 
the German frontier, and served some time in the 
Russian Embassy at Berlin as a spy on Russian 
revolutionaries. When taxed with it, he admitted 
the impeachment. The sailor, a typical good- 
natured peasant, soon made friends with all the chil- 
dren. Rodionov, on the contrary, went but of his 
way to torment and ill-treat them. He forbade the 
grand duchesses to lock their doors at night, inform- 
ing them with a leer that he had a perfect right to 
come into their rooms whenever he liked. With 
every appearance of enjoyment, he announced that 
in Ekaterinburg they would have to observe stricter 
rules, which he himself had devised. Hohriakov 
was nominally senior to Rodionov, but the latter 
did what he pleased. 

Here must be recorded a circumstance which was 
destined to play an important part in the detection 
of the murders of Ekaterinburg. Before separating, 
it had been understood between mother and daugh- 
ters that they would take measures for safeguarding 
the jewels that had been brought with them from 
Tsarskoe, worth not less than a million gold roubles 
(100,000). A letter from the maid Demidova 
288 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

from Ekaterinburg gave the necessary indications. 
The grand duchesses were "to dispose of the medi- 
cines as had been agreed." This meant that the 
jewels had to be secreted in, the clothing in such a 
way as to escape search (Nicholas, Alexandra, and 
Maria had been "searched" very thoroughly and 
brutally). For some days the grand duchesses and 
their trusty servants worked at the task, sewing up 
the valuables in their bodices, in their hats, and even 
inside their buttons. The Empress had few if any 
valuables with her possibly because there had been 
no time to secrete them but thanks to the precau- 
tions now taken, the grand duchesses managed to 
smuggle all that was of greatest value into their 
last prison-house. Womanlike, they clung to these 
relics of former happiness, and perhaps deep down 
in their hearts slumbered some hope that the gems 
might help them to escape. 

Leaving Tobolsk by steamer on May 2oth the 
family and household reached Ekaterinburg on the 
22nd without incident. 

In handing over his prisoners to the Ekaterinburg 
Soviet, Yakovlev obtained the following written 
acknowledgment: "Russian Federal Soviet Re- 
public. Uralian Regional Council of Deputies. 
Receipt. 3oth April, 1918. I, the President of the 
Regional Uralian Council of Deputies, Beloboro- 
dov, have taken over from the member of the All- 
Russian Tsik comrade Yakovlev the interned: for- 
mer Tsar Nicholas Romanov, the former Tsaritsa 

280 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

Alexandra Feodorovna, the former Grand Duchess 
Maria Nikolaevna, and the persons accompanying 
them. All these persons are under arrest and under 
guard. The President of the Uralian Regional 
Sovdep. (Signed) Beloborodov." 



290 



CHAPTER VIII 
PLANNING THE CRIME 

Nothing had been done at Ekaterinburg to pre- 
pare for the arrival of such prisoners as the ex-Tsar 
and his family till April 2yth (i.e., two days after 
the spy Zaslavsky had denounced Yakovlev). The 
arrangements then taken consisted in requisitioning 
Ipatiev's house and putting a rough hoarding 
around it. Zaslavsky reached Ekaterinburg in com- 
pany with a Russian workman named Alexander 
Avdeiev, who had been with him at Tobolsk and 
become imbued with the Jew's tale of Yakovlev's 
alleged treachery. In return for his support and 
blind subserviency, this man received the post of 
commandant of the new imperial prison and prom- 
ises of further promotion. 

Isai Goloshchekin, the intimate friend of Yankel 
Sverdlov, took charge of the prisoners on their 
arrival. Isai played the part of a Bolshevist Pooh- 
ba, being a Komisar many times over, but above all 
he loomed largely in the local chrezvychaika* He 
supervised the removal of the prisoners from their 
railway carriage, completely ignoring Avdeiev, and 
took them away in his motor-car. On reaching the 
Ipatiev house, Goloshchekin told the imperial trio 

291 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

to descend, then pointing to the door, said: "Citi- 
zen Romanov, you may enter." In the same manner 
he let the ex-Empress and Maria pass the thresh- 
old. 

Prince Dolgoruky, who was of the party, did not 
meet with Goloshchekin's approval. "You go to 
another prison," said he, and straightway Dolgoruky 
was removed, never to be seen again. 

When, three weeks later, the other children and 
remainder of the household arrived, the same pro- 
cedure was adopted. Once more Avdeiev was 
ignored, the person in charge being Rodionov. His 
brutalities at Tobolsk had earned him distinction. 
Here he excelled himself. It wa$ raining heavily 
and the platforms were slimy with mud. He would 
not permit anyone to help the grand duchesses to 
carry their own luggage. Nagorny, one of the im- 
perial servants, was knocked over for daring to 
extend a hand to Anastasia, dragging a heavy bag. 

Nobody had permission to share the new prison 
with the Romanovs except the physically weak or 
mentally undeveloped. The only exception was Dr. 
Botkin. Those who did not enter the house went to 
other prisons, the two foreigners excepted. Their 
fate is described elsewhere. 

The family, once more reunited, had need of all 
their love and faith to endure the sufferings that 
marked this last stage of their earthly pilgrimage. 
Besides them and their physician only four servants 
were permitted to remain the chambermaid Demi- 
292 - 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

dova, the footman Trupp, the chef Haritonov, and 
the boy Leonid Sednev, attendant and playmate of 
the sick Alexis. Chemodurov, the Tsar's valet, was 
transferred to the town prison from the Ipatiev 
house three weeks after his arrival. He survived, 
but his mind was affected. 

This building stands at the corner of Vosnesensky 
prospekt and Vosnesensky pereulok (lane) facing 
a large square in which stands the church of the 
Ascension (Vosnesenia), a prominent landmark in 
the city and suburbs. It is a two-storey stone build- 
ing with a garden and outhouses behind, to which 
access is obtained through a gateway into the square. 
As the lane descends steeply from the square, the 
lower storey is a semi-basement in front, gradually 
clearing the surface of the street on the lane side. 
The lower floor was occupied by the guard ; the pris- 
oners lived upstairs in the corner rooms away from 
the stairs and entrance, which were on the gate side. 
Nicholas, Alexandra, and Alexis shared one room 
facing the square; the adjoining chamber, overlook- 
ing the lane, was occupied by the grand duchesses. 
The family could not leave these two rooms except 
for meals, which were taken in the adjoining dining- 
room. Another room, divided into two halves by 
an arch, accommodated Dr. Botkin and Chemodurov 
on one side and the servants on the other. From 
the dining-room a door led to a terrace, overlooking 
the garden. 

Around the house, a wooden hoarding reached up 

293 



THE I/AST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

to the windows of the upper floor. Soon after the 
prisoners arrived, another hoarding was put up, com- 
pletely screening the whole house up to the eaves, 
and enclosing also. the front entrance and gateway. 
There were double windows, as usual in Russian 
houses. Both panes were covered with whitewash, 
rendering it utterly impossible for the prisoners to 
-see anything outside even a crow flying. 

Sentries paced between the hoardings, inside the 
garden, and were stationed at the stairs, beside the 
lavatory, and on the terrace. Here, and at other 
convenient points, machine-guns were posted. The 
prisoners were in a trap from which there was no 
escape. The awful thing about it was the constant 
surveillance, by day and night. There was no 
privacy, not even for the girls no consideration for 
decency or modesty. The Ekaterinburg period was 
one long martyrdom for the Romanovs, growing 
worse with one short interval as the hour of their 
death approached. Their guards, at first, were Rus- 
sians, who, brutal as they were, never attained the 
fiendish ingenuity in tormenting their helpless cap- 
tives that came to be displayed by the alien guards 
and executioners of the final week. 

There had been no provision for guarding the 
house another proof that the prisoners had not 
"been intended for Ekaterinburg. After the first few 
days, a regular guard was organised from workmen 
employed at the local mills and iron works. Alex- 
ander Avdeiev received the style of "Commandant 
294 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

of the Special Purpose House" such was the name 
of the imperial prison. His assistants were Alexan- 
der Moshkin and Pavel Medvedev, both workmen 
and Russians. Avdeiev and his particular friends 
among the guards lived upstairs in the ante room 
and another chamber facing the square. They were, 
consequently, in immediate proximity to the prison- 
ers. No pen can describe what this meant. 

The men were coarse, drunken, criminal types, 
such as a revolution brings to the surface. They 
entered the prisoners' rooms whenever they thought 
fit, at all hours, prying with drunken, leering eyes 
into everything that they might be doing. Their 
mere presence was an offence; but picture the tor- 
ments of the captives to have to put up with their 
loathsome familiarities! They would sit down at 
the table when the prisoners ate, put their dirty 
hands into the plates, spit, jostle and reach in front 
of the prisoners. Their greasy elbows would be 
thrust, by accident or design, into the ex-Tsar's face. 
Alexandra was, of course, a special object of atten- 
tion. They would crowd round her chair, lolling in 
such a manner that any movement on her part 
brought her in contact with their evil smelling 
bodies. 

Prison fare of the poorest kind was provided. 
Breakfast comprised stale black bread from the day 
before, with tea no sugar. For dinner they had 
thin soup and meat, the latter of doubtful quality. 
The ex-Empress could eat nothing except macaroni, 

295 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

The table cover was a greasy oil-cloth. There 
were not knives or forks or even plates enough to go 
round. All ate with wooden spoons out of one com- 
mon dish. By the Emperor's wish the servants sat 
at table with the family. 

The guards sang revolutionary songs devised to 
hurt and shock the feelings of the prisoners, con- 
taining foul words such as no man should dare to 
utter in the presence of innocent girls, but the revo- 
lutionary warriors delighted in wounding the 
modesty of the grand duchesses in this and in other 
still more repulsive ways, by filthy scribbling and 
drawings on the walls and by crowding round the 
lavatory there was only one for the prisoners and 
the warders. They went reeling about the house, 
smoking cigarettes, unkempt, dishevelled, shameless, 
inspiring terror and loathing. They did not scruple 
to help themselves liberally to the clothes and other 
property of the prisoners whenever anything came 
within their reach. 

Only a quarter of an hour was allowed to the 
prisoners in the open air. No physical work was 
permitted. The ex-Tsar felt this privation very 
much. Alexandra suffered terribly. Her son re- 
mained an invalid, unable to walk. The family 
seemed to be overwhelmed by grief. But their faith 
in God and their love for each other illuminated the 
gloom of this awful prison. Above the ribald songs 
of their tormentors might be heard the chanting of 
the Song of Cherubim, the Russian hymn of praise. 
296 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

Now we come to the final phase that preceded 
the murder. It is full of significance. Every step 
taken by the ocult powers of the Ekaterinburg 
chrezvychaika, which, it must be remembered, did 
nothing without orders from the central institutions 
in Moscow Sverdlov being in direct communica- 
tion with Goloshchekin falls into its natural 
appointed place as part of the cruel fate reserved 
for the Romanov family. 

The monsters who had been placed in charge of 
the prisoners as if on purpose to torment them 
through the agency of Russians did not fulfil their 
mission to the end. Even they became humanised 
by the spectacle of the sufferings and the patience 
and humility of their former sovereigns not all of 
them, of course, but certainly a majority, including 
their commandant, Avdeiev. 

One of these men afterwards related how the 
change came over him. He had begun with hatred 
in his heart. The Tsar was the head of the capital- 
istic system, the greatest capitalist of them all. To 
destroy him was to destroy capitalism itself the 
Social-Democratic programme had made it all so 
plain to him. He watched the crowned enemy of 
mankind, the "drinker of the people's blood/' as he 
walked about the garden, and listened to him ex- 
changing simple, homely words with the other 
warders. His notions began to waver. This was 
not a bad man; he was so human, so kindly, just a 
man like other men, and even better. Then the idea 

297 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

occurred to him that it was wrong to desire his 
death. What harm could he do? Why not let him 
escape! Yes, it would be much better if he went 
away, and the children, too, they had done no harm, 
and the Tsaritsa also. She was proud. Not simple 
and homely, like the Tsar; but let her also go. If 
she had done harm, she had also suffered. 

This man repented of the evil he and his fellows 
were doing. He would sing no more lewd songs, 
and tried to dissuade the others. Rapidly the whole 
of the guard workmen from the Lokalov and 
Syssert companies' plants were becoming disaf- 
fected. 

Towards the end of June a secret emissary of one 
of the Monarchist organisations called upon the 
Bishop of Ekaterinburg and tried to get into com- 
munication with the Imperial prisoners through the 
clergy; but this proved to be impossible. He then 
proposed that, at all events, some food and comforts 
should be sent to the prison-house. Dr. Derevenko, 
who had been permitted to remain in the city, gave 
his assistance at this juncture. By some means he 
was in touch with the warders. Avdeiev agreed to 
take in milk and other provisions if they reached the 
house without attracting notice. The nuns of the 
monastery thereupon sent two novices, dressed in 
lay garments, to the house, with all manner of dairy 
produce. Avdeiev received them himself. These 
journeys became frequent* The poor captives felt 
comforted, morally and physically. They had not 
298 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT W 1 !L T O KT 

been forgotten, and the men who had been so ter- 
rible were so much kinder. Hope once more blos- 
somed. The Grand Duchesses looked bright and 
cheerful, "as if ready to smile," says a person who 
saw them at this time. The nuns, emboldened by 
Avdeiev's attitude, brought even some tobacco for 
the ex-Tsar. Avdeiev referred to him as "The 
Emperor." 

In the beginning of July some suspicions must 
have arisen among the Jewish camarilla, or perhaps 
Moscow had received "information." As the time 
was getting ripe for "action/' no doubt steps had 
been taken to verify the arrangements, and the dis- 
covery of disaffection among the Russian guards 
followed. Avdeiev was at once dismissed, the Rus- 
sian guards moved out of the house into premises 
on the opposite side of the lane, and, with one ex- 
ception, were forbidden to come into the house. 
This exception was Pavel Medvedev. He retained 
his post as chief warder. The Russian guard contin- 
ued to provide sentries for the outside posts only. 
They could do no harm there, and served to throw 
dust in the eyes of the public. 

All these changes were carried out by the new 
commandant, a person with whom the reader is 
already acquainted, namely, Yankel Yurovsky, the 
son of a Jew convict, himself a mystery man, hav- 
ing obtained money in Germany for unexplained 
"services," and presently one of the chiefs of the 
local chrezvychaika. Yankel brought with him a 

299 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

squad of ten "Letts" as the Russians called them 
to mount guard inside the prison-house and take 
charge of the machine-gun posts. These men were 
the hired assassins of the red okhrana. They were 
not Letts but Magyars, some of them really Mag- 
yarised Germans, It must be remembered that 
Siberia was Sovietised from the east, not by Rus- 
sians in the first place, but by the soldiers of 
Wilhelm and his Austrian henchmen, who acted 
under orders from the two Kaisers. These so-called 
Letts had entered the service of the chrezvychaika 
after helping to carry out the German design, to 
undermine Russia. 

Innumerable evidences prove that the newcomers 
are correctly classified. The Russian guards could 
tell by their speech that they were foreigners. To 
designate them as Letts was quite natural because 
the Letts formed the backbone and bulk of the for- 
eign mercenaries of Sovietdom and therefore any 
non-Russian Red-guard became a "Lett." But, as 
a matter of fact, the Magyars resemble Letts in 
their appearance and accent. Yurovsky spoke to 
them in a foreign language. Besides Russian and 
Yiddish he knew only German. Among the papers 
found afterwards in the prison-house was an un- 
finished letter to his "Tereschen" from one of the 
"Letts." It was in Magyar, but, according to the 
findings of experts, the writer was evidently a 
German. He used capital letters for substantives, 
often employed Gothic characters and made glaring 
300 



NARRATIVE OF MR, ROBERT WILTON 

blunders in grammar, such as no Magyar would 
make. 

Another of the "Letts" left a still more eloquent 
evidence of his nationality. This man had stood 
on guard on the terrace communicating with the 
dining-room and overlooking the garden a very 
important post with a machine-gun capable of 
sweeping the interior of the house and all the ap- 
proaches from the garden side. On the very day 
before the murder, this man wrote in pencil on the 
wall of the house a record of his service as fol- 
lows : 

Andras Verhas 

Orsegen 1918 VII/i^ 

Alongside this inscription he had tried to write the 
Russian equivalent, but could not spell out the word 
"karaul" (guard duty), in Magyar orsegen* Scraps 
of paper on which other "Letts" had practised writ- 
ing Russian words were also found. 

We are able to fix the date approximately when 
the German-Magyar guard and Yurovsky took pos- 
session. The lay sisters bringing their usual offer- 
ings met with a strange reception on or about July 
loth about a week before the murder. Avdeiev did 
not come out to them. Some of the Russian guards, 
whom they knew, were standing near the door, look- 
ing very much confused, and at first not disposed 
to take charge of the gifts. Finally, however, they 
did so. The sisters then walked away. Presently 
the soldiers came running after them. "Please will 

301 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

you come back," they said. The nuns returned. 
An individual whom they afterwards identified as 
Yurovsky, inquired by whose authority they had 
brought the provisions. "Avdeiev and Derevenko," 
was the truthful reply. "O, they are both in it, are 
they/ 5 he remarked ominously. He nevertheless 
permitted them to come again, "but with milk" 
only." 

This last week of their life must have been the 
most dreadful one of all for the Romanovs. Brutal 
and bestial as the Russians had been in the early 
part of their wardenship, they were preferable, even 
at their worst, to the silent relentless torture applied 
by Yurovsky, who also was a drunkard. He and 
his band watched them literally like a cat watches 
a mouse. He was polite to the Tsar and spoke 
softly to Alexis ; he even permitted a priest to come 
and say prayers, which comforted Alexandra and 
the poor captives unspeakably; yet there is evidence 
that never had they looked so utterly, hopelessly 
wretched as under the tutelage of the Jew. This 
man's brothers and sisters describe him as a "cruel 
tyrant who would not hesitate at anything to attain 
his ends." 

The man and his executioners only waited for the 
signal that was to come from Yankel Sverdlov. 
Everything was ready for the murder. The victims 
had been adequately tortured. Goloshchekin, the 
Jew Sadist, licked his lips in pleasurable anticipa- 
tion. 

302 



CHAPTER IX 
CALVARY 

Yankel Yurovsky left the prison-house on sev- 
eral occasions. Each absence lasted many hours. 
He was surveying the environs of the city for a con- 
venient place to dispose of the bodies of his victims. 
His escort consisted of one or two of the "Letts" 
mounted on horseback. Several witnesses deposed 
to meeting him and his bodyguard in the woods dur- 
ing the week that preceded the murder. They were 
seen near the very spot where the remains were 
afterwards destroyed. 

Whenever he had to absent himself, Yurovsky 
placed Medvedev in charge. Besides the latter, 
there was another non "Lett" in the house, a certain 
Nikulin, respecting whom it is known that he came 
with Yurovsky from the Chrezvychaika. He en- 
joyed Yurovsky' s entire confidence, and was prob- 
ably there to keep an eye on Medvedev. 

On Monday, July 15th, the lay sisters came as 
usual in the morning with milk for the Imperial 
family- Yankel took it himself, and graciously 
informed them that on the morrow they might 
bring half-a-hundred eggs* This they did gladly, 
thinking that the poor captives would enjoy a 

303 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

hearty meal, all unsuspicious of the cynical inten- 
tion that had prompted Yurovsky's generosity* 
(These eggs were boiled by Haritonov, but they 
were eaten, not in Ipatiev's house, but in the 
woods.) 

On the Tuesday morning, a whole nine days be- 
fore the arrival of the Czechs, Yurovsky made his 
final arrangements for the murder of the family. 
The boy Leonid Sednev was removed early in the 
day to Popov's house across the lane, whither the 
Russian guards had been transferred. There he 
was seen sitting on the window-sill and crying 
bitterly, whether because he was dull without his 
play-fellow or had some inkling of his fate is not 
known. The boy disappeared, never to be seen 
again. Later this gave rise to rumours that Yurov- 
sky had been told to reserve him for future use, 
perhaps to impersonate his little friend the Tsare- 
vitch in short, to act the part of a False Dmitri. 

Two important visitors came to the prison-house 
during the day namely, the arch-inquisitor, Isai 
Goloshchekin, and his humble servant, the Russian 
workman Beloborodov, president of the regional 
Soviet. They took Yurovsky away in their auto- 
mobile to some place unspecified, presumably to a 
meeting of the Soviet Presidium (Board). Yurov- 
sky returned some hours later, towards evening. 

At seven p.m. Yurovsky gave orders to Medvedev 
to collect all the revolvers of the outer guard. Med- 
vedev complied. He brought twelve Nagans (the 
304 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT W* I L T O K 

Nagan is the Russian service revolver) to the com* 
mandant's room and handed them to Yurovsky. 
The latter then confided to him the plan to shoot 
the whole "Tsarian family" that night. He (Med- 
vedev) would have to warn the Russian guards 
"later," when he got word to do so. Meanwhile he 
must be silent* At nightfall (about 10:30 p.m, in 
these latitudes in summer time) Medvedev "told 
the Russians." The murderers were to be the 
"Letts." 

There is no record of any open protests on the 
part of these men, who had been "disgraced" only 
a few days ago for their "friendliness" to the "arch- 
capitalist" and "drinker of blood." There is noth- 
ing to be surprised at. Beloborodov had been ren- 
dered "amenable," because he had "stolen"; here 
the crimes laid to these men's charge was not only 
pilfering but "counter-revolution." They knew 
and we may be sure they were made to feel that 
the Chrezvychaika would know how to deal with 
them if they showed truculence. Having "warned" 
the Russians, Medvedev returned to the command- 
ant. 

Two other strangers now made their appearance. 
One of them was Peter Ermakov, "military korn- 
isar" of the Verkh-Isetsk iron- works; the other, his 
assistant, a sailor named Vaganov. Both these men 
had distinguished themselves by their ferocity. 
They were professional assassins, "working" for the 
Red inquisition out of sheer blood-lust. But there 

305 



T. HE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

was another reason for inviting these butchers to the 
approaching feast of blood. They were both to 
play a leading part in the "disposal" of the bodies. 
Both were friends of Yurovsky. With him they 
had already, some days earlier, studied and arranged 
the whole grisly performance. 

When midnight by solar time had gone some 
minutes, Yurovsky went to the Imperial chambers. 
The family slept. He woke them up, and told them 
that there were urgent reasons why they should be 
at once removed; that there was trouble in the city 
which might endanger their lives, and that they 
must dress quickly and come downstairs. All rose, 
washed, and dressed themselves!, the grand duchesses 
donning their jewel-stuffed garments. Each mem- 
ber of the family and their followers put on his or 
her going-out clothes and headgear. The Empress 
wore her overcoat. Some of the prisoners even took 
their pillows for comfort's sake or because they 
had precious possessions secreted within. 

Yurovsky led the way downstairs ; the family and 
suite followed. Alexis could not walk. His father 
carried him In his arms. Dr. Eugene Sergeievich 
Botkin came directly after the family, and after him 
came the chamber-maid Demidova, the cook Hari- 
tonov, and the footman Trupp. 

The procession descended by the back stairs lead- 
ing from the upper to the ground floor. The door 
from the lower landing (by the kitchen) to the 
rooms of the ground floor had been boarded up to 
306 




fVospelct 
Plan of the Upper Floor 




Prospakt 

Plan of the Lower Floor 



Diagram of the 
Property 




PLAN OF HPATXEV'S HOVSB 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

prevent direct communication between their former 
occupants the Russian guards and the prisoners. 
One had to go into the yard and then enter the 
lower floor by a separate doorway. This was the 
route followed by Yurovsky and his victims. The 
motor-lorry that had come for the bodies waited 
outside the gate of this very court-yard, and in the 
dim light of the northern midnight the prisoners 
could probably see the vehicle and must have felt 
reassured, even if any suspicion of their imminent 
end had assailed their minds. 

Still following Yurovsky, they traversed all the 
rooms of the lower floor, now tenanted only by 
"Letts," and came at last to the small lobby adjoin- 
ing the front entrance on the lane (pereulok) side. 
This lobby was lighted by a small window, heavily 
grated, looking into the garden. Outside stood a 
sentry with a machine-gun. He could see every- 
thing that went on inside, especially when the in- 
terior was lit up for the execution. This man's 
account played an important part in assembling and 
corroborating the various depositions dealing with 
the murder. Opposite the window, a door leads 
into a small chamber (i8x 16 ft.) with a heavily 
grilled double window facing the lane. Here also 
stood sentries outside, able to see what was going 
on within. This chamber is partly basement. The 
guards had used it as a dormitory. A locked door 
led into a basement chamber situated immediately 
tinder the Tsar's prison-room. This corner base- 
308 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

ment was a store-room where some of the Imperial 
belongings had been deposited and pilfered. 
There was no escape in that direction. Besides, 
there were double barriers outside, intercepting 
sight and sound. 

The family and their followers were ushered into 
the semi-basement chamber and told to wait. They 
were not suspicious. It did not occur to them that 
they were in a trap. As the room was bare of fur- 
niture, the Tsar asked to have some chairs brought. 
He wished the suffering Empress to rest and the sick 
boy to sit down. Three chairs were brought in. 
One was passed to Alexandra, who had been leaning 
against the wall facing the lobby. Nicholas seated 
Alexis where he had been standing, in the middle of 
the room, and sat down beside him. A pillow was 
placed behind Alexandra. Two other pillows re- 
mained in Demidova's arms. The Tsar and the 
Tsarevich kept their caps on, as if expecting any 
moment to go out. They thought the vehicles that 
were to convey them away had not arrived, the 
lorry being there to take the luggage. On the Em- 
press's right stood three of her daughters, on her 
left the other daughter and Demidova. 

Almost immediately, the door into the lobby was 
obstructed by Yurovsky, his friends and the 
"Letts." There were Nikulin, Ermakov, Vaganov, 
Medvedev and seven "Letts" rthe remaining three 
being on guard duty. There were twelve murderers. 
Each carried a revolver. The rifles of the "Lett" 

309 



THE XAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

guard were stacked in the adjoining room (where 
they lived). 

Yurovsky advanced into the death-chamber and 
addressed the Tsar. There are many versions of 
this utterance. According to the most trustworthy 
one he said: "Your relatives have tried to save you. 
But it could not be managed by them, and so we 
ourselves are compelled to shoot you." 

The twelve revolvers volleyed instantly, and all 
the prisoners fell to the ground. Death had been in- 
stantaneous in the case of the parents and three of 
the children, and of Dr. Botkin and two servants. 
Alexis remained alive in spite of his wounds, and 
moaned and struggled in his agony. Yurovsky fin- 
ished him with his Colt. One of the girls pre- 
sumably the youngest grand duchess, Anastasia 
rolled about and screamed, and, when one of the 
murderers approached, fought desperately with him 
till he killed her. It seems as if the murderers had 
not been able to aim straight at the boy and the girl. 
Even their callous hearts had wavered. The maid- 
servant lived the longest. Perhaps the pillows were 
in the way. She was not touched by the first volley, 
and ran about screaming till some of the "Letts/* 
seizing their rifles, bayoneted her to death. She was 
covered with stabs?> Poor Demidova died the vic- 
tim of a misunderstanding; the Reds thought that 
she was a maid-of-honour and therefore a bour- 
geoise, whereas she was a simple peasant girl. 

"j Within a few minutes of their entering the room* 

''" 3* 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

all was over. No time was to be lost in removing 
traces of the crime. The floors and walls had to 
be washed quickly and the bodies sent away./ Day- 
light would soon appear. There was a long way 
to go through the city. Hardened and ruthless, 
secure in the impunity of murder under the Soviet 
system, Yurovsky and his associates were none the 
less hurrying desperately. They knew that the 
arrangements for "executing" the Romanovs could 
not be regarded as a trial, nor would the people ap- 
prove the deed. And so like common murderers, 
they were desperately anxious to get rid of the 
corpses. Here Ermakov and Vaganov became in- 
valuable. 

The evidence of three eye-witnesses is given be- 
low, namely of Medvedev, one of the actual 
murderers, of Yakimov, who was present at the 
shooting, and of a Red Guard named Proskuriakov, 
who helped to remove traces of the murder. The 
necessary comments of the investigating magistrate 
accompany the depositions so that the reader is able 
to study them in their true perspective. 

Medvedev told his wife all about it directly after 
the murder. He did not conceal the fact that he 
himself had fired his revolver at the Romanovs. He 
even emphasised his active complicity, boasting that 
he was the only Russian "workman 7 * who had taken 
part in the shooting, and that all the others, besides 
Yurovsky and his assistants, were "not ours" z.<?., 
foreigners. Medvedev was caught at Perm while 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

trying to blow up the bridge over the Kama to cover 
the retreat of the Red Army. He confirmed all the 
statements that he had made to his wife except in 
one particular : he denied having stated that he had 
himself done the shooting. It is a customary reser- 
vation in the case of all who take part in a joint 
and prearranged murder. The witness testifies to 
the fact of the murder and names the actual mur- 
derers, but persists in declaring that he himself did 
not do the killing, although he admitted to holding 
a revolver in his hand at the time of the shooting. 
To divert the evidence from himself he had to 
invent an alibi. Hear what he says in his signed 
deposition : 

"Yurovsky sent me out, saying, "Go into the 
street; see if there is anyone about and if the shots 
can be heard/ I went out into the yard surrounded 
by the big fence" (he means the space between the 
outside wall and the hoardings), "and, before I 
had time to reach the street, heard the sound of the 
firing. I returned at once inside the house only 
two or three minutes had passed and, entering the 
room where the shooting had been carried out, I 
saw that all the members of the Tsar's family the 
Tsar, the Tsaritsa, the four daughters, and the Nas- 
lednik (heir), were already lying on the floor with 
numerous wounds on their bodies, and the blood 
was flowing in torrents. The doctor, maid, and two 
men-servants had also been killed. When I 
appeared the Naslednik was still alive, groaning. 
312 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

Yurovsky went up to him and fired two or three 
times point-blank into him. The Naslednik was 
still. The picture of the murder, the smell and 
sight of the blood, caused me to feel sick. . . .*' 

Anatoly Yakimov, the second witness, is the man 
who had become "converted" after remaining a few 
weeks with the Tsar. He had been a sergeant of 
the Russian Guard, and remained so after the Rus- 
sians had been relegated to the outer posts. It was, 
his business to place the sentries and see that they 
remained at their posts. As the Russian sentries 
could see into the room where the murdering was to 
be done, it had not been possible to keep them in 
ignorance to the end, as explained above. Yaki- 
mov "sympathised" with the prisoners, but he did 
not dare to give effect to these feelings. There is 
good reason to believe that he was present at the 
murder. Possibly Yurovsky had insisted upon his 
being inside the house at the time, in order to impli- 
cate him in the deed. His alibi bears a family 
likeness to Medvedev's. Like him, he had a full, 
Circumstantial knowledge of the killing that cor- 
roborates Medvedev in every essential point, and 
that could not have come to him unless he had been 
actually present. He explains that it was all told 
to him by the sentries two men who stood outside 
the death-chamber window and two others who 
were in the courtyard when the bodies were re- 
moved. 

He also unburdened himself to his family. Ao 

313 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

cording to his own account, he heard of the murder 
at four o'clock in the morning, after which he could 
not sleep, but "just sat and shivered/' as he says. 
At eight o'clock he went to his sister, a woman of 
some education, who was married to Agaf onov, an of- 
ficial of the Commissariat of Justice. Here is what 
his sister deposes: "He came in without saying a 
word, looking dreadfully upset and exhausted. I 
noticed it at once and asked him: 'What is the mat- 
ter with you?' He requested me to close the door, 
sat down and kept silent, his face convulsed with 
terror and his body trembling violently. I again 
asked him: 'What ails you?' I thought that some 
great misfortune had overtaken him. He still main- 
tained an obstinate silence, although it evidently 
caused him suffering. The thought occurred to me : 
'Maybe they have killed Nicholas/ I asked him if 
it was so. My brother answered something like: 
'It is all over/ and in reply to my further questions 
he said that all had been killed Le., the Tsar him- 
self and all his family and all who had been with 
them excepting their little scullion. I do not recall 
my asking him if he had taken part in the murder, 
but I remember his saying that he had seen the 
spectacle of the murder with his own eyes. He 
related how this sight had so shaken, him that he 
could not hold out, and every now and then had 
gone out of the house into the open air, adding that 
his comrades in the guard had upbraided him for it, 
suspecting him of feeling repentance or pity. . . . 
3H 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

I then understood him to mean that he had been 
himself in the room or so near that he could see 
the actual murder with his own eyes/' 

Here are two corroborative depositions of inter- 
est. When Yakimov had left his sister, she imme- 
diately ran out to her husband's office. An 
investigating magistrate named Tomashevsky was 
in the next room, and saw her standing, weeping, 
and whispering to her husband. When she had 
gone, Agafonov came and told this same story in 
confidence to Tomashevsky. Agafonov saw Yaki- 
mov later in the day, and relates what transpired : 
"Yakimov came to take leave. [He was going to 
the front.] I was struck by his appearance: the 
face pinched, the pupils distended, the lower lip 
quivering when he spoke. The mere sight of him 
convinced me that all that my wife had said was 
true. Clearly, Anatoly had passed through some 
terrible experience during the night. ... I only 
asked him: 'How are things?' He replied, It is all 
over* ** (vsi yonckeno}. 

Philip Proskuriakov a youngster, the type of 
the good-natured peasant deposed that he had 
entered the guard at Ipatiev's house principally be- 
cause he was curious to have a look at the Tsar; 
not because he felt hostile to him; indeed, if he 
disliked anybody it was the Jews. His narrative 
impressed the investigating magistrate by its evi- 
dent sincerity. He did not see the actual murder, 
having spent the evening with some friends and 

315 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

taken copious draughts of "denaturat" (methylated 
spirits, which were in vogue since the prohibition of 
vodka) and as a result of these libations, Medvedev 
had placed him under arrest. He was locked up in 
the bath-house and sleeping off his "spree" when 
Medvedev came to wake him and order him to go 
into the house. 

The bodies had been taken out just before he 
reached the death-chamber. Everything that hap- 
pened in the house immediately afterwards came 
under his personal observation. He washed the 
blood off the floor and the walls. That he positively 
admits. He discussed the details of the murder 
with Andrei Strekotin, one of the guards, who en- 
joyed Medvedev' s friendship and had been selected 
by him to stand at the lower-floor machine-gun post 
during the "execution." This same Strekotin also 
related his observations to one of his brother-guards 
named Letemin, arrested later and found to be in 
possession of a whole collection of valuables belong- 
ing to the family and Alexis's spaniel Joy (after- 
wards brought to England). Letemin's version 
agreed with Proskuriakov's rendering of the Streko- 
tin eye-witness account. What is still more impor- 
tant, Proskuriakov heard also Medvedev relate the 
story of the killing. 

Medvedev told it to all the guards who with 

Proskuriakov were washing the floor: "Pgsaka 

(Pavel i.e., Medvedev) himself related that he 

had loosed off two or three bullets at the Gosukar 

316 



NARRATIVE OF MR* ROBERT WILTON 

(the Lord i.e., the Tsar) and at other persons. 
... I am telling the honest truth. He did not say 
anything at all about his not having fired himself 
on account of being sent outside to listen to the 
shots. . . . That is a lie!" 

One pathetic incident escaped the notice of all 
these witnesses. The Grand Duchess Anastasia 
took with her a King Charles spaniel, carrying it in 
her arms into the death room. The corpse of little 
Jemmy was found above a heap of cinders all 
that remained of the family that had loved her and 
shared with her their meagre fare. The murderers 
had knocked the faithful friend on the head and 
thrown the body down the iron-pit without trou- 
bling to burn it. Even in her death the little dog 
watched over them, and her mangled remains, still 
recognizable, brought final unmistakable proof of 
the end of the family. 



317 



CHAPTER X 
"WITHOUT TRACE" 

There has probably not been another instance in 
the whole history of crime of precautions to escape 
detection half so elaborate as in the Romanov mur- 
der case. All sorts of subterfuges have been tried 
by lesser criminals with more or less success. Here 
every ruse was combined. The murderers carried 
out the following comprehensive programme: (i) 
They gave out a false announcement of the "execu- 
tion"; (2) they destroyed the bodies; (3) they 
invented a mock funeral; and (4) they staged a 
mock trial. The thoroughness of their methods 
reminds one of their masters, the Germans. It is a 
case of "spurlos" However, in this, as in the other 
instance, detection followed. The criminal always 
gives himself away. The very complexity of the 
Soviet c "precautions" proved their undoing. 

In vain they drew innumerable herrings of their 
own colour over the trail, suborning false witnesses 
to give misleading information about the where- 
abouts of the bodies, announcing officially that the 
family had been removed to a "safe place," etc. 
Sokolov has run them into the open. 

The murder accomplished, all the bodies were 

318 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

carried into the courtyard and placed on the waiting 
lorry. The corpses were not subjected to a thor- 
ough search as we shall see because Yurovsky 
was anxious to get away from the city before day- 
break. They were rolled up in old coats and 
covered with mats to conceal the "cargo" from pry- 
ing eyes. Yankel Yurovsky, Ermakov, and Vaga- 
nov went with them. 

As soon as they had gone, Medvedev summoned 
the Russians to "wash up.' 3 They had not been 
trusted to do the other work, and Yankel had even 
deprived them of their revolvers the "Letts" had 
their own perhaps because he did not feel quite 
sure how they might behave during the murder. 
Even now, Medvedev, his henchman, called up the 
Syssert workmen his own particular friends to 
remove the tell-tale traces of the crime. They 
washed and swabbed the floor and the walls in the 
death-chamber and in the other rooms through 
which the bodies had been borne. (So much blood 
had flowed that the marks of the red-stained swab 
were distinctly visible a year later when I visited 
Ipatiev's house, and experts found unmistakable 
evidence of its being human blood.) The stones in 
the courtyard were also scoured. 

Meanwhile the lorry, with its tragic burden, was 
making its way to the appointed place in the woods, 
a remote corner of some disused iron mines, once 
the property of Countess Nadezhda Alexeievna 
Stenbok-Fermor and now of the Verkh-Isetsky 

319 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

Works. This place is situated northeast of the 
Perm and Ural railway lines, about 11 miles out 
of the city, near the forest road leading to the vil- 
lage of Koptiaki. 

Ermakov (military komisar for the district) 
placed a cordon of Red Guards all round the wood. 
During that and the two following days and nights 
all passage through it was stopped. As will be seen 
later, this "precaution" defeated its purpose. 

Let us return for a few days to Ekaterinburg. 
Yankel Yurovsky had reappeared in the death- 
house in the morning of July lyth. None of the Rus- 
sian guards knew where he had been. Medvedev 
had heard vaguely that he had "gone to the woods." 
At the same time there appeared the reprieved thief 
Beloborodov and his master, Isai Goloshchekin. 

The movables belonging to the murdered family 
went to satisfy their rapacious instincts. Some of 
the witnesses describe tables laden with precious 
stones, jewellry, and all sorts of other articles scat- 
tered about the Commandant's room. Everything 
had been ransacked, and what was <not found to be 
worth keeping was thrown away or destroyed in the 
fireplaces, which were blazing despite the summer 
heat. 

Yurovsky and Goloshchekin travelled by motor- 
car to the woods on the lyth, l8th, and iQth, re- 
maining for many hours in fact whole days at 
the iron pits. But all this time the sentries were on 
duty outside the death-house as if nothing had hap- 
320 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 




NEW ENVIRONS OF EKATERINBURG 

SHOWING ROAD BY WHICH THE BODIES OF MEMBERS OF THE IM- 
PERIAL FAMILY WERE CARRIED, AND THE PIT WHERE THE ASHES 
WERE BURIED. 

DISTANCES; EKATERINBURG, n MILES, PIT TO KOPTIAKI, 3 MILES. 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

pened, so that the people should suspect nothing. 
They were removed only on the fourth day, when 
the cordon around the wood was also raised. 

Only then (on July 2oth) was the announcement 
made at Red meetings and in official proclamations 
that "Nicholas the Sanguinary" had been executed. 
The news was simultaneously transmitted by the 
wireless stations of the Bolshevist Government, and 
appeared in The London Times of July 22, 1918, 
in the following form: 

"At the first session of the Central Executive 
Committee elected by the Fifth Congress of the 
Councils a message was made public, received by 
direct wire from the Ural Regional Council, con- 
cerning the shooting of the ex-Tsar, Nicholas 
Romanov. 

"Recently Ekaterinburg, the capital of the Red 
Ural, was seriously threatened by the approach of 
the Czecho-Slovak bands. At the same time a 
counter-revolutionary conspiracy was discovered, 
having for its object the wresting of the tyrant from 
the hands of the Council's authority by armed 
force. In view of this fact, the Presidium of the 
Ural Regional Council decided to shoot the ex-Tsar, 
Nicholas Romanov. This decision was carried out 
on July 16. 

"The wife and son of Romanov have been sent 
to a place of security. Documents concerning the 
322 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

conspiracy which were discovered have been for- 
warded to Moscow by a special messenger. 

"It had been recently decided to bring the ex- 
Tsar before a tribunal, to be tried for his crimes 
against the people, and only later occurrences led 
to delay in adopting this course. The Presidency 
of the Central Executive Committee, after having 
discussed the circumstances which compelled the 
Ural Regional Council to take the decision to shoot 
Nicholas Romanov, decided as follows: The Rus- 
sian Central Executive Committee, in the persons of 
the Presidium, accept the decision of the Ural 
Regional Council as being regular. 

"The Central Executive Committee has now at 
its disposal extremely important material concern- 
ing the Nicholas Romanov affair; his own diaries 
which he kept almost to the last days; the diaries 
of his wife and children; his correspondence, 
amongst which are letters by Gregory Razputin to 
Romanov and his family. All these materials will 
be examined and published in the near future/* 

Every word of this official statement is impor- 
tant, for every phrase contains a lie, and every lie 
shows up in more glaring colours the diabolical 
nature of the plot hatched and carried out by Yan- 
kel Sverdlov and his tools and accomplices. I take 
the falsehoods seriatim: (i) The message made 
public at the Tsik as coming from the Ural sovdep 
was in reality concocted by Sverdlov; (2) the 

323 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

Czechs entered Ekaterinburg on the 25th, nine days 
after the "execution," and there was no armed plot; 
(3) the Presidium of the Ural sovdep did not "de- 
cide" to shoot the ex-Tsar, for that "decision" was 
dictated from Moscow; (4) the "wife and son" 
were not sent to a "place of security," but were 
basely murdered; (5) no "later occurrences" super- 
vened that could by any stress of the imagination 
be construed into a justification for not bringing 
the ex-Tsar before a tribunal, even supposing there 
had ever been any real intention to do so (as a 
matter of fact, this story of a "tribunal" was in- 
vented; (6) the Imperial correspondence taken 
with other "loot" from the murdered Family has 
not been published to this day. 8 

"Up to date (August, 1920), the only information that has 
reached the world respecting the Imperial family's private papers, 
removed to Moscow after their death, is contained in three short 
telegrams published in The London Times of August x6, August 
28, and September 28, 19x8. 

The first gives an extract of the Tsar's diary for March 2/15, 
the day of his abdication at Pskov: "General Ruzsky came this 
morning and read to me a long conversation which he had had on 
the telephone with Rodzianko, according to which the situation at 
Petrograd is such that a Cabinet of members of the Duma will 
be unable to do anything because against it are fighting the So- 
cialist Parties in the shape of workmen's committees. My abdica- 
tion is necessary. Ruzsky has transmitted this conversation to 
General Headquarters, and Alexeiev passed it on to all the Com" 
manders-in-Chiefs. At 12.30 carne answers from all, the sense of 
which is that, to save Russia and keep the Army at the front 
quiet, I must make up my mind to this step. I have consented. 
From G. H. Q. they have sent a draft of a manifesto. In the 
evening arrived from Petrograd Guchkov and Shulgin, with whom 
I had a long talk, and handed them the signed manifesto as agreed 
(i.f. f renouncing the Tsarevich's rights as well- the Tsar's own 
decision). At one o'clock in the morning left Pskov with a heavy 
feeling, due to all I have lived through. Am surrounded by treach- 
ery, cowardice, and deceit." 

The second reproduces a letter dated January 14, 19x6, from 

324 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT -WILTON 

Here is a translation of the official announcement 
as it was made to the people of Ekaterinburg: 

DECISION OF THE PRESIDIUM OF THE REGIONAL 
SOVIET OF WORKMEN'S, PEASANTS' AND RED- 
GUARDS' DEPUTIES OF THE URAL. 

"In view of the fact that Czecho-Slovak bands 
are threatening the Red capital of the Urals* 
Ekaterinburg; in view also of the fact that the 
crowned hangman (palach) may escape the people's 
assizes (a Whiteguard plot to capture the whole 
Romanov family has been discovered), the Presidi- 
um of the Regional Soviet in fulfilment of the 
will of the revolution has decided (fiostanovil) that 
the former Tsar Nicholas Romanov, guilty before 
the people of innumerable sanguinary crimes, shall 
be shot. 

"On the night of the i6th to the lyth of July, 
the decision (postanovlenie) of the Regional Soviet 
was carried into execution. 

the Empress Maria to "Niki," complaining of Witte's delay in sum- 
moning the Duma, bids the Tsar be strong, congratulating him on 
his "new spirit." On April 5 (at Tsarskoe) the Tsar in his diary 
speaks of preparations to go to England, and says that news of this 
proposal was communicated to him by Prince Lvov and Kerensky. 

The third merely enumerates the other documents seized by the 
Soviet: "The diaries of the Empress and her daughters, notes 
by the Tsarevich, over 5,000 letters of the correspondence of the 
Tsar with his wife, with the Kaiser and other Sovereigns, with 
Rajspulin with divers official personages, also with his father Alex- 
ander III, between 1877 and 1894." 

Lastly, the Manchester Guardian (of July t, 1920) published 
from its Moscow correspondent a summary of Alexandra's letters 
to Nicholas II., copies of which (the originals having disappeared) 
had been secretly lent to him by a member of the Soviet Govern- 
ment. The extracts quoted by nim do not shed any new light on 
her life and character. 

32? 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

"The family of Romanov has been transferred 
from Ekaterinburg to another and safer place. 

"The Presidium of the Reg. Soviet of W., P., and 
R. Dep. of the Ural. 

DECISION OF THE PRESIDIUM OF THE ALL-RUSSIAN 
CENTR. Ex. COM. OF i8TH JULY A.C. 
"The All-Russian Centr. Ex. Com. of Soviets of 

W., P., R. and Cossack Deputies in the person of 

its Presidium approves the action of the Presidium 

of the Reg. Sov. of the Ural. 

"The President of the Tsik, Y. Sverdlov." 

The discrepancies between the Moscow and the 
Ekaterinburg announcements are interesting and 
significant, but they need not fyfc discussed at this 
stage. I would call attention only to the date of 
the Tsik's "decision" and to the fact that it was 
kept secret for two days after its ostensible issue. 
As a matter of fact the whole murder had been 
directed from Moscow, and even the text of the 
"announcement" had been previously approved by 
Sverdlov, so it is not surprising that Beloborodov 
disregarded dates. But the real reason was that 
the Red chieftains feared the people and, above all, 
sought to obscure the facts. 

I now return to the woods. On the lyth, iSth, 

and iQth large quantities of petrol and sulphuric 

acid were taken from the city to the iron pits; at 

least 150 gallons of the former and eleven pouds 

326 



NARRATIVE OF M&. ROBERT WILTON 

(400 lb.) of the latter. Ekaterinburg being the 
centre of the platinum industry required large stocks 
of sulphuric acid to generate the intense heat neces- 
sary for melting this hardest of metals. The 
Komisar of Supplies was Voikov, ex-passenger in 
Lenin's German train. He it was who furnished 
the acid to Yurovsky as his friend Sverdlov's agent. 
(I remember I wanted to order a platinum ring at 
a local jeweller's during my stay in the city. He 
could not carry out the order because there was no 
sulphuric acid "since the previous year.") 

There is not the shadow of a doubt as to what 
happened around the iron pit, as the reader will 
convince himself after reading the next chapter. 
Yurovsky's acolytes cut up the bodies, steeped them 
in petrol, and btflmed them. The sulphuric acid 
was used to dissolve the larger bones. 

I have spoken of the mock funeral invented by 
the murderers to deceive public opinion in Russia 
and abroad. Here is the telegram that appeared in 
The London Times of September 23, 1918: 

"Amsterdam, Sept. 22. According to a telegram 
from Moscow, the Izvestua gives the following de- 
scription of the obsequies of the ex-Tsar, which, 
according to newspaper reports, were solemnly car- 
ried out by troops of the People's Army (sic) at 
Ekaterinburg. 

"The body of the ex-Tsar, which had been 
buried in a wood at the place of execution, was 
exhumed, the grave having been found through 

327 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

Information supplied by persons who were ac- 
quainted with the circumstances of the execution. 
The exhumation, says the Soviet journal, took place 
in the presence of many representatives of the 
supreme ecclesiastical authorities in Western 
Siberia, the local clergy, and delegates from the 
People's Army, Cossacks, and Czecho-Slovaks. Th 
body was placed in a zinc coffin, encased in^etSstly 
covering of Siberian cedar and the cpSSfTwas ex- 
posed in the Cathedral at Ekaj#rfTnburg under a 
guard of honour composed of tfie chief commanders 
of the People's Army. The body will be tempo- 
rarily buried in a special sarcophagus at Omsk/ " 

Comment is superfluous. The fourth and last of 
the "precautions" against conviction followed a 
year later, perhaps under stress of circumstances, 
but certainly without any regard for the Soviet's 
own previous announcements: 

Here it is : 

"On September 17, 1919, in the House of the 
Executive Committee of the Soviet at Perm, the 
Bolshevists brought to trial twenty-eight persons ar- 
rested on the accusation of having murdered the Tsar 
and his family. The following report of the proceed- 
ings is taken from the Bolshevist paper Pravda: 

" The Revolutionary Tribunal has considered 

the case of the murder of the late Tsar Nicholas 

Romanov, his wife, the Princess of Hesse, their 

daughters Olga, Tatiana, Maria and Anastasia, and 

3*8 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

their suite. In all eleven persons were assassinated. 
Of the twenty-eight persons accused three were mem- 
bers of the Ekaterinburg Soviet Grusinov, Yak- 
hontov, and Malutin; among the accused were also 
two women, Maria Apraksina and Elizaveta Miron- 
ova. The account of the murder as gathered from 
the material under the consideration of the Revolu- 
tionary Tribunal is as follows: 

" 'The Tsar and all the members of his entourage 
were shot no mockery and no cruelties took place. 
Yakhontov admitted that he had organised the mur- 
der in order to throw the discredit of the crime on 
the Soviet authorities, whose adversary he became 
after having joined the Socialist revolutionaries of 
the Left Wing. The plan of murdering the Tsar 
was conceived during the latter' s stay at Tobolsk, 
but the Tsar was too strictly watched. In Ekater- 
inburg, when the Czecho-Slovak troops were ap- 
proaching the town, the Soviet authorities were 
panic-stricken to such a degree that it was easy for 
him to avail himself of his position as chairman of 
the Extraordinary Commission (for combating 
counter-revolution) and to give the order to murder 
the Tsar and his family. Yakhontov admitted that 
he personally participated in the murder, and that 
he took upon himself the responsibility for it. He, 
however, said that he was not responsible for the 
robbery of the belongings of the Tsar's family. 
According to his deposition, Tsar Nicholas said be- 
fore he died, "For the murder of the Tsar Russia 

329 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

will curse the Bolshevists. 33 Grusinov and Malutia 
stated that they did not know anything about 
Yakhontov's plans, and only carried out his orders. 
Yakhontov was found guilty of the murder and sen- 
tenced to death. Grusinov, Malutm, Apraksina, 
and Mironova were found guilty of robbery com- 
mitted on the murdered members of the Tsar's 
family. They were sentenced to death too. The 
death sentence was carried out the following day. 

" 'Several objects belonging to the household of 
the Tsar were discovered with a thief named Kirit- 
shevsky, who stated that these things had been given 
to him by a man named Sorin, who was the chair- 
man of the Local Extraordinary Commission. At 
the time of the murder Sorin was the commander of 
a revolutionary battalion. Sorin was a personal 
friend of Beloborodov, who also participated in the 
assassination of the Emperor.' Rossia (Paris), 
No. i, December 17, 1919." 

I have carefully compared the names given above 
with the list of 164 persons mentioned in the 
dossier as being implicated or even suspected of 
having acted any part whatsoever in the tragedy; 
I have perused the cognomens of the twenty-four 

9 This document has been widely quoted by Jewish organizations 
to prove that the murder of the Tsar was not carried out by the 
Bolshevists, and to dispel the nation of a "racial vendetta." A 



always disclaimed 

all participation (sic) in the murder, explaining that its intention 
was to judge Nicholas IL publicly, but not to do away with him 
secretly in a cellar." 

33 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT W I "L T O K 

members of the Ekaterinburg Sovdep presidium. 
There is not one name in the mock trial that even re- 
sembles any of them (one cannot possibly identify 
Yakhontov with Yurovsky) ; the very charge is far- 
cical if one compares this report with the text of the 
official announcement of the "execution." Alone 
Beloborodov's name is familiar. He was nominally 
president of the Ural sovdep at the time of the 
murders. I explained his real position that of a 
mere helot, a thieving workman, kept in office to 
serve as a screen for the rulers of Sovietdom. After 
the murders he was "promoted" to the Tsik, the 
highest honour of Sovdepia. But they do not 
stand on ceremony with Russian komisars in the 
land where Yankel Sverdlov rules, and we read of 
him in the Pravda as being stigmatised as (i) a 
thief, and (2) a party to the very murder for which 
he was promoted the very same appalling crime 
that Sverdlov had ordained the stain whereof 
haunts the chieftains of the Soviet like a Nemesis, 
so that they utter things without sense. 

Besides, the Soviet of Moscow received a lion's 
share of the loot ! Between July 2oth and 22nd it 
was taken from Ipatiev's house and removed to the 
Red Metropolis. The Bolshevists were fleeing before 
the advance of the Siberian troops. Yankel Yurov- 
sky, evidently in a hurry to leave Ekaterinburg, 
took farewell of the death-house on the night of 
the 19th. His driver thus describes the exodus. 
That night he had by Yurovsky's orders called at 

33* 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

the chrezvyckaika, and thence conveyed two young 
men, one of them a Jew, to Ipatiev's house, where 
Yankel was waiting. These youths went into the 
house and brought out seven pieces of baggage, 
among them being a black leather trunk covered 
with seals. When he had taken his seat in the 
vehicle, Yurovsky gave his orders to the young 
men: "Set everything to rights. Leave twelve 
men on sentry duty and send the remainder to the 
station." 

The guard at Ipatiev's house remained till the 
23rd, but even after that, on the 24th and 25th, 
some of the Russian ex-warders still visited the 
house. The Whites entered Ekaterinburg on the 
25th, and occupied the house on the following day. 



332 



CHAPTER XI 
DAMNING EVIDENCE 

Having established, with the evidence of accom- 
plices and of the death-house, the fact that a 
murder had been committed, the investigating mag- 
istrate had to find the bodies or to show conclusively 
what had become of them; otherwise the whole case 
remained in doubt. This proved to be a task of 
immense difficulty. 

Suspicions of the truth were rife from the outset. 
It was known that five motor-lorries had been 
requisitioned; that all had been absent several days; 
that two had carried petrol, and that one had re- 
turned covered with mud and gore. Too many 
persons were involved to conceal the truth for long; 
the peasants who had to come by the forest road 
from Koptiaki village at once detected something 
amiss, and quickly drew their conclusions, which 
turned out to be correct. But "suspicions" are not 
proof. 

Somewhere within the purview of the disused 
iron mine "proof" was obtainable on that point 
there seemed to be no doubt. We took up our resi- 
dence in the wood Sokolov, Diterichs, myself, and 
others and remained there throughout the late 

333 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

spring and early summer of 1919- We descended 
the mine, found water and ice and a floor. We 
searched the ground and scoured the woods, living 
from day to day in alternate hope or despair of set- 
tling the gruesome mystery. Sometimes I felt as 
if we were seeking the proverbial needle. The 
woods were full of disused workings, each easily 
capable of concealing what we sought. 

Day by day we discovered fresh relics around 
the pit where the bodies had, we knew, been de- 
stroyed. Sokolov tirelessly passed through his 
searching examination every likely witness; not a 
peasant, or dachnik (summer resident), or railway 
servant that had been anywhere near the place es- 
caped him. 

Slowly, but surely, the scope of possible error les- 
sened. We had got well away from the versions 
carefully sown by agents of Yurovsky, who re- 
mained in the city, that the bodies had been buried 
in one place, then re-buried in another. 

One of the witnesses cited in the preliminary in- 
quiry (before Sokolov took charge) had described 
overhearing a conversation between several Bolshe- 
vists about the bodies. The speakers were said to 
be: Ermakov (whom we know), Mlyshkin, Kostu- 
2ov, Partin, Krivtsov, and Levatnykh. They 
spoke cynically of feeling the corpses while they 
were still warm. Levatnykh boasted that he had 
felt the Tsaritsa and that he "could now die in 
334 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON" 

peace." They also spoke of the "valuables sown in 
their clothes." 

The presumable genuineness of these confidences 
misled the earlier investigator into believing their 
other statements or perhaps the additions made to 
them by the spy who may have been a Red agent 
to wit, that the bodies had been buried in various 
places round the city. This was a "red" herring 
that unfortunately drew the investigator off a hot 
trail. He did not even go near the wood. Had he 
done so, he could not have helped discovering easily 
then what we had such difficulty in finding a year 
later. His excuse had been that the wood was 
"dangerous" on account of Red bands; but even 
if this were so, he could have deputed a less timor- 
ous person. A number of self-appointed "investi- 
gators" took this opportunity of "gleaning" relics 
perhaps invaluable clues. 

Extreme measures had to be taken, nothing less 
than the complete sifting of the ground within the 
area of destruction and emptying of the shafts 
down which any remains could have been thrown. 
This was a task outside the province of an investi- 
gating magistrate. Here we wanted miners with 
pumping machinery, woodsmen, and surveyors; 
above all we wanted money. 

Thanks to Admiral Kolchak the wherewithal 
was forthcoming. Indeed, I render him bare jus~ 
tice in saying that without his stanch personal sup- 
port the investigation would have been overwhelmed 

33? 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

long ago by the constant intrigues of the Omsk 
Government. He gave the money out of his own 
funds because the grant legally authorised by him 
was "held up" by his Ministers. 

Under the orders and supervision of General 
Diterichs, a command of White Guards was formed 
to carry out the necessary operations. The men 
were all from the Urals Le., miners and peasants 
versed in woodcraft. Several hundreds of them 
camped around the Ganina Yama (ditch), situated 
near a bend in the road to Koptiaki, not a hundred 
paces from the mine. These men knew what they 
were working for and put their shoulder to the 
wheel in all earnestness. 

But we had to leave before complete success had 
crowned their efforts. Diterichs received the sum* 
mons to save the armies. I went with him. Gen- 
eral Domontovich, a very gallant soldier, took com- 
mand in his place. (He died of typhus during the 
retreat and was buried in Chita early this year* 
"Tsarstvie nebesnoie.") 

Success came before we had to evacuate Ekaterin- 
burg. The contents of the shaft, extracted with in- 
finite trouble, set at rest for ever any lingering 
doubt as to the destruction of the bodies. Sokolov 
had his "proof." 

Here is the narrative of the investigation* It is 
a good commentary on the homely saying, "Murder 
will out." 

It will be remembered that Ermafcov went with 
336 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

the bodies from the death-house. Now Ermakov 
lived at the Verkh-Issetsk ironworks, adjoining the 
city and situated along the route to Koptiaki i.e. 9 
north-east of Ekaterinburg. The Stenbok-Fermer 
Wood lies a few miles beyond. At the works Er- 
makov found a detachment of his Red Guards (he 
was military kornisar) and a number of conveyances 
ready harnessed. The whole procession moved off 
along the Koptiaki road. There is, indeed, no other 
road in the vicinity practicable for a motor-lorry. 
Vaganov, the other regicide, mounted his horse and 
acted as armed escort for the lorry. 

Shortly after three o'clock in the morning (solar 
time) they reached that place where several paths, 
long disused and grass-grown, turn off to the left 
towards Ganina Yama. Here they forced a way 
through the undergrowth, and at one place nearly 
upset the lorry into a ditch. The mark of the 
wheels was still visible a year later, and alongside 
lay the beam which had been brought from the dis- 
used mine to jack up the canted lorry. 

Around the shafts in this particular place the 
grass then showed no trace of human passage. Kop- 
tiaki villagers did not come that way as a rule. The 
place had been well selected. But the murderers 
forgot the habits of the peasant, especially the hay- 
makers and fisherfolk. 

Nastasia Z. left the village at dawn with her son 
and daughter-in-law. They approached the grue- 
some procession just as it was turning off the road. 

337 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

Two horsemen rode up to them. One wore a sail- 
or's uniform. Nastasia knew him he was a Verkh- 
Issetsk resident Vaganov. The latter yelled outr 
"Turn back!" and coming abreast of the peasant- 
cart brandished a revolver at Nastasia's head.. 
Frightened, the peasant woman pulled her horse 
round so sharply that the cart almost upset. Vaga- 
nov rode alongside, still pointing his weapon and 
shouting "Don't look around or I shoot. . . ." 
After chasing them about a mile towards the vil- 
lage, Vaganov rode back. 

The peasant had not been able in the faint light 
to make out clearly what was behind Vaganov. 
"Something long and grey, like a heap," was all that 
they could distinguish. The baba (peasant woman) 
concluded that it was the Red Guard army march- 
ing to Koptiaki. Urging her horse onward, she 
immediately roused the whole village, informing 
the muzhiks that the "army" was coming "with 
transport and artillery." They listened in conster- 
nation, alarmed chiefly for their hay crop. An army 
coming meant fighting in the neighbourhood, and 
here it was just the time for mowing. The hay 
might all be lost. 

They discussed the matter long and passionately^ 
then some of the boldest among them, headed by an 
old soldier, set out to investigate. 

On the road they encountered some Austrian war 
prisoners who were hay-making, and asked if they 
had seen the army* They replied that quite early, 
338 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

while they were working on the road, some Russian 
Cossacks had ridden up and driven them away. The 
villagers became all the more curious to know what 
it all meant. 

Presently, as they came abreast of the mine, they 
heard horses neighing. Coming to one of the turn- 
ings, they saw that the grass had all been crushed 
and the saplings bent. They were on the point of 
following this strange trail, when out of the wood 
appeared a horseman armed with sword, revolver, 
rifle and hand-grenades and asked them what they 
were doing. The muzhiks put on a bold face, al- 
though badly frightened, and asked if the tovar- 
ishch (comrade) would kindly reassure them, be- 
cause the whole village was in a state of excitement. 

They were graciously informed that there was 
no cause for alarm. "Our front has been entered 
at several points. We are merely scouting and 
practising. Do not be afraid if you hear firing!" 
They had a friendly smoke together and then the 
muzhiks departed. They had scarcely gone when 
a report like the explosion of a hand grenade was 
heard, and then a short while afterwards another 
explosion. Soon after their return to the village 
the same horseman appeared "to tranquillise them 
all/' as he explained. 

They were reassured about the hay-making, but 
now arose another matter. Many of the villagers 
fished in the large Issetsk lake which spreads its 
lovely waters in front of Koptiaki. They had ob- 

339 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

tained a good haul that night and must take it into 
the city it was market day (Wednesday) and 
in the hot weather fish does not keep. But the "Rus- 
sian Cossacks 5 ' were inexorable. 

On the city side there was a crowd at the level 
crossing over the Ural line striving to get to Kop- 
tiaki, which being a pretty place attracted many 
summer residents. These unfortunates, thus 
"stranded," waited for hours and hours in vain. 
Some of the railway servants were accommodated 
with "benzine" from the casks of petrol waiting in 
reserve. The stream of fisher folk and the proces- 
sion of dachniks coming and going enabled the in- 
vestigation to define very precisely the exact limits 
of the cordon placed round the wood. It pointed 
in one direction Ganina Yama. That was the lo- 
cality that had to be kept from prying eyes. 

The peasants were also the first to discover the 
place where the bodies were destroyed. Their evi- 
dence afforded immense, invaluable service to the 
investigation; in fact, without them the truth might 
neverhave been established owing to the earlier mis- 
takes of the inquiry. 

As soon as the cordon was raised, some of the 
Koptiaki men hastened to the spot where the horses 
had neighed and the detonations had been heard. 
They had thought that the Red guards were burying 
arms. The ashes around the pit suggested some- 
thing else. They started to scrape; soon they found 
a cross belonging to the Empress and the brass 
340 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

buckle of the Tsarevich's belt. Some instinct 
prompted them to jump to the conclusion that it 
was "the Tsar's," although they knew nothing of 
the murder. 

There were eight of the muzhiks standing round 
the pit examining with awe the finds that they had 
made: "Boys," said one, and he voiced the secret 
thought of all, "it is just this, they have been burn- 
ing Nicholas here. That cross can belong only to 
him. And that buckle, I tell you, is the Tsare- 
vich's.*' They crossed themselves in prayer and 
silently came away. Needless to say, these honest 
souls promptly handed over the relics to the White 
authorities. 

On my first visit to the burning-mound, I was 
attracted by an inscription carved on the giant birch 
that overhangs one pyre. It read: "T. A. Fesen- 
ko" and the date "July 11, 1918," i.e., six days be- 
fore the murder. A young man sat beside the tree. 
He was a stranger to me. I took him to be one of 
Sokolov's agents, especially as outsiders were not 
encouraged to hover round the iron-pits. I was 
looking closely at the ground to note where the 
bodies had been burned and pick up any remaining 
clues. 

The stranger exclaimed: "You will have to 
look very hard!" I thought this was a strange re- 
mark; the singed and scorched appearance of the 
ground was, indeed, very noticeable still, although 
nearly a year had passed. But I encouraged the 

341 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

conversation, suspecting a surprise. The stranger 
proceeded to give in rather excited tones his con- 
viction that the story of the bonfires and the burn- 
ing of the bodies was all a myth. "See for your- 
self! How could they have destroyed all those 
bodies and left so few cinders!" he insisted. 

Of course I did not enlighten him as to the petrol 
and sulphuric-acid which so powerfully aided the 
work of cremation or the probable scattering of 
the ashes around and down the pit. I went straight 
to Sokolov, who was not far away and told him 
what the young man had said. "That must be Fesen- 
ko," was his remark. We walked up to the place. 
The stranger had resumed his seat beside the birch 
and appeared to be suffering. Sokolov continued: 
"Yes, that's the man. He brought Yurovsky to 
this place. He is just a young fool of a Bolshevist. 
Yurovsky took him because he was in charge of this 
wood, and he was so proud of escorting a komisar 
that he recorded the visit by carving his name and 
date on the tree. 

"Why then is he at large?' I queried. "Well, 
the fact is we hope he may give himself or some of 
the murderers away. We arrested him and let him 
go. He haunts this place, and is ever trying to 
prove that nothing could have happened here!" I 
felt rather sorry for the poor wretch. Perhaps he 
had not suspected Yurovsky's purpose; Yurovsky 
did not confide such secrets. At all events I gave 
him the benefit of the doubt, feeling sure that there 
342 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

would be no peace for his tortured mind in this life. 

But Sokolov dispelled my sympathy: "The fact 
is, he touches a sore point. Where are the cinders? 
That is the question. We have found too few. 
They must be hidden somewhere. Now Fesenko 
could not possibly have discovered this weak point 
in our armour himself. He has probably been put 
up to it by the murderers or their spies. That is 
why we let him wander about." However, Fesen- 
ko did not give away himself or his associates. 

Not a hundred paces away from the pyres I no- 
ticed a little clearing with a comfortable tree-stump. 
Here one could sit quietly, unseen by the people at 
the pit's mouth. A pleasant birch and pine grove 
stretched its fragrant, sonorous maze between this 
natural arbour and the scene of grisly horror. Here 
on this stump Yurovsky had sat while his henchmen 
performed the last act in the tragedy. Beside this 
seat we found (a year later) egg-shells the remains 
of the fifty eggs ordered by Yurovsky from the nuns, 
ostensibly for the Romanovs. But this fare had 
not sufficed for the dainty komisar. There were 
also chicken-bones. There wene also torn pages 
from a treatise on anatomy in German (Yurovsky 
was only a feldsher; he knew little about anatomy). 
And in order that there be no doubt as to the origin 
of these various clues, it so happened that Yurovsky 
left behind a newspaper published in German at 
the very period under discussion full of abuse of 
the Czechs, accusing them of servile subserviency to 

343 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

the Entente High Command, and treating the war 
as a slaughter arranged in the interest of capital. 

Reference has been made in preceding chapters 
to the manner in which the Grand Duchesses had 
concealed their jewels. Two of their confidential 
servitors, Miles. Tutelberg and Ersberg, came to 
our camp in the woods to identify the relics. They 
had sewn up the bodices, buttons, hats, and other 
receptacles and knew precisely what jewels were 
on the persons of the victims when the murder took 
place, it being obvious that during their residence 
in Ipatiev's house none of the prisoners would ven- 
ture to undo or change these receptacles, as they 
were under constant observation. The Grand 
Duchesses Olga, Tatiana, and Anastasia each wore 
double-quilted bodices stuffed with jewels weighing 
several pounds. Olga carried a satchel round her 
neck with some special gems and wore several ropes 
of pearls concealed across her shoulders. The man- 
ner in which the concealment had been effected mis- 
led the first superficial search of the bodies in the 
house. 

We now trace the gruesome picture of the cut- 
ting up and destruction of the bodies* First of all 
the clothes were partly removed. The bodices at 
once aroused attention owing to their weight. The 
"ghouls" began to tear them apart. Their contents 
were spilled on to the ground, and some of the 
things rolled into the grass or were trodden into the 
soil of the mound. 

344 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON. 

But they did not trouble to denude the corpses 
completely, and began hacking them in pieces on 
the clay mound that surrounded the pit's mouth, 
smiting and severing at the same time some of the 
valuables that still remained. The large diamonds, 
which had been camouflaged as buttons, have dis- 
appeared with the exception of one. They may 
have been burned with the clothes of the Grand 
Duchesses or have been looted. One was found 
trampled into the clay beside the pyre. Here also 
was found the Empress's emerald pectoral cross. 
Some of the bullets dropped out of the bodies dur- 
ing the chopping, others while the limbs were in 
the flames. 

Two pyres were used one near the shaft, the 
other near the birch tree. After the cremation had 
been completed the cinders of both pyres were col- 
lected and thrown down the shaft of the mine, 
which had been previously prepared. Ice remains 
throughout the summer in deep workings like this 
one. It had been tested by means of hand grenades, 
and had then been smashed in order that the cin- 
ders, etc., should sink to the bottom of the water. 
Over them a flooring had been adjusted and an- 
chored. 

Innumerable witnesses saw the coming and the 
going of the lorries. The "ghouls'* remained in the 
wood till their task was done. Their shelters and 
amps were discovered. They were seen leaving 
rolling about in the lorry, like men tired to death, 

345 



THE, LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

The flooring had deceived all search in the mine. 
Only when the operations that I have described 
above had brought 'all the core of the shaft to the 
surface everything was explained. The corpse of 
little Jemmy lay just under the false floor. It had 
been preserved by the ice. When good Domon- 
tovich made this discovery he immediately tele- 
graphed to us. We all realized that the mystery 
of the bodies had been solved. . . . 

There were literally hundreds of clues now avail- 
able. Sokolov busied himself classifying and iden- 
tifying them. It would be quite impossible to enu- 
merate them all. Several volumes of the dossier 
are devoted to it. There are the proces-verbaux of 
each "find" and each identification. I give here a 
brief but accurate summary of the clues: 

(1) A large diamond of the finest water, identi- 
fied as forming a pendant to a necklace belonging to 
the Empress, valued at 20,000 gold roubles; slightly 
touched by fire. 

(2) An emerald cross belonging to Alexandra, 
identified as a present from the Empress Marie, 
found by experts to be of high workmanship, valued 
at 2,000 gold roubles; broken and singed. 

(3) A pearl earring untouched, having been 
thrown with some earth down the shaft, recognized 
as one of a pair always worn by the Empress, de- 
clared to be of extremely fine workmanship, valued 
at 3,000 gold roubles. 

346 



NARRATIVE OF MR, ROBERT WILTON 

(4) Four fragments of a large pearl and settings, 
declared to be a pair to (3). 

(5) Two fragments of emerald declared by ex- 
perts to have formed part of a large and very fine 
stone, severed by some hard and heavy object and 
trampled. 

(6) Eleven fragments of emerald. 

(7) Thirteen round pearls as of high quality, all 
belonging to one rope. 

(8) Five fragments of pearl, belonging to one 
large gem of finest orient, severed by a heavy weight 
or trampling. 

(9) Another broken pearl of high quality. 

(10) Two fine brilliants declared to have formed 
part of an ornament of large size. 

( 1 1 ) Portion of a large diamond silver-mounted 
ornament bearing traces of heavy blows. 

(12 to 21) Precious stones diamonds, sap- 
phires, rubies, almandine, and topazes and set- 
tings, all bearing marks, as experts show, of having 
been crushed or severed by heavy or cutting ob- 
jects. 

(22 to 28) Articles and appurtenances of ap- 
parel, including pieces of cloth identified as parts 
of the Empress's skirt, the Tsarevich's military 
overcoat and Botkin's overcoat; six sets of corset 
steels the Empress would not permit her daughters 
or the servants to go without corsets, neither would 
she herself; Demidova wore them also that would 
make exactly six) ; metallic parts of corset suspen* 

347 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

ders and fragments of silk and elastic; the Tsare- 
vich's belt buckle; the Tsar's belt buckle, both 
identified; three paste shoe buckles of first-class 
workmanship, one identified as the Empress's, two 
as belonging to the grand duchesses ; a large number 
of buttons, hooks and eyes, etc., some identified as 
belonging to the Empress's dress, also military 
buttons corresponding with the uniforms and caps 
of the Tsar and Tsarevich, as made for them by 
the court tailor in Petrograd. The appurtenances 
of female costume were such as the court dressmaker 
used for the family. There were also parts of ap- 
parel such as were used by the tailor who dressed 
the court servants. The footgear remnants showed 
strong action by fire. Experts were able, however, 
to note that they included cork and fine brass screws, 
both evidences of high-class articles. In their opin- 
ion the remnants might well represent seven pairs 
of boots. 

(29 to 41) Exhibits of equal if not greater in- 
terest. Among them may be cited : A pocket case 
in which the Tsar always carried his wife's portrait; 
three small ikons worn by the grand duchesses, hav- 
ing in each case the face of the saint destroyed as 
if blows had been aimed at them; the Empress's 
jubilee badge of her Lancer regiment; the gold 
frame of Botkin's eye-glasses ; a large spectacle glass 
such as the Empress wore at Tobolsk; remnants of 
the Tsarevich's haversack, in which he was accus- 
tomed to keep his treasures; several bottles as used 
348 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

for smelling salts, always carried by the grand 
duchesses, and finally a varied assortment of nails, 
tinfoil, copper coins, etc., which vastly puzzled So- 
kolov till somebody, I think Mr. Gibbes, reminded 
him that Alexis was fond of collecting odds and 
ends, being of a very saving disposition, like his 
father. 

Then came a number of specially important re- 
lics. First, a series of Nagan bullets, some entire 
but bearing the marks of the rifling, some without 
the lead core, some in the shape of blobs of moulten 
lead, still unmistakable. Secondly, in the shaft it- 
self, a human finger, two pieces of human skin, and 
in the clay of the mound many fragments of chop- 
ped and sawed human bones, which could still be 
certified although they had been subjected to the 
action of fire and perhaps of acid. Experts found 
that the skin was from a human hand. The finger 
is described as belonging to a woman of middle age. 
It is long, slender and well-shaped, like the Em- 
press's hand. 

Near the shaft was found a set of artificial teeth 
(upper jaw with plate), identified as Dr. Botkin's. 
The front teeth were deeply encrusted with mire, as 
if the body had been dragged face downwards and 
thereby the teeth, catching in the hard clay soil, had 
dragged the plate out of the dead man's mouth. 

When the first inspection of the death house was 
made ten days after the murder it bore all the 
traces of having been plundered by people who had 

349 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

first slaughtered the owners. The reader will be 
able to picture it, but his imagination will not come 
up to the reality. Amidst this scene of pillage 
and confusion one felt that a careful hand had de- 
stroyed everything that could help the investiga- 
tion; nevertheless highly important clues came to 
light, among them a full list of the Red guards who 
had acted as gaolers, the Tsar's private cypher 
which he had hidden away as if expecting to be 
able to reclaim it some day* 

In the death chamber there was a curious inscrip- 
tion in German, written by a man of some culture 
not Yurovsky, therefore, but perhaps one of the 
two men from the Chrezvychaika whom he had left 
in charge of the house on his departure. It was an 
adaptation of Heine's lines on the fate of Belshaz- 
zar: 

Belsatzar ward in selbiger Nacht 
Von seinen Knechten umgebracht. 

He had omitted the 'conjunctive "aber" which 
comes in the poet's line after "ward" ; and then, hav- 
ing first written "selbigen," had changed it to "sein- 
en," feeling perhaps that these modifications were 
necessary to fit the occasion. Perhaps unconsciously 
he also converted Belsazar (as Heine spells the 
name) to Belsatzar. The writer was quoting a 
Jew whose poem expatiates on the overthrow of a 
Gentile sovereign who had offended Israel. The 
350 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

Book of Daniel is not so explicit. It says: "In 
that night was Belshazzar the King of the Chal- 
deans slain." (Dan. vi. 30.) But the author of 
the inscription wished to make it "plain" that 
"Belsatzar" was slain by his own people. 



CHAPTER XII 
ALL THE ROMANOVS 

The death of Nicholas II. and his family did 
not suffice for the Soviet plan of "government" 
with, or without, Germany. Nothing short of 
extermination of all the Romanovs could satisfy 
the enemies of "Belsatzar." Whenever the Tszk 
(Central Executive Committee) and the Chrezvy- 
chctika (inquisition) laid hands on any of the ex- 
Tsar's relatives their fate was sealed. It did not 
matter where the unfortunate princes might be, or 
what local authority happened to be ostensibly in- 
volved the Tsik and Yankel Sverdlov, Red Jew- 
ish Autocrat of All the Russias, directed the dis- 
posal of them. 

It is quite useless for the apologists of Soviet 
rule to insinuate that local bodies may have com- 
mitted excesses without the knowledge and ap- 
proval of the Centre; in these murders of Grand 
Dukes and a Grand Duchess in all 1 1 persons of 
the blood Royal the hand of the Central Govern- 
ment is clearly apparent. Moreover, they were all 
slain in cold blood, of deliberate purpose; not like 
the victims of the holocaust at Perm, because a 
352 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

reign of stark terror had been ordained from Mos- 
cow. 

It is with mind and hand still atremble after 
reciting the horrors of the cellar and the woods of 
Ekaterinburg that I take up this tale of woe, all the 
more pitiful on account of the utter absence of any 
pretext for the crime just sordid murder unreliev- 
ed by any shadow of political expediency or provo- 
cation. 

First, I take the case of the Grand Duke Michael 
Alexandrovich; he "disappeared" before the others 
about a month before the Tsar and he was the 
ostensible heir although he had formally resigned 
his rights to the people. I have collected all the 
materials concerning his last days in Perm. 

The Tsar's brother had remained at Gachina, his 
usual residence, during the early months of Bolshe- 
vist rule. There he was arrested in March, 1918, 
and sent into exile. His secretary, Nicholas Niko- 
laievich Johnson, and the former Chief of the Gen- 
darmerie at Gachina, Colonel Znamerovsky, were 
arrested at the same time and transported together 
with him, guarded by Letts. Perm was their des- 
tination, and in that city they resided for the next 
two months. 

Apart from being tinder surveillance, the exiles 
enjoyed comparative freedom. The Grand Duke 
took his walks with his secretary. Although suffer- 
ing from a chronic complaint (gastric ulcers) which 
required constant exercise and a special diet, he had 

353 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

no cause to complain of his health while in Perm. 
The fact was many people sent him dainties, such 
as sterlets freshly caught out of the Kama, so that 
his rooms at the Korolevskie Nomera (King's Inn) 
were always full of provisions. He felt so well that 
he seldom had recourse to the medicine for stilling 
the terrible pains that he suffered during acute at- 
tacks of the malady. 

Popularity has its drawbacks. The people of 
Perm did not realise that their attentions to the 
exile might arouse suspicion among his Red enemies* 
When things came to such a pass that the Tsar's 
brother found himself running the gauntlet of popu- 
lar ovations, it became necessary to avoid too fre- 
quent appearances in the streets. Znamerovsky 
warned the Grand Duke that the Reds at the subur- 
ban Motoviliha arsenal were beginning to grow res- 
tive and openly agitating against the liberty allowed 
to the exiles. So thereafter the familiar figure 
of Michael Alexandrovich in his shabby grey suit 
and top boots was seen no more, and he took his 
exercise under the cover of darkness. 

The Grand Duke had left his wife and children 
at Gachina. Countess Brasova (his morganatic 
spouse) came to visit her husband in the middle of 
May. Madame Znamerovskaia had also arrived in 
Perm. It was a rash step. Countess Brasova had 
much difficulty in getting away; in fact it was only 
managed by a stratagem. The komisars were told 
354 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

that if they interfered the matter would be referred 
to Moscow. This frightened them. 

Reaching Moscow on the 22d or 23d of May 
Countess Brasova decided to take a still bolder step 
to save her husband. Conscious of his complete 
aloofness from politics, she imagined that personal 
intercession with the Red chieftains would move 
them to let him go. Of course it was an illusion 
excusable only in a distracted wife. I mention it 
because Lenin himself intervened in the matter. 
It was the lofty idealist of Sovietdom that ab- 
solutely refused to permit the departure of Michael, 
and thereby assumed responsibility for what hap- 
pened. 

Madame Znamerovskaia did not leave Perm. 
She was there when her husband was shot and later 
shared his fate. But I am anticipating. 

Unbeknown to any member of the family or even 
to N. N. Jackson, Colonel Znamerovsky had con- 
ceived a plan of escape which he intended to put 
into practice, fearing that the Motoviliha workmen 
might be goaded into violence. I am in possession 
of the details of this plan, and I can state most 
positively in the light of subsequent events 
that it was not carried out, nor even attempted. 

On the 13th June a telegram reached Gachina 
from Perm, announcing that "our general favourite 
and Johnny had been removed by whom and 
whither unknown." This message was supposed 
to have come from Znarnerovsky it could have 

355 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

come only from him. The first feeling was one of 
unmixed joy; then doubts began to arise, and no 
small anxiety as to the probable repression that 
would at once fall upon the household at Gachina. 
Surely enough soon afterwards Countess Brasova was 
arrested by Uritsky, the bloodstained Komisar of 
Petrograd, who himself was assassinated two months 
later by another Jew. After innumerable tribula- 
tions, she managed to escape with her children out 
of Russia. 

What had happened in Perm? A despatch from 
Mr. Alston, the British Acting High Commissioner, 
reported from Vladivostok, February 13, 1919: 
"Mr. T. has just arrived here. . . . When at 
Perm he says he lived in the same hotel with Grand 
Duke Michael and Mr. Johnson, his secretary, who 
was a Russian. At two a. m. on or about the i6th 
June he saw four of the Perm militzia or police take 
them off, and he is convinced that they were killed." 

Later, it became possible to obtain the evidence 
of eye-witnesses, which corroborated and amplified 
Mr. Alston's despatch. The Grand Duke had two 
servants with him in Perm, Borunov and Chelyshev. 
They lived in an adjoining room. Mr. Johnson 
lived upstairs. Chelyshev escaped and gave the fol- 
lowing version : 

At about the date above mentioned (l2th to i6th 
June he was hazy on this point) he was asleep 
one night when three men in soldiers' dress, fully 
armed, entered his room, woke him up and roughly 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

ordered him to lead them to Michael Romanov. In 
vain he protested that the Grand Duke was asleep. 
They threatened him with the Chrezvychaika. He 
had to comply. He first woke Mr. Johnson. Then 
he led the way to the Grand Duke's room. He was 
asleep. Chelyshev roused him and explained the 
reason. The Grand Duke looked at the armed 
men. 

One of them said : "We have orders to take you 
orders from the Sovdep." The Grand Duke re- 
plied: "I shall not come unless you show me a 
paper." One of the men then stepped forward and, 
laying his hand roughly on the Grand Duke's 
shoulder, exclaimed: "Oh! these Romanovs! We 
are fed up with you all!" 

Realising that resistance was futile, the Grand 
Duke rose and dressed himself. Mr. Johnson had 
also meanwhile made himself ready, and insisted 
that the men should take him away as well. After 
some argument they agreed. Chelyshev declares 
that he also asked to be taken, but that the men 
refused. 

As the soldiers and their prisoners were going 
out of the room, Chelyshev remembered about 
the medicine, and, grasping the bottle, followed, 
calling out: "Please your Highness, take it with 
you." He knew that without his medicine the 
Grand Duke might be subjected to great and need- 
less suffering. The soldiers roughly pushed him aside 
and, making some brutal remark about the Imperial 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

family, led the prisoners away. From that moment 
they were lost to view. Many stories of Michael's 
escape and of his having been seen at Omsk, at Semi* 
palatinsk, at Chita, at Harbin, etc., have been suc- 
cessively disproved. 

Against the version of an escape there are the 
strongest evidences: The Grand Duke would 
never have been a party to any attempt to evade his 
gaolers, knowing full well that both the Tsar for 
whom his loyalty and affection were proverbial 
and his own family would suffer for him. It may 
be objected that he was removed against his will by 
friends in disguise; but this theory cannot explain 
away their refusal to allow him to take with him 
a remedy necessary to his health and perhaps to his 
life. There had been plots to procure his escape 
so I have reason to believe; but in every case the 
plans had been betrayed. Colonel Znamerovsky 
knew this. He would trust nobody with his plan, 
but obviously it miscarried, for he was himself to 
go with Michael, and we know that instead of that 
he was murdered. The shooting of Znamerovsky 
followed close upon the Grand Duke's disappear- 
ance. 

Chelyshev afterwards professed confidence in his 
master's escape, but at the time he had no such illu- 
sion. In fact, he was convinced then that the Grand 
Duke had been trapped, for when he had had time 
to recover from his surprise, he went to the local 
Soviet and complained that the Grand Duke had 

358 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

been kidnapped. He relates that no attention was 
paid to him at first but that later some semblance of 
a search was made and quickly dropped. 

Regarding the ultimate disposal of the two pris- 
oners, stories circulate just as numerous and varied 
as the stories of their escape. I need not cite them. 
It suffices that the Grand Duke Michael, gentlest 
of men, to whom all thought of power and even of 
ambition was repugnant, disappeared to be seen no 
more. 

Perm and its vicinity was destined to witness 
other tragedies full of horror. Many other mem- 
bers of the Romanov family hud been interned there 
including (i) the Grand Duchess Elizabeth, sainted 
sister of the Empress, venerated by grateful Musco- 
vites while Alexandra was disliked; (z) the Grand 
Duke Sergius Mikhailovich former Master of the 
Ordnance, and quite remote from politics; (3) 
Prince Igor; (4) Prince loan; (5) Prince Constan- 
tine, all three brilliant young men, the sons of the 
late Grand Duke Constantine Constantinovich, none 
of them concerned with political matters; and (6) 
Prince Vladimir Pavlovich Palei son of the Grand 
Duke Paul and step-brother of the Grand Duke 
Dmitri Pavlovich. This youth of seventeen had given 
promise of being one of the world's greatest poets. 

Prince loan was married to Princess Elena of 
Serbia, who had come to the Urals to share her hus* 
band's exile. She had been persuaded to go to her 
country, the Bolshevists hesitating to incarcerate 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

her, and she was at Ekaterinburg when, towards the 
end of June, she heard that Prince loan and the 
other captives had been put on starvation rations* 
She decided, come what might, not to leave him be- 
hind. Thereupon the Bolshevists arrested her. She 
was in the prison at Ekaterinburg when the Tsar 
and his family were murdered. In the same prison 
were some people who had followed the Imperial 
household into captivity; young Countess Anastasia 
Hendrykova, Mile. Schneider, the Emperor's valet 
Volkov. (Prince Dolgoruky and General Tatish- 
chev had "disappeared" earlier,) Of course none 
of them knew anything about the* awful happen- 
ings in Ipatiev's house. 

When the Jewish murderers and their accom- 
plices, the German-Magyar "Letts," had taken 
wing before the advance of the Whites these pris- 
oners were sent to Perm for future disposal, while 
they themselves had hurried westward, having helped 
to accomplish the hellish design of the Jew fiend, 
Yankel Sverdlov to exterminate "all the Ro- 
manovs." Orders had already preceded them to 
Perm and the design had been fully accomplished 
there. The murder of the Romanovs of Perm took 
place exactly twenty-four hours after the murder of 
the family in Ekaterinburg. 

Here are the bare facts of this new butchery. 

The six Romanov prisoners above-mentioned with 

the Grand Duchess's companion, the nun Varvara* 

and S. M. Remes, manager for the princes, were in* 

360 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

terned in the village school of Alapaevsk, a place in 
the environs of Perm. 

On the night of July 17 (1918) their warders 
came to tell them the story that Yurovsky had re- 
tailed to the Tsar : that there was danger for them, 
that the enemy (i.e., the Czecho-Slovaks) were ap- 
proaching, and that in the interest of their per- 
sonal safety they would be removed. It was even 
confided to them whither they were going, namely 
to the Siniachkhin Works. All unsuspicious, they 
at once complied. The programme of the mur- 
der was here somewhat different. It was not 
convenient to carry it out on the premises. The 
party took their seats in the native korobs (a small 
tarantass) and were driven north. 

When twelve versts (eight miles) out the caravan 
halted in a wood which contained a number of dis- 
used iron-ore mines one sees the similarity of de- 
tail in the murderers' plan and here the unfortu- 
nates were slain and their bodies thrown down the 
shafts* 

It was a much cruder performance than that of 
Ekaterinburg. The actual murderers here were 
simply Russian criminals, escaped convicts who 
"worked" for the Chrezvychaika, the Red Inquisi- 
tion. They just slaughtered the victims and got 
rid of the bodies without so much as rifling their 
pockets. 

Meanwhile at the school certain "precautions" 
were being taken. A pretended "escape" was 

361 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

t 

staged. The school building and its approaches 
were "faked" to show evidence of combat between 
the Red Guards and pretended White Guards, and 
to give verisimilitude to the performance they took 
a peasant who happened to be locked up in the local 
gaol, murdered him and placed his dead body in 
the school to represent the White "bandits." 

Mr. Preston, the Consul, telegraphed from Eka- 
terinburg, October 28, 1918, that on the retaking of 
Alapaevsk by the White troops on September 28, 
the corpses of the Romanov Princes, the Grand 
Duchess and their attendants were found sufficient- 
ly preserved to be recognised, and that they were 
buried in the presence of a great concourse of peo- 
pie. 

The discovery had been made, thanks to the re- 
source of a local police agent, whose name I do not 
give for special reasons. Post mortem examination 
showed that the victims had been bludgeoned to 
death but must have undergone a prolonged agony 
before they died. The Grand Duke Sergius was 
shot through the head, perhaps to put him out of 
his misery; for the murderers were just butchers who 
did not seek to torture their victims. There was 
no refinement of cruelty about them. They were 
only Russians. It is not true that they threw their 
victims down the shaft before life was extinct* The 
autopsy has dispelled that legend. The murderers 
even exploded hand grenades down the shaft, prob- 
ably to make assurance doubly sure. 
362 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

The investigation has clearly established the au- 
thorship of these murders. The orders came from 
Moscow through the same channels that had been 
used in the murder of the Tsar namely, from the 
Jew Sverdlov to the Jew Goloshchekin, and, as 
usual, the Russian workman Belodorodov acted as 
the dummy president of the Ekaterinburg Soviet 
board the channel through which Moscow acted 
in the Urals. These orders were carried out by the 
leading komisars of Perm, among them being the 
Komisar of Justice Soloviev. 

As in the case of the murder at Ekaterinburg, the 
Bolshevists at Perm followed up their traitorous 
crime by announcing that there had been a con- 
spiracy. The world was told that the Princes had 
been kidnapped by bands of White Guards. (When 
the Whites had to evacuate Perm, General Diterichs 
arranged to have the bodies of the martyred Princes 
removed eastward. They rest in a place of safety 
at the Russian Cathedral in Peking)* 

More than half a year later a crime equally abom- 
inable was perpetrated at Petrograd. The victims 
were the Grand Dukes Paul Alexandrovich, Dmitri 
Constantinovich, Nicholas Mikhailovich (the his- 
torian), and George Mikhailovich. They had been 
imprisoned for some time without any charge being 
preferred against them. On January 29, 1919, 
they were removed to the Fortress of SS. Peter and 
Paul, and there on the same day without any inves* 
tigation or form of trial they were "killed by Red 

363 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

Guards with revolvers" such is the trite informa- 
tion that is available. But the crime of Ekaterin- 
burg and the slaughter of Alapaevsk give a clue as 
to the authorship of this atrocity. The last of the 
Romanovs within the power of the Jew-ruled So- 
viet had passed away. Perhaps, some day, N. A. 
Sokolov will be able to investigate the crime of 
Petrograd* 

We now approach the end of this long martyrol- 
ogy. The members of whom I am about to speak 
form part of the Red Terror ordained by the Soviet 
to avenge the murder of Uritsky and the attempt 
on Lenin, which took place about a month after 
the crime of Ekaterinburg. 

I referred above to the transfer of certain prison- 
ers from that city to Perm. Volkov, the Tsar's 
valet, has deposed that altogether thirty-six persons 
travelled in the prison train. Among them were 
Countess Hendrykova, Mile. Schneider, and Princess 
Elena- They all found themselves interned in the 
same prison in Perm. Here Volkov met Chelyshev, 
who had also been locked up, and from him heard the 
account of the abduction of the Grand Duke Mi- 
chael. They saw the Princess leave* After great 
difficulty the Siberian Government had managed to 
rescue her. She did not, of course, know that her 
husband had been murdered. She thought he had 
escaped, and went away willingly enough this time. 

The Terror had been proclaimed on September 
i ? 1918. The official Izvestiya declared that the 
364 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

"proletariat (sic) will reply * . . in a manner 
that will make the whole bourgeoisie shudder with 
horror." The Krasnaia (Red) Gazeta announced: 
cc We will kill our enemies in scores of hundreds. 
* . Let them drown themselves in their own 
blood." 10 

"On the night of September 3rd" I am quoting 
Volkov "we were led out of the prison, eight of 
us. There were Countess Hendrykova, Mile. Schnei- 
der, and Mme. Znamerovskaia, myself, and four 
others. We were surrounded by twenty-two armed 
guards, part Letts, part Magyars. 

"We had been told that we were to be transfer- 
red to another prison; we carried our small posses- 
sions. When we saw that they were leading us out 
of the town, we realised that our last hour had 

"The chre&vychaika of Petrograd, presided over by the Jew 
Peters, proclaimed that "the criminal hand of the Socialist-Revolu- 
tionary Party, directed by the Anglo-French, has dared to fire 
at the leader of the working classes. . . . This crime will be an- 
swered by mass terror . . . representatives of capital will be sent 
to forced labour , * . counter-revolutionaries will be extermin- 
ated. . . ." Petrovsky, Komisar for Interior, telegraphed all local 
Soviets, reproving them for "the extraordinarily insignificant 
number of serious repressions (the hate-laden Jew could not abide 
the innate kindliness of the Russians) and mass shootings of White 
Guards and bourgeoisie" Petrovsky denounced these "grandmoth- 
erly" methods ( ). He ordained "all Right Socialist-Revolu- 
tionaries must be immediately arrested* Considerable numbers of 
hostagcft must be taken from bourgwislt and former officers. At 
the slightest attempt at resistance, or the slightest movement in 
White Guard circles, mass shootings of hostages must be imme- 
diately employed. Indecisive and irresolute action in this matter 
on the part of local Soviets will be severely dealt with." Early 
in September (191:8), Zinoviev (Apfelbaum), one of the "cultured" 
leaders of Soyietdom, publicly declared: "We must win over to 
our side 90 millions out of the xoo millions of population of Soviet 
Russia. As for the rest, we have nothing to say to them, they 
must be annihilated." Bolshevism, White Book, p. 80. 

36? 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

come. It was terribly hard on the ladies. They 
dragged themselves along with difficulty in the 
heavy mud. After several miles, we came to a cor- 
duroy road with swamps on either side." (It was a 
sewage farm.) "Some of our guards suddenly be- 
gan offering to carry our bags. I knew that meant 
that they were going to shoot us directly, so each 
one wanted to secure his booty beforehand. It was 
now or never. While they were wrangling over the 
spoils I made a dash for it." 

Volkov leapt. the ditch and was scuttling across 
the slimy wast\when the Magyaro-Letts opened 
fire. He fell justv&s the first shot rang out and re- 
mained lying. They thought he was dead and 
moved on. He then made another dash and finally 
got away. After wandering about for forty-three 
days, he came into the White zone and was saved. 

The frightfully mangled remains of Countess 
Hendrykova and Mile. Schneider were discovered by 
us in the summer of last year and committed to the 
grave in Perm, in full view of the prison windows 
where they had been fellow captives of Princess 
Elena, 

"Comrade" Petrovsky's accusations were unde- 
served in Perm. The Red Terror ran a *full stream 
of blood in that region. The peasants, being re* 
garded by Bolshevists as the worst kind of bour* 
geoisie, provided the bulk of the "scores of hun- 
dreds" of victims. For details of these horrors I 
366 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

would refer the reader to the White Book on Bol- 
shevism issued in April, 1919. 

Respecting Count Tatishchev and Prince Dolgor- 
uky, nothing is known as to the manner of their 
death. According to Volkov, who was in prison 
with him in Ekaterinburg, Tatishchev was summoned 
to the office on or about June 8th, and was there in- 
formed that, by order of the Soviet, he was to be 
deported to the province of Ufa. He was there- 
upon taken away from the prison and seen no more. 

Although secret-service investigation among the 
Reds strengthens the belief that Michael was mur- 
dered, it is a fact that no trace o ' his dead body has 
been discovered; and it is, therefore, conceivable 
that he survived. There are many records of won- 
derful escapes from Red Guard shooting squads. 
Volkov is an instance. Chelyshev, the other serv- 
ant, was twice led out to execution, yet in the end 
reappeared* If the Grand Duke was taken away 
by Russians, the chances of his escape would be na- 
turally greater. But even admitting this happy 
contingency, the murderous intention of the Soviet 
rulers remains unaffected. 

Prince Dolgoruky remained some time in the 
Ekaterinburg House of Detention. He was fre- 
quently in communication with the worthy Mr. Pres- 
ton, trying to relieve the sufferings of the captives 
in Ipatiev's house. Probably this hastened his end, 
We kno^ that the British Consul was threatened 
with death if he "interfered" any more. Dolgoruky 

367 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

disappeared like his senior, the Count. Their mem- 
ories, like the memories of Hendrykova and Schnei- 
der, will live through the ages as of those who have 
been "faithful unto death." 



368 



CHAPTER XIII 
THE JACKALS 

Around the tigers of the Soviet and their feasts 
of blood hovered the jackals, singly, in twos and 
threes, and in packs, waiting to snatch some morsel, 

It would be impossible to mention all the sorry 
scavengers that thronged around the Romanovs be- 
fore and after their martyrdom. I refer only to 
such of them that affected, one way or another, the 
course of the tragedy and its investigation. 

Chronologically I record the name of Soloviev 
first, because he figures in the dossier as an actor 
while the family was still at Tobolsk. The depo- 
sitions of numerous witnesses, substantiated by 
Soloviev himself, show that he was receiving a sal- 
ary of R$-4o,ooo (nominally 4,000) from a banker 
named X. (well known in Petrograd and reputed 
to be a Jew), who acted as the chief of the German 
secret service during the war, having the disburse- 
ment of secret funds from Berlin in his hands. 

Having married a daughter of Razputin, named 
Matrena, after the "saint's" death, and formed a 
connection with Anna Vyrubova, then at liberty in 
the lied capital, and with other friends of Grishka, 
this young man, an ex-officer in the Russian Army 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

and former A.D.C. to Guchkov, started on a "mis- 
sion" to Siberia. Ostensibly he went to his wife's 
home. His own explanation is that he was interest- 
ed in the fisheries of the Ob; also that he took money 
and comforts to Tobolsk to the Imperial family 
from their friends in Petrograd. He deposes that 
he handed the money to the priest Vasiiiev, also the 
presents. He accuses the priest of appropriating 
the one and the other. The priest makes counter 
accusations. 

There appears to be reason to believe that the 
Empress knew of this "mission/ 3 and, retaining to 
the very end all her illusions regarding Grishka and 
Anna, gave her confidence to Soloviev as his son-in- 
law and the associate of Vyrubova. How he repaid 
this confidence will be seen. 

The agent of X. naturally kept him and the 
Germans informed as to all the happenings at To- 
bolsk, but one may be quite sure that he did not stop 
there. Information given to the Germans meant, 
of course, its communication, when Berlin so de- 
sired, to the Bolshevists, its servants. Is it surprising 
in these circumstances that each of the four separate 
and independent organizations formed to release 
the Imperial exiles was betrayed before anything 
could be attempted? for the Solovievs were many 
and the tentacles of X. were far-reaching. 

It could not be a coincidence that officers who 
met Soloviev in Tiumen were arrested by the Reds 
and "disappeared/' Two such cases are recorded in 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

the dossier. It is certainly more than a coincidence 
that before and after the fall of the Kolchak Gov- 
ernment he was in mysterious association with per- 
sons who were strongly suspected of being German 
agents, and could give no satisfactory account of 
the source of his income since he had been cut off 
from the supplies of X. 

N. A. Sokolov found him and Matrena at Chita, 
enjoying the confidence and support of Maria Mi- 
hailovna, the so-called "Queen of Diamonds/' who 
presided over the destinies of the Ataman's house- 
hold and had a decided finger in the Trams-Baika- 
lian pie. The "Queen" bore a striking likeness to 
a certain Jewess who had spied on the Russian South 
Western front in the days of the war. She came in 
person to release the Solovievs from the House of 
Detention to which they had been relegated by 
Sokolov's legal order. Sokolov himself had to flee 
from Chita to avoid worse consequences. 

The priest Vasiliev was of another stamp. His 
antecedents should have dispensed him from ecclesi- 
astical office. He had killed the sexton of the 
church where he had previously served. The plea 
of accident, of which he availed himself to secure 
a nominal punishment of "penitence," could not 
engender a proper recognition of his responsibili- 
ties. The man was a self-seeker; he saw in the cap- 
tivity of the Romanovs an opportunity to advance 
his own and his son's interests. He indulged in all 
manner of demonstrations of "loyalty" bell-ring- 

371 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

ing and prayers without regard to their effect 
upon the captives and their gaolers. As a matter 
of fact, they did much harm to the family. 

The accusation brought against him by Soloviev 
appears to be borne out in part by the discovery of 
a certain quantity of articles belonging to the Im- 
perial family in his (Vasiliev's) house. 

The Czech pharmacist Gaida, commanding their 
rearguard when they were stopped by orders from 
Berlin and Moscow, who afterwards entered the 
service of the Omsk Government, played a sorry 
part in the investigation of the Tsar's murder. Im- 
mediately after the occupation of Ekaterinburg by 
the Whites, Gaida requisitioned Ipaticv's house for 
his personal use and took for himself the room in 
which the Tsar and his wife had lived. The 
judiciary begged him not to do so, explaining that 
it was most necessary that the house should not be 
disturbed, in the interests of justice* They were 
brushed aside. Gaida threatened violence if they 
did not leave him alone. They drew up a proems- 
verbal on the matter. It is in the dossier* 

In the light of this incident, it is rather strange 
to read the Red proclamations denouncing the 
Czecho-Slovaks as the agents of the counter-re volu- 
tion who were coming to deliver Nicholas Romanov* 
Gaida's complete indifference to the Romanovs and 
their fate was shared by his countrymen, and it is 
extremely doubtful if they would have behaved 
372 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

better towards the Romanovs than they did after- 
wards to Kolchak. 11 

Among the spies and officers employed by Gaida, 
some are known to have been Bolshevist agents* 
One of the officials of his intelligence branch proved 
to be the Nikolsky who had behaved so brutally to 
the exiles at Tobolsk and was afterwards president 
of the local Soviet, When the Russian officers at 
Ekaterinburg heard of his previous exploits they 
killed him, without giving the investigation an 
opportunity to obtain his deposition. 

Another hostile Czech was a certain Zaieek, a 
former Austrian officer, who was in charge of an 
important section of the Intelligence Department. 
When the former Extraordinary Komisar Yakov- 
lev, repenting of the part he had played in the re- 
moval of the Tsar from Tobolsk, came over to the 
Whites and applied to General Shenik for service, 
he happened to come into the hands of Zaieek, who, 
being a traitor and a spy, took measures to have 
Yakovlev sent away, perhaps knowing that he had 
been in the confidence of Mirbach and might give 
the whole German show away. 

The Omsk Government, largely composed of 
Socialist-Revolutionaries, gave little encouragement 
to the investigation. To them the murder of the 

** Admiral Kolchak was surrendered by the Czechs to the Reds 
at Irkutsk while he was travelling eastward in February, 1930, 
under the protection of the Allied flag*. The order to surrender 
him was countersigned by the Czech "comm an dcr*in -chief", Gen* 
eral Janin, Admiral Kolchak was shot soon afterward in a 
peculiarly cruel manner. 

373 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

ex-Tsar appeared to be a matter of quite inferior 
interest. The investigating magistrate, being in 
straits for money, applied to the Governor-General 

of the Ural, a mining engineer named P , for a 

sum of 100 roubles (then worth about 1) to pro- 
vide the monthly stipend of a typist. Being a mem- 
ber of the S.R. party, this high official refused, 
explaining that in his opinion no inquiry was 
needed, as it was clearly <e a simple case of the shoot- 
ing of hostages," too common to worry about. 

When, at a later stage, this person was making 
his way eastward in a luxurious car stuffed with 
"loot," the officers of Ataman Semenov searched it, 
found several millions of Romanov roubles (the 
currency of the old regime, worth even now about 
250 to the ) besides gold and platinum, and shot 
him on the spot as a "speculator." 

The investigating magistrate was able to discover 
the whereabouts of a noted Bolshevist named Ilmer, 
who had come to Siberia secretly with an important 
mission from Moscow. He communicated with the 
Secret Service at Omsk, requesting that an officer 
should be sent to apprehend Ilmer. But Timer die! 
not turn up. It was ascertained that the Secret 
Service instead of sending the officer had sent a 
telegram, with the result that Ilmcr escaped. 

Perhaps the worst enemies of the investigation 

were in the Ministry of Justice, It being a cardinal 

maxim of the Kolchak Government that it wielded 

supreme authority over the Russian dominions 

374 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

pending the convocation of a constituent Assembly, 
the blessed formula consecrated by advanced poli- 
ticians and adopted as a sine qua non by the Powers 
of the Entente, the Minister of Justice had to be a 
Socialist-Revolutionary. M. Starynkevich, a law- 
yer who had been exiled by the former regime^ ful- 
filled the necessary requirements. 

He persistently and deliberately declined to treat 
the Tsar's murder as anything more than an ordin- 
ary penal offence and would not appoint a special 
investigator. The inquiry was therefore conducted 
casually. A member of the Tribunal of Ekaterin- 
burg without special training in criminal investiga- 
tion had the case in hand. (Curiously enough he 
was of Jewish extraction.) The blunders or worse 
then committed are directly ascribable to Starynke- 
vich* 

It was only by direct and categorical orders from 
the supreme ruler (Admiral Kolchak) that the 
appointment of a special investigator (N. A. 
Sokolov) was assured. But realising that renewed 
and constant attempts would be made to upset the 
investigation, Kolchak gave Sokolov a special war- 
rant of appointment and otherwise supported him 
in his work. It was very necessary, for all that 
Omsk would allow him for expenses was Rs4-5o 
per diem (about 6d.), and when he arrived in 
Ekaterinburg he had exactly 165 Siberian roubles 
(then about 2) in his possession for all outlays. 

Bad enough, this was nothing to what came after. 

375 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE KOMANOVS 

The investigation was frequently embarrassed by 
the excessive zeal of amateur Sherlocks or Pushfuls. 
In some cases their thirst for information could not 
be ignored, as they claimed to make their demands 
from a high personage friendly to the Omsk Gov- 
ernment. In February of last year Sokolov pre- 
pared a confidential report for transmission abroad, 
and handed it to Admiral Kolchak, The next 
morning it appeared in full in the local organ of 
the Socialist-Revolutionary Party. The paper was 
suppressed a few hours later, but, of course, the mis- 
chief had been done. The murderers knew exact ly 
how the investigation stood. All the names of the 
accused and witnesses were printed in full for the 
whole world to read, and there also was the name 
of the investigator (Sokolov), whose appointment 
had been so distasteful to Starynkevich, practically 
inviting anybody to come and kill him. (A sum- 
mary of the disclosed information was published in 
The London Times of February 18, 1919.) 

This same Starynkevich, now an ex-Minister, has 
lately come out in another "disclosure." He has 
informed the representatives of Jewry that not a 
single Jew was concerned in the murder of the Im- 
perial family. It seems almost incredible, but here 
is the document. It is a letter from the Secretary 
of the Joint Foreign Committee of the Jewish Board 
of Deputies and the Anglo-Jewish Association, giv- 
ing details of an interview with M- Starynkevich. 
It says: "the Minister, in a statement given to me 
376 



NARRATIVE OF MR- ROBERT WILTON 

written down with his own hand, and herewith lit- 
erally translated, declares that: 

"On the strength of the data of the preliminary 
inquiry, the course of which was reported to me 
every week by the Attorney-General, I can certify 
that, among the number of persons proved by the 
data of the preliminary inquiry to have been guilty 
of the assassination of the late Emperor Nicholas 
IL and of his family, there was not any person of 
Jewish descent." 

The letter proceeds: 

"I put to him the question as to how he explains 
the fact of General Knox having sent to the British 
War Office a report to the contrary. M. Starynke- 
vich . . . said that the Russian military circles had 
vehemently asserted from the very outset that the 
assassination of the Tsar's family was the handi- 
work of the Jews, and that this point must be 
established by the inquiry. They started an inves- 
tigation of their own, and insisted on the whole 
course of their inquiry being left to themselves. The 
Minister of Justice had to contend with great diffi- 
culties before he obtained that the inquiry should be 
carried out by the regular organs of his department. 
Even the impartial investigation did not cease to 
be hampered by the interference of the military. 
Thus, when the First Examining Magistrate, 
Sergeiev, had failed to discover any trace of Jewish 

377 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

participation in the crime, these military circles 
vociferously protested against him and insinuated 
that M* Sergeiev was a Jew himself. This cam- 
paign was so violent and persistent that the Minister 
of Justice had to discharge M. Sergeiev from the 
case and to entrust the further proceedings to an- 
other examining magistrate. His successor (<ur., 
Sokolov) was likewise unable to discover any trace of 
Jewish participation in the murder of the Tsar's 
family." 

I have given this "statement" in full to prevent 
any subsequent "misapprehensions." M. Starynke- 
vich's record is known to the reader. He shows 
himself in his written "denial" to be a quibbler* 
The degree of "guilt" of the implicated persons 
had not been fully established in the initial stages 
of the inquiry, but they were known to be impli- 
cated and known to be Jews. The names of 
Yurovsky, Goloshchekin, Safarov, Voikov are in 
Sergeiev' s own proces-verbaux, and they were per* 
fectly known by him to be Jews. 

It was only natural that the maintenance of 
Sergeiev, reputed to be of Jewish descent, at the 
head of the investigation alarmed all who were con- 
cerned with the establishment of the truth, but M- 
Starynkevich carefully conceals another, still more 
important, reason for their anxiety. Sergeiev was 
a judge, not an investigating magistrate. He had 
been deputed to take over the conduct of the Invest*- 
378 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

gation from the first magistrate (Nametkin) in the 
early days of August, 1918, and, contrary to law 
and to the rules of criminal investigation in Russia 
as well as in other countries, had continued to con- 
duct the inquiry after the formation of the govern- 
ment at Omsk and despite the fact that fully 
qualified investigating magistrates were available. 
The persistent refusal of the Minister to relieve 
Sergeiev could be understood only in one sense. 
Not till February of the following year did Staryn- 
kevich at last comply with the law, but even then 
it was not by his own initiative. Soon afterwards 
he himself had to leave. Hence his complete 
ignorance of the subsequent course of the investiga- 
tion. His slurs upon the military are beneath con- 
tempt. But on this and on any other points, Soko- 
lov and the dossier are, here to answer him, if 
necessary* 



379 



CHAPTER XIV 
BY ORDER OF THE "TSIK" 

The murderers of the Romanovs have been un- 
masked in the preceding chapters, but not all of 
them. The parts played by Yurovsky and Golosh- 
chekin are apparent. They were confidential agents 
of Yankel Sverdlov, the Red Tsar. Other very 
important personages remained in the background; 
they were the Komisars Safarov, Voikov and 
Syromolotov. ' 

I give here a complete list of the names or cog- 
nomens of the so-called "judges": (l) Beloboro- 
dov, (2) Goloshchekin, (3) Sakovich, (4) Voikov, 
(5) Bykov, (6) Syromolotov, (7) Safarov, (8) 
Ukraintsev, (9) Kiselev, (10) Vainer, (11) 
Hotimsky, (12) Vorobiev, (13) Andronokov, (14) 
Andreiev, (15) Simashko, (16) Avdeiev, (17) 
Kariakin, (18) Zhilinsky, (19) Chufarov, (20) 
Yurovsky, (21) Efremov, (22) Anuchin. The 
above formed the Oblastnoy Sovdep (Regional 
Council of Deputies), Lc^ the representatives for 
the whole of the Ural region. The Board was com- 
posed of five members, Beloborodov, the Russian 
"dummy," as President, and Goloshchekin, Safa- 
, Voikov and Syromolotov, all four Jews, as 
380 



NARRATIVE OF MR* ROBERT WILTON 

members. The "Chrezvychazka" (inquisition) was 
"run" by Goloshchekin, Yurovsky, Efremov, 
Chustkevich and three other Jews. 

These "inner circles" are the men who "tried" 
the Tsar and condemned him to death, in other 
words, assumed the duty of carrying out Sverdlov's 
orders. They sent "compromising" documents to 
Moscow afterwards: letters alleged to have been 
surreptitiously exchanged between the Tsar and 
officers outside. They are rank forgeries. One of 
them alludes to "five windows" facing the square, 
whereas the Tsar's quarters comprised only two win- 
dows on that side, and if the alleged plotters had 
succeeded in penetrating the double barriers, scaling 
the house and entering as directed, they would have 
jumped into a veritable hornet's nest. Besides, how 
could they hope to escape the machine-gunner on 
the roof? 

This mockery of a trial has been perpetuated by 
the "fakes" of sensation-seekers and imaginative 
writers. One enterprising foreigner cabled thou- 
sands of words from Ekaterinburg not long after 
the murder, describing the aeroplanes that hovered 
over the city presumably to carry off the Tsar 
and the dropping of bombs, etc., all of which was, 
of course, rank nonsense ; but he also gave a wonder- 
ful account by "the Tsar's faithful servant," whose 
name had never been heard of, who told with a 
wealth of detail how the Tsar was fetched away 
"for trial" and how he came back and took an 

381 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

affecting leave of his wife and children before being 
shot all alone. . . . There are pages and pages of 
this stuff, and it is all absolute twaddle, but none 
the less mischievous. 

There was no trial of any sort whatsoever. The 
person named Sakovich in the above list was found 
in Ekaterinburg afterwards. He admits that he 
was in the room when Goloshchekin and his friends 
were talking to Yurovsky just before the murder, 
but he did not even pay attention to what they 
said, as the conversation was of such a banal char- 
acter. No trial therefore no verdicts, judgments 
or other such like formulae, and no reading of any 
papers to the Tsar before the family was sent to 
its last account. This so-called "paper" is an in- 
vention inspired by the murderers, to fit in with the 
Moscow story of an intended triaL The only 
"paper" concocted by the murderers was the "De- 
cision" as to the "execution." At the Soviet head- 
quarters in Ekaterinburg numerous drafts of this 
document were afterwards discovered and figure in 
the dossier. They show how troubled the murderers 
were to invent an appropriate lie for approval by 
Moscow. 

Why was the Tsar moved from Tobolsk and 
why was he not brought to Moscow > as Yakovlev 
had been instructed? It is absurd on the face of 
it to hint that the Ural Regional Sovdcp was over* 
riding the decisions of Moscow* We have just seen 
that the virtual rulers of the Ural were Yankel 
382 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

Sverdlov's fellow-Jews and associates, even sub- 
ordinates: 

An answer is offered by the Soviet organ, of the 
4th May, 1918. It explains that it was "owing to 
alleged indications of efforts being made by local 
peasants and by Monarchist groups to promote 
escape." We trace here the handiwork of Soloviev 
and Vasiliev. And it adds: "The regional Soviet 
of the Urals are charged with surveillance over the 
Imperial family" (The London Times, May 6, 

1918). 

But while this answer goes a certain way, and 
definitely involves the responsibility of the Moscow 
government for all that happened in the Urals, it 
by no means tells the whole truth. The inside his- 
tory of Yakovlev's mission has been explained. 
Yakovlev was the agent of Sverdlov. But Sverd- 
lov as president of the Tsik 12 was over the foreign 
as well as the domestic affairs of Sovietdom, being 
in, fact Prime Minister. Now Sverdlov had been 
a paid agent of Germany and was still in the closest 
touch and relationship with Mirbach. The Tsar's 
own definition of Yakovlev's mission was unques- 
tionably right, in substance, if not in detail : to ob- 
tain his endorsement of the Treaty of Brest-latovsk. 

The Soviet organs published long accounts of 
Yakovlev's journey. In these he is falsely described 

**Eve this high body (the Red Cabinet of Ministers) was, like 
all Soviet institutions, ruled by an Inner Ring (Presidium or Exec- 
utive Committee) which was (and is) invariably composed of 
Jews, with one or two Russians as lay figures. 

383 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

as the representative of the Sovnarkom, ".*, of 
Lenin's parliament. That was merely to cover up 
the tracks. Yakovlev is quoted as speaking of 
Nicholas Romanov as a pleasant enough person, but 
of "extraordinarily limited intellect." He was not 
clever enough to realise the advantages that were 
offered to him. 

The Germans, of course, were extremely dis- 
pleased by this contretemps^ more especially as it 
came in conjunction with the failure of their plan 
to nobble the Russian intelligentzia and with their 
aid to set up the "new government" that Luden- 
dorff craved. One of Mirbach's chief assistants, a 
Dr. Ritzier, then remarked to one of these Russians 
that "the Bolsheviks were still necessary." A few 
months later the Red terror avenged the slight in- 
flicted upon the German associates of Sverdlov. 

Voikov, the Jew, boasted to his "lady" friends in 
Ekaterinburg after the murder that "the world will 
never know what we did with the bcxiies." It was 
his accomplices that suggested to the remorse- 
stricken Fesenko that the "cinders were not there*" 
The insolent confidence in the superiority of their 
"precautions" displayed by Voikov is characteristic 
of his race* 

The murderers invented another story in Perm, 
of which I have not yet spoken- Their agents gave 
information that one of the Grand Duchesses hud 
been seen in the city and that she had been shot dur- 
ing the Terror some months after the "execution*' 
384 



NARRATIVE OF MR, ROBERT WILTON 

at Ekaterinburg. They were quite positive about 
it. They even pointed out the place where "Anas- 
tasia" had been buried. The bodies there were 
many were exhumed; the only one that was a 
young woman's was unmistakably identified by the 
local police as that of "Nastia Vorovka" (the thief 
Nastia) a well-known criminal. 

The Komisar Safarov, afterwards editor of the 
official "Izvestiya," wrote an article on the "execu- 
tion" which figures in the dossier as an interesting 
sidelight on the motives of the crime and its 
methods. It is only fair that the accused should 
speak for themselves. I here give a plain, unvar- 
nished rendering of this "defence" : 

"In the places seized by the Czecho-Slovaks and 
bands of White-guards in Siberia and the Southern 
Ural, authority has fallen into the hands of Black- 
hundred pogrornists composed of purest Mon- 
archists by profession. The real intentions of the 
White-guards of the Quadruple Entente are made 
plain by the mere fact that at the head of them all, 
as supreme war-lord, stands the Tsar's general 
Alexeiev, the most devoted servant of Nicholas the 
Sanguinary, himself a convinced blood-shedder 
(palach). . . . 

"Around Nicholas all the time was spread an 
artful network of conspiracies. One of them was 
discovered during the transit from Tobolsk to 
Ekaterinburg." (Safarov here suggests that Yakov- 

38? 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

lev was a traitor, and passes over in silence the 
'whole history of the interrupted journey. This 
compels the inference, which is borne out by scores 
of direct evidences that the Tsik, /.*., Sverdlov, de- 
liberately sent the Romanovs into a death-trap.) 
Safarov continues: "Another plot was discovered 
just before the execution of Nicholas. The partici- 
pants in the last conspiracy to deliver the mur- 
derer of workmen and peasants out of a peasant- 
workman's prison clearly identified their hopes with 
the hope that the Red capital of the Ural would b<* 
occupied by Czecho-Slovak-Whiteguard pogrom- 
ists. 

"General Alexeiev wanted to bring over into 
his Stavka (G.H.Q.) his own Tsar/ 7 (The Gen- 
eral had long been dead when Safarov wrote this 
article.) "His calculations have not been justified. 
The people's assizes (narodny sud} have judged the 
All-Russian murderer and Anticipated the plans of 
the counter-revolution. The will of the Revolution 
has been accomplished although many of the formal 
aspects of bourgeois legal procedure were infringed, 
and the traditional, historical ceremonial of the 
execution of 'crowned personages' was not observed. 
The peasant-workingman's authority here also ex- 
pressed itself in a form of extreme democratism ; u 

"Here is the way "Democratism" was applied, I cite Bolshevist 
writers: The "instruction*' xasued by the AU-Ruasiau Extraordi- 
nary Commission to all Provincial Extraordinary Commtemon* 
(Chrezvychaiki) says: "The All-Ruasian Extraordinary Commit 
sion Js perfectly independent in its work, carrying out house 
searches, arrests, executions, which : * afterwards reports to the 

386 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT W I J, T O N 

it made no difference for the Ail-Russian murderer 
and had him shot just like an ordinary robber 
(razboinik). Nicholas the Sanguinary is no more, 
and the workmen and peasants may with full right 
say to their enemies : You played your stake on the 
Imperial crown. You have lost. Take your 
change an empty crowned head." 

The Russian peasants at Ekaterinburg looked at 
the matter differently. They caught Vaganov, one 
of the regicides, and killed him on the spot. It was 
very distressful to the Investigating Magistrate, but 
he could not prosecute the peasants; there were too 
many of them, and they would not have understood. 
It had appeared to them the right thing to do, to 
slay the Russian who had laid hands upon the Tsar. 

Council of the People's Commissaries (Sovnarkom) and to the 
Central Executive Council (Tsik). The Provincial and District 
Extraordinary Commissions are independent in their activities, and 
when called upon by the local Executive Council (Ispolkom) pre- 
sent a report of their work." In so far as house searches and ar- 
rests are concerned, a report made afterwards may result in put- 
ting right irregularities committed owing to lack of restraint. 
The same cannot be said of executions. . . * It can also be seen 
from the "instruction" that personal safety is to a certain extent . 
guaranteed only to members of the Government, of the Central 
Executive Council (Tsik) and of the local Executive Committees 
(Ispolkom), With the exception of these few persons all mem- 
bers of the local committees of the (Bolshevik) party, of the Con- 
trol Committees ^and of the Executive Committee of the party may 
be shot at any time by the decision of any Extraordinary Commis- 
sion of a small district town if they happen to be on its territory, 
and a report of that made afterwards* (From an article by M. 
Alminsky, "Pravda," October 8, 1918.) 

"Comrade" Bokiv gave details of the work of the Petrograd 
District Commission since the evacuation of the All-Russian Ex- 
traordinary Commission to Moscow. The total number of arrested 
persons was 6,220* 800 were shot. (During about six months.) 
(From a report of a meeting of the Conference of the Extraordi- 
nary Commission, "Izvestia", October 19, 1918, No, 228.) 

387 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

But Safarov eludes issues he himself raises. Why 
not have sent the Tsar for trial to the capital, to 
Moscow? Surely, that was the place where the 
"will of the Revolution" could have been properly 
displayed! All these wonderful conspiracies of 
which he speaks made it all the more necessary to 
send him there and save the Ural Soviet from all 
responsibility. The approach of the Whites Should 
have caused the local chieftains not to delay one 
single day. Why not? Because Sverdlov had 
already sent for Syromolotov to arrange the mur- 
der. . * 

The cynical references to "bourgeois legal pro- 
cedure" and to "historical ceremonial" will, it is to 
be hoped, put an end for ever to the legend of a 
"trial." 

Yankel Sverdlov conversed with his agents in 
Ekaterinburg over the direct wire before and after 
the murder, giving directions when necessary. They 
forgot to destroy all evidence of these conversa- 
tions. When the investigation was confided to 
experienced and fearless hands, one of the first 
measures taken was to thoroughly overhaul the rec- 
ords of the Telegraph Office. It yielded astonish- 
ing results. I give some of the documents in this 
and the following chapters. 

Here is the record of a conversation between the 

Red Tsar and, apparently, Beloborodov, the for* 

mer in Moscow, the latter in Ekaterinburg* This 

record was written in pencil on the backs of tele* 

388 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

gram blanks. There are six such blanks. The writ- 
ing is evidently of one and the same person. It 
consists of questions asked by Sverdlov and answers 
thereto. The record was made obviously on the 
2oth July, three days after the murder. Here it is, 
textually translated: 

"What is heard with you? 

"The position on the front is somewhat better 
than it appeared yesterday. It is ascertained that 
the opponent has denuded all fronts and flung all 
his forces on Ekaterinburg. Can we hold Ekater- 
inburg long? It is difficult to say. We are taking 
all measures to hold it. Everything superfluous 
has been evacuated from Ekaterinburg. Yesterday 
a courier left with the documents that interest you. 
Communicate the decision of the Tsik, and may we 
acquaint the population by means of the text that 
you know? 

"At a meeting of the Tsik presidium on the i8th 
it was decided (posfanovleno) to recognise the de- 
cision of the Ur. Reg. Sovdep as regular (pravil- 
nym). You may publish your own text. With us 
yesterday, in all the newspapers was inserted a cor- 
responding announcement. I have this instant sent 
for the exact text and will communicate it to you 
(tebi6) ie+> to thee. Sverdlov is speaking to aix 
inferior) . 

..* 

"This moment I shall hand over the exact text of 
our publication. . . ." 

389 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

I do not reproduce it. There is no need. The 
"wireless" printed in The London Times of July 22, 
1918, is the exact and accurate translation of the 
text given in this conversation recorded in Ekaterin- 
burg two days previously. (The Moscow and the 
Ekaterinburg texts are given in Chapter X.) What 
better evidence could be found of the genuineness 
of the above record? It stops there. But it tells 
us volumes. It is the language of conspirators, of 
accomplices in a crime, and of a superior whose or- 
ders and whose initiative alone count. Yankel 
Sverdlov assumes his true proportions. He and the 
Bolshevist Government in which he was omnipotent 
as president of the Central Executive Committee 
(Tsik) and virtually chief also of the Red Inquisi- 
tion are forever identified with the murders that 
have been described in this work. The courier 
referred to is Yurovsky. We know that he left on 
the ipth with the plunder and, it is believed, the 
"heads." The Whites were beginning to concen- 
trate their forces. That was four days after the 



"execution." 



But why all these precautions? If the people are 
so anxious to try and to punish their late ruler, why 
resort to all manner of subterfuges, both in com- 
mitting the "execution" and in acquainting the 
people of the death of their "oppressor"? The 
answer is a simple one : Sverdlov and his associates 
were not sure of the people. The reason of that 
is equally simple: they were not Russians; they 
390 " 



iVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

JOTS. They were "internationalists/' re- 
pudiating all nationality, yet disguised under Rus- 
sian names. The Russians in their midst were 
dupes or dummies. Krassin might come to clear 
the ground, but Apfelbaum-Kamenev appeared for 
the serious work. What happened in London in. 
1920 is comparable in a modest way with the Red 
mechanism in Russia itself. 

Taken according to numbers of population, the 
Jews represented onejln^.tsn; among the komisars 
that rule Bolshevist Russia they are nine in ten if 
anything, the proportion of Jews is v still greater. 

There has been no intention here to ascribe the 
murder of the Romanovs to a race vendetta: it js 
the Jewish organisations in this and other countries 
that have emphasised this aspect of the Soviet 
crimes by their persistent attempts to prove that no 
Jews took part in them. Why do they not follow 
the example of the bold Rabbi who excommunicated 
Laiba Braunstein, alias Leo Trotsky, for the abom*, 
mable crimes thajt^jJ^ 

humaruty and against civilisation^ Why are they 
trying to screen the sinister Red Tsar Yankel Sverd- 
lov and his host of Jewish assassins the Isai 
Goloshchekins, the Yankel Yurovskys? 

They feared the Russian people, they feared the 
Romanovs because they were Russians, they feared 
Nicholas Romanov because he had been a Russian 
Tsar and when he refused to be seduced from his 
loyalty to his people and to the Allies they resolved 

39* 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

that he should die he and all the Romanovs, 
This resolve was carried out when the advance of 
anti-Bolshevist forces gave a reasonable hope of 
sophisticating the crime and avoiding a just punish- 
ment. 

And so definite was Jew-ruled Moscow on the 
necessity of the ex-Tsar's death that a whole month 
before the murder, the report persisted that 
Nicholas II. was dead. On the 2 1st June the Kom- 
isar of the Press, named Stark, telegraphed to the 
Presidium of the Sovdep at Ekaterinburg: "Urgent- 
ly inform regarding authenticity reports Nicholas 
Romanov killed" ; on the 23rd, Bonch-Bruevich, the 
secretary of the Sovnarkom (Council of people's 
Commissaries of which Lenin is president), tele- 
graphed to the President of the Ekaterinburg 
Sovdep (i.e., Beloborodov) : "Information circu- 
lating Moscow alleging former Emperor Nicholas 
the Second killed. Send any available informa- 
tion." A certain Boyard arrived in Ekaterinburg 
on the 9th July and telegraphed to the French 
Consul in Moscow: "Am staying meanwhile at 
British Consulate. Reports about Romanov false/' 

The Germans knew what they were doing when 
they sent Lenin's pack of Jews into Russia. They 
chose them as agents of destruction. Why? Be- 
cause the Jews were not Russians and to them the 
destruction of Russia was all in the way of busi- 
ness, revolutionary or financial. The whole record 
of Bolshevism in Russia is indelibly impressed with 
392 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT W I t T O N* 

the stamp of alien invasion. The murder of the 
Tsar, deliberately planned by the Jew Sverdlov 
(who came to Russia as a paid agent of Germany) 
and carried out by the Jews, Goloshchekin, Syromo- 
lotov, Safarov, Voikov and Yurovsky, is the act not 
of the Russian people but of this hostile invader. 

The Jewish domination in Russia is supported 
by certain Russians: the "burgess" Ulianov alias 
Lenin, the "noble" Chicherin, the "dissenter" 
Bonch-Bruevich. They are all mere screens or 
dummies behind which the Sverdlovs and the thou- 
sand and one Jews of Sovdepia continue their work 
of destruction; having wrecked and plundered 
Russia by appealing to the ignorance of the work- 
ing folk, they are now using their dupes to set up a 
new tyranny worse than any that the world has 
known. 

Sovietdom has consecrated three heroes to whom 
monuments have been erected: to Karl Marx, to 
Judas Iscariot, and to Leo Tolstoi, the three names 
that are associated with Revolution, Apostacy and 
Anarchism ; two of them Jews. 

When the Jew Kanegisser assassinated the Jew 
ITritsky, the Soviets ordained a Terror throughout 
the land. Rivers of Russian blood had to wipe 
away the stain caused by a Jew who dared to op- 
pose the Jewish rulers of unhappy Russia. 



393 



CHAPTER XV 
THE RED KAISER 

When Yakovlev failed to remove the Tsarevieh 
from Tobolsk and to "convert" the Tsar, he disap- 
pointed Mirbach more than he disappointed Svcrd- 
lov. 

The Jews feared the Russians, but the Gentians 
wanted to use them* The Red Tsar planned to ex- 
terminate the Romanovs, but the Red Kaiser 
proposed to reinstate Nicholas. 

For a time their 1 respective schemes assumed 
divergent courses; in the end, Wilhelm*s agents 
realised that they could not dissociate themselves 
from the Red Tsar, and it was the lattcr's plan that 
prevailed. But, morally as well as practically, the 
German hand which had brought the Jew murderers 
into Russia controlled and directed thtf assassins' 
work. Only when Berlin realised that the Roman- 
ovs were irrevocably on the side of the Entente did 
they release the hands of the murderers. 

The proposal that Yakovlev brought to Tobolsk 
was 'much more insidious than the Tsar understood 
it to be. Nicholas was not only to endorse the 
peace concluded at Brest; he was to sei'/e the reins 
of power with the help of German bayonets and to 
394 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

give his only son to be a lawful Tsar under German 
tutelage. 

This meant the intervention of Russia in the war 
again, but on the German side* The Red Kaiser 
and his staff did not trust their Red agents any 
more. 

While Yakovlev went to Tobolsk as envoy ex- 
traordinary of the Tsik (but In reality of the 
German G.H.Q.) the official representative of Ger- 
many to the Soviet Government, with which she 
was in treaty and in virtual alliance, was summon- 
ing a secret conference of Anti-Soviet Russians to 
arrange for the advent of the "new government" 
desired by LudendorfL 

It was a very pretty scheme, quite on German 
lines. But it failed at every point. The Germans 
once more had shown a total incapacity to under- 
stand human nature. Nicholas scorned the base 
overtures; the Russian intelligentsia displayed, on 
this occasion, a sound understanding of their duties 
and interests. 14 The illness of Alexis was another 
obstacle, though in itself it made no difference. 

Sverdlov was not disturbed by Yakovlev's failure 
to bring Nicholas and Alexis to Moscow.. He 
had his agents everywhere. While Soloviev acted 
as watch-dog over the captives of Tobolsk so that 
no stranger to German plans should spirit them 
away, innumerable Red Solovievs hemmed the cap- 
tives in. The common herd of the Soviets knew 

** See footnote, Chapter VII. 

395 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

nothing, of course. The strings were cunningly, 
discreetly pulled from Moscow according to the best 
methods of Potsdam and the Wilhelmstrasse. 

No sooner had Yakovlev started on the terrible 
rush of 160 miles over bogs and rivers running 
deep water over breaking ice to Tiumen than the 
Jewish conclave in Ekaterinburg received its orders 
to stop the travellers at all costs. Omsk was at 
once "stampeded" by the false statement that 
Yakovlev was trying to arrange a rescue. Yakov- 
lev was really seeking to escape the North Ural net 
by taking the south Ural route. He did not have 
to go through Omsk at all, but to change from the 
Perm on to the Samara line. There was no escap- 
ing out of the country by that route then. It could 
lead only to Moscow. Nevertheless, this train was 
turned back to Ekaterinburg. Sverdlov did not 
really want the Romanovs to go further. He could 
not afford to quarrel openly with his former pay** 
masters, but he was probably shrewd enough and 
sufficiently well informed to suspect their secret 
designs. 

The talk of a trial in Moscow did not begin till 
much later, when Moscow rumour reported the Tsar 
as already defunct, and solely as an antidote to 
those rumours, as they threatened to upset the plan 
of murder. 

Sakovich, formerly surgeon in a hussar regiment 
and ex-ultra-monarchist, appertained to the Ural 
Regional Sovdep as Komisar of Health. He de* 
396 



NARRATIVE OF MR, ROBERT WILTON 

posed afterwards that he had overheard Goloshche- 
kin, Safarov and Voikov discussing with Beloboro- 
dov the alternative of wrecking the train with 
Nicholas Romanov or of "arranging" an accident. 
In the former case, the responsibility would be 
placed on "counter-revolutionaries" trying to effect 
a rescue. He did not listen to all the details as it 
did not concern his department. But the Jews did 
not have to carry out the plan then. The Germans 
were still in favour of the survival of Nicholas. 
The idea was utilised some months later at 
Alapaevsk. I have a copy of the message sent 
afterwards to Moscow and Petrograd in which the 
murderers seriously describe the "rescue" staged by 
them after the murder as having been the cause of 
the grand ducal "disappearance." 

The Romanovs were suffered to live. A German 
mission (ostensibly Red Cross) came to Ekaterin- 
burg at the end of May to ascertain all about the 
life of the "residents of Ipatiev's house/* as the Im- 
perial prisoners were officially styled. These spies 
went straight to Berlin with their report. The Red 
Kaiser knew full well what torments were being 
endured by those whom he had professed to cher- 
ish, who after all were his kith and kin. He could 
have saved them at any time. But * . . they 
would not be saved by him. . * . 

Mirbach's death did not, perhaps, introduce any 
modification of the plan of slaughter. He was 
assassinated one week before the event. The Bol- 

397 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

sheviks declared that his death was an act of provo- 
cation committed by their Socialist opponents and 
gravely resolved that they must not quarrel with 
Germany, because that would only be playing into 
the hands of the assassins. This solemn farce had 
a deeper meaning. 

During the summer of that year the Siberian 
anti-Bolshevist units began to grow in numbers and 
strength. The Germans had themselves foolishly 
promoted this reaction by arresting the departure 
of the Czechs and compelling them to fight. A 
Siberian Army was quickly springing into existence* 
It might drive the Red Tsar out of Moscow and 
thus, instead of an ally or agent there, the Red 
Kaiser would find himself confronted by a hostile 
Russia. The war was slowly dragging to its fateful 
end; every battalion counted. The Entente knew 
what the assistance of Russia meant, so the Entente 
went to the aid of the Czechs and Siberians. 

Ludendorff does justice to this tragic dilemma in 
his book of "War Memories" ". * . the Entente, 
realising that they could not work with a Govern- 
ment which looked for support to Germany, took 
action against Bolshevism, and instead of sending 
these troops (the Czechs) to France, held them tip 
along the Siberian railway on the frontier between 
Russia and Siberia, in order to fight the Govern- 
ment in Moscow. In addition to this, by garrison- 
ing the railway, the Entente prevented the return 
of our prisoners of war from Siberia. This was 
398 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

unquestionably a serious loss to us." (Vol. II, p. 



The holding up of the Czechs was Ludendorff's 
own work. He is ashamed to admit it, and puts 
the cart before the horse in pleading that the En- 
tente displayed such far-sighted activity. More- 
over, it was precisely the German-Magyar prisoners 
of war who, rallying to the appeal of their Kaisers, 
stopped the departure of the Czechs. Ludendorff 
is too modest. But his statement makes one point 
crystal-clear : that in the German view the plan to 
get rid of the played-out Red Tsar, to put a sub- 
servient White Tsar in his place, had to be dropped. 
The Red Tsar might be useful yet. As Dr. Ritzier 
had remarked: "The Bolsheviks are still necessary." 

The usefulness of the Bolsheviks was to be two- 
fold: (i) to defend the German front in Russia; 
(2) to prevent the White Tsar from joining the 
Russian forces of the Entente. 

This being the story of the Tsar's murder, we are 
concerned chiefly with the second part of Yankel 
Svcrdlov's German programme. How was it to 
be carried out, so that there should be no possible 
mistake? Obviously, there was only one way 
through death's dark portals. To bring the Tsar 
or the Tsarcvich to Moscow would involve risks. 
The Jews were in a fright; telegrams discovered in 
Ekaterinburg show that they trusted none of the 
Russians in their employ. That is why the Roman- 
ovs remained in Ekaterinburg. 

109 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

Four days before Mirbach's assassination, conse- 
quently while the Red Tsar had his daily audiences 
with the representative of the Red Kaiser, 
Goloshchekin was already in Moscow, had dis- 
cussed the murder with Sverdlov, and had tele- 
.graphed to Beloborodov to send another member of 
the Conclave to Moscow. 

The Germans approved the murder; there can 
be no doubt on this point. The position held by 
Mirbach in Moscow, his daily reports from the 
members of the Red Inquisition, which naturally 
had the closest connection with the arrangements 
for the murder, such as the sending to Ekaterinburg 
of the ten Magyar-German "Letts" as executioners, 
are conclusive evidences. The Red Tsar and the 
Red Kaiser were in accord, 

But it was absolutely essential that no Russians 
should be left inside the house where the Romanovs 
were to die. Whether the Germans assented to the 
wholesale slaughter that took place remains in, 
doubt. By that time Mirbach had gone to his last 
account, and the blood^ 
murderer? perhaps ""exceeded the German design, 

1n AtHt l,a,.* f * "'' * * 

and therein may be found a good reason for the 
report of the "safety" of the family, but the Rod 
Kaiser cannot escape responsibility for the whole 
crime, any more than can the Red Tsar who planned 
it and the Soviet regime that rendered such a crime 
possible, 

Here is a translation of the original typewritten 
400 



JNAJCKATAVJE UF M K . RU3JEKT WILTON" 

telegram found in the archives of the Telegraph 
Office in Ekaterinburg and included in the dossier: 

"Moscow. 
"To President of TSIK SVERDLOV for GOLOSHCHE- 

KIN. 

"Syromolotov has just gone for organisation of 
affair in accordance with directions of Centre., 
Apprehensions unfounded stop Avdeiev superseded, 
his assistant Moshkin arrested. Yurovsky replaces 
Avdeiev. Interior guard all relieved replaced by 
others, stop. 4558* 

"BELOBORODOV." 

Below the text in black ink is marked the date: 
"4/VH" and further, in ink of the same colour: 
"Telegram received," after which in black pencil is 
the signature: "Komisar To . . .** (the rest of the 
name illegible), this representative of the Soviet 
being in charge of the telegraph office and endors- 
ing all official messages as they were handed in for 
transmission. 

ThivS message needs no explanation. It is a full 
and crushing confirmation of all that has preceded : 
Fear of the Russians; preparation of the murder; 
direction of the plan from Moscow; und eagerness 
of the local Jews to anticipate the signal for the 
butchery. The horrible servility of the dummy 
president Bdoborodov is disclosed in all its naked- 
ness* He hastens to assure his Jewish masters that 

401 



THE LAST PAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

their "apprehensions" are "unfounded." The 
German-Magyars who had done their best to carry 
out the Red Kaiser's behest to capture Siberia and 
to crush any hope of Russia's military revival, they 
were now called in to consummate the Red Kaiser's 
plan by murdering the Tsar. 

For all that has been stated in these chapters 
there is unimpeachable authority. There is the 
dossier. And there is the overwhelming eorroboni- 
tion of the horrible realities that have converted a 
large part of Europe into a charnel, Russia into a 
pest-house and the rest of the world into a hot-bed 
of unrest. 

And pre-eminent among the Doers of Evil, mur- 
derers and despoilers, has been the Red Kaiser. 

When, in 1915, he wrote to the Tsar, asking htm 
to recall the days when they were friends, and 
Nicholas, mindful of the bitter lessons that friend- 
ship had entailed, replied that those days must for- 
ever be forgotten, Wilhelm of Hohen'/ollern 
started the machinery that was to sweep out of ex- 
istence the Tsardom and Russia, and the hapless 
Romanovs. 

In the autumn of 1915 there assembled in Vienna 
the representatives of the German and Austrian 
General-Staffs to discuss a plan for the promotion 
of a revolutionary movement in Russia. It was 
then that all the outlines of the "Russian'* revolu- 
tion were laid down; it was at this meeting thru 
the leading actors in the Red tragedy were ch wn : 
402 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

the Lenins and the Sverdlovs and the host of 
Jewish wreckers, who spent the interval between 
their engagement and their appearance on the Rus- 
sian stage in the calm of Swiss resorts, studying 
and rehearsing their parts. 

The money that financed the "Russian" revolu- 
tion was German money, and I say it on the 
strongest evidence which can be corroborated in the 
German secret archives YANKEL SVERDLOV RE- 
CEIVED A SALARY FROM THE GERMANS TILL 
NOVEMBER 7, 1917, when, becoming Red Tsar 
of All the Russias, he had at his disposal loot un- 
imaginable. 

And thus it came to pass that the Germans who 
slew the Tsar and the Jews who organised, aided 
and abetted the murder each left his mark upon 
the walls of Ipatiev's house. 



403 



CHAPTER XVI 
EPILOGUE 

Many hundreds of relics were collected in and 
around Ekaterinburg by the law, and more particu- 
larly by the military, officers of the White govern- 
ment. The larger number had no value as clues. 
They were personal belongings jewelry, clothing, 
linen that had been stolen before and after the 
murder. By Admiral Kolchak's orders, this prop- 
erty was taken to Vladivostok by General Diterichs 
In February, 1919, and sent to the Tsar's sister the 
Grand Duchess Xenia as next-of-kin. 

Those of the Romanovs who had not been in the 
power of the Soviets and had succeeded in leaving 
the country were destitute. The total fortune be- 
longing to the Tsar in England amounted to 500. 

Two days after the murder, the Soviet govern- 
ment issued a decree declaring all the property and 
possessions of the Romanovs forfeited to them. 
This act had a double purpose : to afford any banks 
holding funds to the credit of the family a pretext 
for non-payment; to 'legitimise*' the robbery of the 
corpses in the wood and the appropriation of the 
valuables left in Ekaterinburg. 

The ropes of pearls and the matchless pearl neck- 
404 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

laces snatched from the bodies have been the objects 
of barter on the Continental and London markets. 
Red missions smuggled in a huge quantity of jewels 
belonging to the Crown and to the Romanovs per- 
sonally as well as to other individuals all "for- 
feited" in the same manner. 

Among the relics was a private code that was 
found in the ventilator of the Ipatiev lavatory. It 
bore the following inscription in the Empress's 
hand: "For my own beloved Nicky, dear, to use 
when he is absent from his 'spitzbu/ Fr. his lov- 
ingly, Alice, Osborne, July, 1894." The German 
word had been erased and rewritten in Russian! 
The owner of this little book had evidently prized 
it above everything else and fearing that it might 
be taken away from him had hidden it hoping, no 
doubt, to claim it some day. 

Also among the mementoes from her funeral pyre 
came a ruby that belonged to the murdered Em- 
press. It was identified by her maid who told the 
following story: "The Emperor gave Her Majesty 
a ruby ring when she was only fifteen. They fell in 
love even then. It was at the wedding of her sister 
the Grand Duchess Elizabeth. After that they 
thought about each other for eight years. The 
Empress always wore the ruby ring hanging on a 
chain on her breast." 

The spaniel Joy also came to England. Both 
the dogs that were most highly prized by the Im* 
perial family were of English breeds. Jemmy, who. 

405 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

died with his masters, was a diminutive black-and- 
tan King Charles, so small that he could not mount 
the Ipatiev stairs unaided. 

The sufferings of the Romanovs in Ipatiev's 
house were so terrible that it is not seemly to mis- 
represent them, as some writers have done, in sordid 
fashion. I have the inventory of the house and its 
contents, signed by Ipatiev and the Komisars; I 
have the proccs-*uerbal of Sergeiev's inspection, 
made within a fortnight of the murder; lastly, I 
have the evidence of my own eyes. The house itself 
contained every comfort and convenience: electric 
light, excellent stoves, a well appointed bath-room 
and lavatory, electric bells everywhere, plenty of 
good and even luxurious furniture. The bath was 
in working order and, when Sergeiev visited it con** 
tained: firewood for the heater, sheets bearing the 
Imperial monogram and a cake of sorip on the rack, 
besides numerous other signs of frequent usage. The 
brutal guards, being used to the Russian steam bath, 
were not interested in this "outlandish" contrivance, 
and except for their prying and offensive habits did 
not apparently stand in the way of personal cleanli- 
ness. 

The story of girlish locks shorn because of the 
Impossibility of other methods of combating dirt 
and its consequences is not borne out by the evi- 
dence. "Combings" of hair of four different hues 
were found; also some short hair in the bath-room. 
One would expect to find them. It is stated in the 
406 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON* 

dossier that a barber visited the house to attend the 
Tsar and the Tsarevich. 

Each member of the family had his or her bed. 
There were sheets, pillows and blankets. There 
was a wash-house in the court-yard. 

For some reason the house was deficient in crock- 
ery and plate and table linen, hence quite needless- 
discomfort was inflicted upon the family at meal- 
times. The peasant-guards, inoculated with the 
anti-bourgeois theories, saw no particular hardship 
in their feeding out of one dish, as they themselves 
are accustomed to do in the villages. 

The torment that was endured by the captives 
was far worse than any merely physical privations. 
But one such privation did affect them very 
grievously: the utter impossibility of seeing any- 
thing at all beyond the painted glass of their win- 
dows. The youngest Grand Duchess (Anastasia) 
one day could not brook this privation any longer 
and managed to open a window in the girls' room. 
She almost paid for this act with hei; life. The 
sentry in the inner hoarding immediately fired, jtfst 
missing her. The bullet lodged in the window 
frame. Anastasia gained nothing except a fright. 
She saw nothing except the hoarding of the sentry 9l 
and did not wait for a second shot* 

In the room where the Imperial couple and 
Alexis lived and slept next to the chamber in 
which their four daughters were crowded Alex- 

407 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

andra placed a good-luck sign. It was so unobtru- 
sive that Gaida, the Czech commander who forcibly 
installed himself in this room, probably did not 
notice it. In pencil she formed the mystic sign of 




ALEXANDRA'S GOOD LUCK SIGN 



swastika and inscribed the date "17/30 April," the 
day of her arrival in the house. 

In the death-chamber in addition to the "Bd~ 
satzar" inscription was one that has yet to be 




TOE MYSTERIOUS INSCRIPTIONS INT THE DEATH CHAMBER. 

deciphered* It is in thick black ink, written with 
an expert hand, and just below, on the window-sill 
are three groups of figures that may or may not have 
a meaning. 

Some of the persons with whom the reader has 
become familiar have gone to their last account* 
408 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

The Russian regicide Medvedev died in prison of 
typhus early last year. His accomplice Yakimov 
died in prison of inflammation of the lungs at the 
end of last year. Their death and burial certificates 
are both in the dossier. 

Yurovsky wrote a letter to a certain Dr. A. before 
he fled from Ekaterinburg imploring him to protect 
his old mother "who does not share my views but 
who may suffer simply because I am her son." It 
is at once an avowal of guilt and a proof that even 
the most blood-thirsty wretch has some good in him. 
This man had coolly tortured, murdered and cut up 
innocent children, and was not able to remove his 
old mother because he had to take the proofs of his 
crime to Moscow, yet he does not forget her. . . . 
Before the Kolchak armies left Ekaterinburg we 
heard that Yurovsky had been seen in the city. 
Had he come at great risk to look for his mother? 
Sokolov had had her removed to Irkutsk. She 
feared and loathed her son. 

Yankel Sverdlov, the Red Tsar, died in Moscow 
early in 1919* He was knocked on the head by the 
workmen at one of the Moro^ov mills, and suc- 
cumbed to concussion of the brain. Sovietdom was 
in an uproar. It was officially announced that this 
"valiant defender of the people's rights" had come 
to a natural end, by inflammation of the lungs, 
Nevertheless, the chrezvychaika could not allow 
the Red Tsar to be so dishonoured. Yankel was 
followed to the outer bourne by thousands of inno- 

409 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

cent victims offered up in holocaust to his memory. 

The mortal remains of the blood-stained agent 
and associate of the Red Kaiser were exposed to the 
public gaze and given a pompous Red funeral, and 
the Theatre Square which faces the building where 
Yankel had spun his web of blood received a new 
name, the accursed name of Sverdlov. 

None of the Red Jews dared to wear the mantle 
of Yankel Sverdlov openly. His office was dele- 
gated to Kalinin, a "dummy" of the Beloborodov 
variety, who provided the needful Russian screen to 
cloak their villainies. For there was no change in 
the spirit of the Red Jew government of Russia, 
only an adaptation of methods, a variation of vic- 
tims first the bourgeois^ then the proletairc* 

The Russians who fought and bled for their coun- 
try are almost extinct. One of the last who died 
in the sacred cause was Nicholas IL and the other 
Romanov victims of the Red invaders, German and 
Jewish. A remnant persisted to the end. To them 
the Red Usurpers of Moscow could never be any- 
thing except an alien domination. 

I recall the night before we left Ekaterinburg. 
The Reds were approaching, but Sokolov went into 
the darkness and the rain to obtain the evidence of 
important peasant witnesses. He told them who he 
was and the object of his call They could have 
locked him up in a cellar and given him up to the 
Reds. It was to their advantage to do so* By giv* 
ing him information they incurred great risk* He 
410 



NARRATIVE OF MR. ROBERT WILTON 

explained it all to them. "And now, what will you 
do?" he asked. "Will you help justice? Will you 
remember that he who is dead was your Tsar?" 
They did not hesitate one instant. They chose the 
path of honour, of self-sacrifice. They gave their 
evidence and brought Sokolov on his way. 

It is the peasant that will bring Russia back to 
new life. Alexandra's vision may yet come true, 
and Nicholas and the Romanovs may not have died 
in vain. 



411 



PARTra 



THE MEMBERS OF THE IMPERIAL FAM- 

ILY AT THE OUTBREAK OF THE 

REVOLUTION 

1. NICHOLAS II, ALEXANDROVICH, Emperor of 

Russia, oldest son of the Emperor Alexander 
III, bom in Gachino (near Petersburg) on 
May 6, 1867. Ascended to the throne on 
October 20, 1894. Married Princess Alice of 
Hesse on November 14, 1894, At the out- 
break of the Revolution was forty-nine years 
of age. 

2. EMPRESS ALEXANDRA (PRINCESS ALICE) FE- 

ODOROVNA, wife of the Emperor Nicholas II, 
born Princess of Hesse, on May 25, 1872. 
At the outbreak of the Revolution was forty* 
four years of age. 

3. GRAND DUCHESS OLOA NIKOLAIEVNA, the Em- 

peror's oldest daughter, born on November 

3> 1895. 

4. GRAND DUCHESS TATIANA NXKOLAIEVNA, the 

Emperor's second daughter, born on May 29, 



5* GRAND DUCHESS MARIA NXKOLAIEVNA, the 

4t - 
) 



THE LAST PAYS OF THE ROMANCVS 

Emperor's third daughter, bom June 14, 
1899. 

6. GRAND DUCHESS ANASTASIA NIKOLAIEVNA, 

the Emperor's youngest daughter, born on 
June 5, 1901. 

7. GRAND DUKE ALEXIS NIKOLAIEVICH, the Em* 

peror's only son and Heir to the Crown, born 
July 30, 1904. 

8. GRAND DUKE MICHAEL ALEXANDROVICH, the 

Emperor's brother; considered to be the heir 
to the throne befort the birth of Alexis Nik* 
olaievich. Born November 22, 1872. 



416 



n 

CHRONOLOGY OF THE DOCUMENTS 

1917 

1. March 2/15 Emperor Nicholas II signed in 

Pskov the act of his abdication, assigning the 
throne to the Grand Duke Michael Alexan- 
drovich. 

2. March 3/16 Grand Duke Michael Alexandra 

vich refused to ascend the throne before the 
decision of the Constituent Assembly was 
made. 

3. March 4/17 Arrival of the deposed Emperor 

at the general headquarters at the front. 

4. March 7/20 General Kornilov, fulfilling the 

order of the Council of Ministers, arrested 
the Empress in the palace of Tsarskoe-Selo. 
All the children had the measles. 

5. March 8/21 The arrest of the Emperor by a 

commissar of the provisional government. 

6. March 9/22 Arrival of the arrested Emperor 

at Tsarskoe-Selo. 

7. July 31 -August 13 The departure of the im- 

perial family for Tobolsk, according to the 
orders of the provisional government, under 
the supervision of the members of the Petro- 

417 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

grad soviet of workmen and soldiers' 
deputies. 

8. August 6/19 Arrival of the Tsar and the im- 

perial family at Tobolsk. The night was 
spent on board the steamer, before the fam- 
ily moved to the house of the governor. 

9. December 29-January 11, 1918 Uprising of 

soldiers in Tobolsk because of a prayer made 
by the deacon during the church service for 
the prolongation of the days of the imperial 
family. 

1918 

10. February 12/25 Arrival of an order from 

Moscow cutting down the allowances of the 
imperial family to the limits of a soldier's 
ration* Beginning of the life of privation. 

11. March 3o-ApriI 12 Arrival of an order from 

Moscow to increase the severity of the super- 
vision of the imperial family. 

12. April 13/26 Departure of the Emperor, the 

Empress and Grand Duchess Maria Nik- 
olaievna to Ekaterinburg. The other daugh- 
ters and the Tsarevich remained in Tobolsk. 

13. April 17/30 Arrival of the Emperor and the 

persons with him at Ekaterinburg, A search 
of the Emperor's belonging^ 

14. April i8-May i Dismissal of all persons at- 

tached to the imperial family, with the ex* 
ception of the physician. 
418 



CHRONOLOGY OF THE DOCUMENTS 

15. May 7/20 The Tsarevich and Grand Duch- 

esses left Tobolsk for Ekaterinburg. 

16. May 10/23 Arrival of the Tsarevich and 

Grand Duchesses at Ekaterinburg. 

17. July 4/17 The last day of the life of the im- 

perial family, and the last walk in the 
garden. 

18. July 5/18 At daybreak the Emperor, his wife 

and children were killed in the basement 
of the Ipatiev house. The bodies were 
searched. 

19. The same day the bodies were taken out of the 

house and burned. 



419 



Ill 

EXPLANATION OF RUSSIAN NAMES 
MENTIONED IN THE DOCUMENTS 

C. E. C. Central Executive Committee of the 
All Russian Congress of Workmen, Soldiers and 
Peasants 5 Deputies, the most important institution 
in the Soviet Republic. 

CHREZVYCHAIKA Extraordinary Commission of 
Inquiry an institution of secret political police, 
of the Soviet Republic, which exists in every dis- 
trict town. Through this institution, according to 
the scheme of the Bolsheviki, the reign of terror is 
carried out. 

KRESTY A jail in Petrograd where political pris- 
oners were confined. 

MOTOVILIHA WORKS Situated on the river 
Kama, three miles from Perm* Large production of 
war material. 

SISSERTS MINING WORKS Fifty versts from 
Ekaterinburg, producing cast-iron, iron, marble, and 
gold. 

, TOBOLSK Town on the right bank of the river 
Irtysh, near the mouth of the river Tobol, formerly 
a very important town. After the trans-Siberian 
420 



RUSSIAN NAMES IN THE DOCUMENTS 

railroad was constructed It lost its importance, being 
too far from the railroad. 

VERKH-!SSETSK IRON WORKS Situated half a 
mile from Ekaterinburg. 

ZNAMENSKY IKON OF THE HOLY VIRGIN A 
very ancient holy image given to the Tsar Alexis 
Mikaielovich (the Isecond czar of the Romanoff 
dynasty) by the Patriarch of Antioch. To the 
memory of this image the Empress Elizabeth Pe- 
trovna built a church in Tsarskoe-Selo. 



IV 
ALPHABETICAL INDEX OF NAMES 

AVDEIEV, Alexander, formerly a locksmith. Was 
commissar to the imperial house at Ekaterin- 
burg from May till June, 1918. 

AKSIXJTA, Captain, in command of the First Rifles 
Regiment in Tsarskoe-Selo, was commanding 
the detachment of the guards of the imperial 
family in Tobolsk. 

APRAKSIN, Count. At the outbreak of the revolution 
was attached to the empress, being in charge of 
her affairs. 

BENCKENDORF, Count. Cavalry general. Was 
grand marshal of the imperial court. 

BOTKIN, Eugene Sergeievich, physician. Stayed 
permanently with the imperial family from the 
moment of their arrest till the time they were 
murdered. Was shot with the imperial family. 

BUXHOEVDEN, Sophie, Baroness. Personal 'maid 
of honour to the empress. Accompanied her to 
Tobolsk. 

BELOBORODOV, Alexander. Chairman of the Ural 
provincial soviet of the workmen's and soldiers* 
deputies. Following his orders the imperial 
family were assassinated, 
422 



ALPHABETICAL INDEX OF NAMES 

CHEMODUROV, Terenty Ivanovich; servant to 
the emperor; arrived with the imperial family 
at Tobolsk; stayed with the emperor up till the 
time the imperial family was moved to Eka- 
terinburg. He died shortly after. 

CHKEIDZE, Member of the duma; dne of the lead- 
ers of the Petrograd soviet of workmen's depu- 
ties during the first months of the revolution. 

DMITRI EV, High Commissar, commissioned to 
Tobolsk by the Omsk soviet of workmen's 
deputies. 

DEMIDOVA, Anna, favourite maid of the empress. 
Stayed permanently with her in Tsarskoe-Selo, 
Tobolsk and Ekaterinburg. Was shot with the 
imperial family. 

DBHN, Julia, Mme. Wife of first officer on Em- 
peror's yacht Standart. An intimate friend of 
the Empress. 

DERBVENKO, Vladimir Nikolaievich, physician. 
Stayed with the imperial family in Tobolsk. 

DOLGORUKY, Alexander Vasilievich, prince, marshal 
of the imperial court. Stayed with the im- 
perial family in Tobolsk. 

DOMODZIANZ, Ensign, Armenian origin. Was 
elected by the Tsarskoe-Selo soviet of work- 
men's deputies to assist Colonel Kobylinsky. 

DuT2MAN, Commissar to the imperial family. 
Commissioned from Omsk by the Siberian so- 
viet of workmen's deputies. 



THE LAST PAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

ERZBERG, Elizabeth. The grand duchesses' maid. 
Parted from the imperial family on the way to 
Ekaterinburg. 

GIBBES, Sidney. An English teacher to the grand 
duchesses and tsarevich. Joined the imperial 
family in Tobolsk and stayed with them until 
their arrival in Ekaterinburg. 

GILLIARD, French teacher to the grand duchesses and 
the tsarevich. Stayed with the imperial 
family in Tobolsk and accompanied the tsuro 
vich to Ekaterinburg, where he was dis- 
missed from the imperial family's service, 

HARITONOV, Ivan. The chef to the imperial family, 
Was shot with the imperial family. 

HENDRYKOVA, Anastasia Vasilzevna, Countess. Per- 
sonal maid of honour to the empress* Came 
with her to Tobolsk. 

HITROVO, Margaret. Maid of honour to the grand 
duchesses. Arrived at Tobolsk and was ur** 
rested. 

HLYNOFF, Priest in Tobolsk who replaced the priest 
Vasiliev. 

HOHRIAKOV, a graduate of an ecclesiastical semi- 
nary; chairman of the Tobolsk soviet of work- 
men's and soldiers' deputies; became com- 
missar to the imperial family after the resigna- 
tion of Yakovlev. 

KERENSKY, Alexander Fcodorovich, minister 
of justice, formerly prime minister of the pro* 
visional government 
424 



ALPHABETICAL INDEX OF NAMES 

KOBYLINSKY, Eugene Stefanovich, Colonel; was ap- 
pointed commander of the garrison in Tsarskoe- 
Selo. Later was commandant of the palace. 
Brought the imperial family to Tobolsk, and 
was in command of the guards until the time 
the imperial family moved to Ekaterinburg. 

KORNILOV, Lavr Georgievich, famous Russian 
general and patriot. A prominent name in the 
history of the Russian revolution. During the 
first days of the revolution was made command- 
ing officer of the forces of the Petrograd mili- 
tary district. Was the executor of the order of 
the provisional government for the arrest of 
the imperial family. 

KOROVICHENKO, Paul, Colonel, military jurist; 
was made commandant of the Tsarskoe-Selo 
palace after Kotsebue. 

KOTSEBUE, Captain of Uhlans, commandant of the 
Tsarskoe-Selo palace. Was dismissed and suc- 
ceeded by Korovichenko. 

KUZMIN, Ensign; was in command of the military 
forces of the Petrograd district after Kornilov 
and Polovtzov. 

Lvov, George Evgenevich, prime minister of the 
provisional government during the first three 
months of the revolution. Was imprisoned in 
Ekaterinburg at the time the imperial family 
was kept in Ipatiev's house. 

MAKAKOV, Engineer; was attached to the imperial 
family during their journey to Tobolsk. 

425 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

MEDVEDEV, Pavel; aged thirty-one; senior guard 
of the imperial family in Ekaterinburg. Took 
part in the murder of the imperial family. 

MOSHKIN, Alexander; formerly locksmith; was as- 
sistant to Commissar Avdeiev in Ekaterinburg. 
Was discharged for drunkenness and theft of 
the emperor's belongings. 

MRACHKOVSKY, Serge; Military Commissar in the 
Red army. Collected the men for the guard 
of the imperial family in Ekaterinburg. 

NAGORNY, Clement Gregorievich ; a servant of 
the tsarevich; stayed with them permanently. 
After the time the imperial family moved to 
Ekaterinburg, was dismissed, put in prison 
and shot. 

NARYSHKINA, Lady of honour to the empress. 

NIKIFOROV, Alexis; senior guard of the imperial 
family in Tobolsk. 

NIKOLSKY, Alexander; Ensign, member of the So- 
cial Revolutionary party. Was assistant to 
Commissar Pankratov in Tobolsk, 

NIKULIN, Assistant to Commissar Yurovsky in 
Ekaterinburg. 

PANKRATOV, Basil Semenovich; was appointed in 
September, 1917, as commissar to the im- 
perial family and was dismissed by the soldiers 
after the Bolshevik revolution. 

PEREVERZEFF, Paul Nikolaievich; lawyer, replaced 
Kerensky in the post of minister of justice and 
resigned on account of trouble he had with the 
426 



ALPHABETICAL INDEX OF NAMES 

Petrograd Bolsheviki, Made the search of the 
emperor's papers at Tsarskoe-Selo. 

PIGNATTI, District Commissar in Tobolsk; occupied 
this position from the first days of the revolu- 
tion till the time of the downfall of Admiral 
Kolchak's government. 

POLOVTZOV, General; took General Kornilov's po- 
sition as commander of the military forces of 
the Petrograd district. 

PROSKURIAKOV, Philip; aged seventeen, work- 
man; was amongst the guards of the imperial 
family in Ekaterinburg. 

RAZPUTIN, Gregory; half monk and half adven- 
turer; was killed a month before the revolution. 

RODIONOV, Commander of the Letts detachment in 
Tobolsk; escorted the tsarevich and the grand 
duchesses from Tobolsk to Ekaterinburg. 

SRDNKV, Ivan; servant of the grand duchesses- 

SCHNEIDER, Katherine, court lecturer; was separated 
from the imperial family in Ekaterinburg. 

SVBRDI,OV, a prominent Bolshevik, chairman of 
the central executive committee of the All- 
Russian congress of Soviets of workmen's, 
soldiers' and peasants' deputies. 

TATISHCHEFF, Ilia Leonidovich, Count, gen- 
eral A, D* C. to the emperor; stayed with the 
imperial family in Tobolsk; discharged on their 
arrival at Ekaterinburg; shot. 

TEG LEVA, Alexandra, nurse of the tsarevich and 
grand duchesses; stayed with the imperial 

427 



THE LAST DAYS OF THE ROMANOVS 

family up to the time of their arrival in Ekat- 
erinburg. 

TRTJPP, Aletxis; servant of the imperial family; 
stayed with them and was shot with the im- 
perial family. 

TUTELBERO, Mary, maid to the empress; was sepa- 
rated from the imperial family on the way to 
Ekaterinburg. 

VASILIEV, Clergyman of the Blagoveschensky 
church in Tobolsk; officiated at divine service 
in the imperial family's house. 

VERSHININ, Member of the duma, accompanied 
the imperial family to Tobolsk as commissar 
of the provisional government. 

VOLKOV, Alexis; servant to the empress, tlis~ 
charged and arrested on the arrival of the irn~ 
perial family at Ekaterinburg. 

VYRUBOVA, personal maid of honour and a friend 
of the empress. 

YAKIMOV, Anataly; workman who was a senior 
guard of the imperial family in Ekaterinburg 

YAKOVLEV, Bolshevik commissar to the 5mj>eriul 
family. Replaced Pankratov on April 9, 1918. 
Came from Moscow to Tobolsk and went hack 
on account of trouble he had with the Ekat- 
erinburg Bolsheviki, who seized the imperial 
family. 

YUROVSKY, Commandant, jailer and executioner of 
the imperial family. 



428 



