Digitized  by  tine  Internet  Arciiive 

in  2009  witii  funding  from 

University  of  Toronto 


littp://www.arcliive.org/details/lastdaysofromanoOOwilt 


THE      LAST 
DAYS         OF 

THE 
ROMANOVS 


THE 

LAST    D     YS 

OF   THE 

ROMANOVS 

From    15th   March,    191 7 
Part   I— THE   NARRATIVE 

BY 

ROBERT   WILTON 

Special  Correspondent  of   The  Times 
Author  of  '  Russia's  Agony  ' 

Part   II— THE   DEPOSITIONS   OF 
EYE-WITNESSES 


THORNTON   BUTTERWORTH   LIMITED 
62    ST.     MARTIN'S    LANE,     LONDON,    W.C.  z 


First  Published Sept.  ig20 


CONTENTS 


PART  I 

HAP.                                                                                                                             PAGE 

I    Prologue 13 

II    The  Stage  and  the  Actors 

22 

III    No  Escape  :    Alexandra  Misjudged 

.      30 

IV    Rasputin  the  Peasant 

39 

V    '  The  Tsar  is  Innocent ' 

47 

VI    Exile  in  Siberia  .... 

.      55 

Vll    Moscow  and  Berlin 

.      65 

III    Via  Crucis 

•      75 

IX    Calvary 

.      85 

X    '  Without  Trace  '          .         .         . 

.      96 

XI     '  Murder  Will  Out  '     . 

.     105 

XII    All  the  Romanovs 

.    119 

QII    The  Jackals         .... 

.     131 

>CIV    By  Order  of  the  '  Tsik  ' 

•     139 

XV    The  Red  Kaiser  .... 

149 

^VI    Epilogue 

156 

PART  II 
he  Story  of  the  Published  Documents 
he  Depositions^  of  Colonel  Kobylinsky 


.         .         .     165 
.     167 

[continued  overleaf 


CONTENTS— PART  II  (continued) 


The  Deposition  of  M.  Gillard 

The  Deposition  of  Mr.  Gibbes 

The  Examination  of  Anatoly  Yakimov 

The  Examination  of  Pavel  Medvedev  . 

The  Examination  of  Philip  Proskuriakov 

Appendix 


page 
224 

242 

259 

285 

294 

3'^9 


LINE   CUTS    IN    THE   TEXT 

Sketch  Map  of  the  Road  from  Ekaterinburg  to  Kop- 

TIAKI,     showing     the    ROAD     ALONG    WHICH     THE    BODIES 
WERE    CONVEYED     AND    THE    GaNINA    MiNE    WHERE    THEY 

were  destroyed 

Plan  of  Ipatiev's  House  and  Grounds  and  of  Upper 
AND  Basement  Floors 

The  Empress  Alexandra's  Good-Luck  Sign  . 

The  mysterious  Inscription  in  the  Death  Chamber     . 


PAGE 


107 

159 
160 

160 


LIST    OF    ILLUSTRATIONS 

E 

The  Martyred  Family         ....  Frontispiece 

In  this  group,  photographed  four  years  before  their  death, 
the  Tsar,  Nicholas  II,  the  Tsaritsa,  Alexandra  Feodorovna,  and  , 

their  youngest  daughter,  the  Grand  Duchess  Anastasia,  are  seated  ^         ^ 

in  the  centre  ;  behind  them  stand  (from  left  to  right)  the  Grand 
Duchesses  Maria,  Olga  and  Tatiana.  The  Tsarevich  Alexis, 
then  ten  years  old,  wears  a  sailor  suit.  Nicholas  II  is  in  the 
uniform  of  the  Fusilier  Guards.  The  mother  and  daughters  have 
on  some  of  the  matchless  pearls  afterwards  stolen  from  their  dead 
bodies  by  the  murderers. 

TO    FACE    PAGE 

Rasputin — Wounded  at  his  Village  Home     .         .      40 

Just  before  the  outbreak  of  hostilities  in  1914,  the  '  saint  ' 
had  been  stabbed  by  a  peasant  girl  whom  he  had  wronged,  and 
was  being  nursed  by  his  wife  and  daughters  at  Pokrovskoe 
(Tobolsk  Province) .  Here  he  received  the  only  letter  that  he  ever 
had  from  Nicholas  II,  and  here  he  boasted  that  if  he  had  been 
in  Petrograd  at  the  time,  he  would  have  stopped  the  war. 
Nicholas  and  Alexandra  had  no  suspicion  that  '  Grishka  '  was 
a  German  agent.  On  this  portrait  the  '  saint  '  has  inscribed 
some  of  his  pious  reflections.  '  What  of  to-morrow  ?  Thou  art 
our  Guide,  O  God.     How  many  Thorny  paths  in  this  Life  ? ' 

Alexandra's  Despair  over  Rasputin's  Death  .     40 

Facsimile  of  a  letter  in  which  the  Empress  for  once  betrays 
her  feelings.     The  closing  sentence,  written  disjointedly,  refers  y/ 

to  his  '  murder,'  which  occurred  a  week  beforehand,  and  her 
anxiety  for  the  safety  of  the  Tsar,  showing  that  she  knew  of  a 
plot  against  his  life.  '  Besides  _ever3rthing,  try  for  a  moment  to 
realize  what  it  is  to  know  a  friend  in  daily,  hourly  danger  of  also 
being  foully  murdered.     But  God  is  all  mercy.' 

Photographs  taken  during  their  Captivity.         .       56 

(a)  The  Tsar  sawing  wood  in  the  courtyard  of  the  Governor's 
Palace,  Tobolsk.  It  is  winter.  He  wears  the  papaha  (military 
fur  hat)  and  felt  boots. 

(fe)  The  Empress  Alexandra  in  the  Governor's  Palace,  Tobolsk. 

(c)  The  Tsarevich  Alexis  and  his  spaniel  Joy,  in  the  park  at 
Tsarskoe. 

Ipatiev's  House  in  Ekaterinburg  ....      80 

This    photograph    was   taken   in    Ma3^    1918,    directly   after  ^ 

the  arrival  of  Nicholas,  Alexandra  and  Maria.  Their  gaolers 
had  had  time  to  put  up  only  the  inner  hoarding.  The  outer  hoard- 
ing, erected  later,  enclosed  the  gateway  and  approaches  to  the 
house.  Machine-guns  were  mounted  at  different  points  within 
the  enclosure  and  in  the  garret.     Note  the  shrine  on  the  left. 

The  Chamber  of  Death 80 

a  vaulted  semi-basement,  18  feet  by  16  feet.  Photographed 
from  the  spot  where  the  German,  so-called  '  Lett,'  soldiers 
stood  while  firing  their  revolvers.  The  Tsar  and  his  son  sat  in 
the  centre  of  the  room  and  behind  them  was  the  Empress,  also 
seated.     The  other  victims  stood  at  the  further  wall. 


8  LIST   OF   ILLUSTRATIONS    (continued) 

PLATE  TO  FACE  PAGE 

V  Yankel  (Jacob)  Sverdlov — The  Red  Tsar      ,         .     88 

He  organized  the  murder  of  the  Romanov  family,  and  was 
killed  by  Russian  workmen. 

He  wears  a  short  shirt  and  shabby  overcoat. 

Bolshevism  had  ruined  the  industries  of  the  country. 

Only  the  cap  of  expensive  fur  befits  the  high  office  of  the 
wearer.  He  was  President  of  the  'Tsik,'  i.e.  Prime  Minister  and 
ruler  of  the  Red  Inquisition.  He  poses  with  his  portfolio  at  the 
entrance  of  his  palatial  offices  in  the  Hotel  Metropole  in  Moscow, 
the  square  in  front  of  which  is  named  after  him. 

Yankel  Yurovsky,  the  Murderer  .         .         .88 

He  shot  the  Tsar  and  the  Tsarevich  with  his  own  hand. 

VI  At  the  Ganina  Mine        ......    104 

On  the  left,  Mr.  Sydney  Gibbes,  the  Tsarevich's  tutor  ;  on  the 
right,  looking  down  the  shaft,  Mr.  Robert  Wilton,  The  Times' 
Special  Correspondent.  At  the  bottom  of  this  shaft  was  a  false 
floor,  beneath  which  the  ashes  of  the  victims  were  cunningly 
concealed.  The  bodies  had  been  cut  up  near  the  shaft  and 
burned  on  two  pyres,  one  next  to  this  spot. 

The  Pyre  at  the  Birch  Tree  ....    104 

N.  A.  Sokolov,  General  Domontovich  and  his  A.D.C.  pose 
at  the  limits  of  the  larger  pyre,  where  most  of  the  bodies  and 
clothing  were  cremated.  Alongside  stands  the  tree  with  the 
tell-tale  inscription. 

VII  Relics  found  near  the  Pyres         ....    128 

(a)  The  Empress's  great  diamond  pendant. 

(6)  Her  pectoral  cross,  set  with  emeralds. 

(c)  One  of  the  Empress's  huge  pearl  earrings. 

'  Faithful  unto  Death  ' 128 

This  group  was  taken  at  Tobolsk  during  the  captivity.  All 
except  M.  Pierre  Gillard,  the  French  tutor  (in  the  centre),  died 
for  their  loyalty  to  the  Imperial  Family.  Countess  Hendry kova  is 
seated  on  the  right  with  Mile.  Schneider  by  her  side.  Their 
mangled  bodies  were  found  outside  Perm.  Count  Tatishchev 
(left)  and  Prince  Dolgoruky  (right)  '  disappeared  '  at  Ekaterin- 
burg. Two  bodies,  supposed  to  be  theirs,  were  found  outside 
the  city,  one  bearing  documents  of  '  citizen  Dolgorukov.' 

VIII  The  Faults  of  the  Earlier  Inquiry     ,         .         .     144 

N.  A.  Sokolov,  pointing  to  the  wall  of  Ipatiev's  house,  calls 
attention  to  a  serious  omission  made  by  his  predecessor.  General 
Diterichs  (seated)  listens.  The  other  auditor  is  M.  Magnitsky. 
Prokuror  (Public  Prosecutor)  of  the  Ekaterinburg  Court. 
Photograph  taken  in  the  garden,  beside  the  terrace. 

The  Hand  of  the  Red  Jew  Murderers.         .         .     144 

A  facsimile  of  the  original  message  filed  at  the  Ekaterinburg 
Telegraph  Office  by  the  local  Soviet  chiefs  to  the  Moscow  Tsik 
(Central  Executive  Committee)  on  July  4,  1918,  twelve  days  before 
the  murder.  In  it  Beloborodov,  the  Russian  '  dummy  '  president, 
informs  Sverdlov  through  Goloshchekin  that  Syromolotov  is 
hastening  to  Moscow  to  take  the  final  instructions  for  the 
'  affair  '  and  that  the  Russian  guards  have  been  replaced  by 
'  others,'  i.e.,  by  German  soldiers. 


AN  APPRECIATION   AND  A   FORECAST 

What   The  Times  says  regarding  the  terrible  story  of  the  martyr- 
dom of  the  Romanovs  told  by  Mr.  Robert  Wilton : — 

NO  comment  can  enhance  the  poignancy  or  add  to  the 
significance  of  the  tale.  Its  story  illuminates,  as  no 
other  episode  in  the  ghastly  annals  of  Bolshevism  has  done, 
the  real  nature  of  the  forces  that  have  ruined  Russia,  and  that 
still  hold  her  in  their  bloody  and  t5n:annical  grip.  It  makes 
clear  the  purpose  for  which  Germany  originally  sent  Lenin 
and  his  Jewish  confederates  into  Russia,  and  shows  how 
thoroughly  that  purpose  was  achieved.  Incidentally  it 
places  the  characters  of  the  late  Emperor  Nicholas  and  of 
the  Empress  Alexandra  in  a  new  light,  and  proves  them  to 
have  been  loyal  to  the  Allies  even  unto  death.  It  clears  them 
of  many  foolish  and  of  some  foul  aspersions,  and  while 
it  reveals  at  once  their  strength  and  their  weakness,  their 
folly  and  their  virtues,  brings  home  to  the  guilty  the  guilt 
for  their  death. 

Whatever  trials  and  convulsions  the  future  may  hold  in 
store  for  the  unhappy  Russian  people  before  they  once  more 
attain  to  the  dignity  of  ordered  nationhood,  we  believe  that 
the  tragic  figures  of  the  late  Tsar  and  Tsaritsa  will  steadily 
grow  in  public  esteem  and  will  beckon  their  people  on  to  a 
recovery  of  self-respect  and  of  self-control.  Before  that  goal  is 
reached,  many  a  terrible  reckoning  may  have  to  be  paid  ;  for 
.  when  a  nation  awakens  to  a  sense  of  the  degradation  into  which 
it  has  fallen,  albeit  by  its  own  fault  as  much  as  through  the 
evil  designs  of  others,  its  penitence  is  rarely  limited  to  a  con- 

9 


10  A  FORECAST 

trite  confession  of  its  own  shortcomings.  All  Europe,  indeed 
the  whole  world,  is  interested  in  the  recovery  of  Russia,  for 
until  there  be  again  a  Russia,  there  can  be  no  true  peace  in 
Europe  or  in  Asia.  But  it  is  of  high  importance  that  Russian 
convalescence  should  not  be  accompanied  by  further  devasta- 
ting crises,  if  they  can  be  avoided,  or  by  outbursts  of  popular 
wrath,  which,  by  seeking  to  avenge  upon  the  innocent,  or 
comparatively  innocent,  the  sins  of  the  guilty,  might  tend  once 
again  to  alienate  from  the  Russian  people  the  sympathies  of 
civilized  humanity.  We  trust  that  Our  Correspondent's 
narrative  may  serve  to  open  eyes  hitherto  blind,  or  wilfully 
closed,  to  unpalatable  truths  ;  and  that  influences  which,  by 
reason  of  inertia  or  indifference,  have  not  yet  been  exercised, 
may  exert  themselves  to  forestall  phases  in  the  drama  of 
Russia  that  might  cause  even  the  story  we  have  published 
to  lose,  by  comparison,  something  of  its  horror. 


PUBLISHER'S  ANNOUNCEMENT 

WE  owe  it  to  our  readers  to  explain  that  the  contents  of 
the  first  part  of  this  book  were  written  without 
knowledge  of  the  existence  of  the  translations  contained  in 
the  second  part. 

For  '  The  Last  Days  of  the  Romanovs,'  Mr.  Robert  Wilton 
wrote  the  story  of  their  martyrdom — he  had  unique  qualifi- 
cations— on  first-hand  information  and  on  the  basis  of  data 
contained  in  the  dossier  in  Russian  of  which  he  possesses  a 
complete  copy. 

The  translations  of  Minutes  of  Evidence  (which  form  the 
second  half  of  this  volume)  were  published  in  the  United  States 
by  M.  George  Tellberg,  ex-Minister  of  Justice  in  the  Omsk 
(Kolchak)  G  overnment,  quite  independently.  Respecting  these 
depositions,  it  may  be  said  without  fear  of  exaggeration  that 
never  have  they  been  surpassed  in  their  intrinsic  interest  or 
in  the  manner  in  which  they  are  presented.  M.  Sokolov,  the 
investigating  magistrate  who  examined  the  deponents,  is  evi- 
dently a  master  of  his  craft. 

It  will  be  seen  by  comparing  the  two  parts  that,  so  far  as 
the  depositions  here  published  go,  they  entirely  bear  out  and 
give,  so  to  speak,  chapter  and  verse  for  Mr.  Wilton's  narra- 
tive ;  and  we  have  every  reason  for  stating  that,  if  and  when 
the  rest  of  the  dossier  becomes  public,  similar  affirmation  will 
be  given  to  the  whole  of  his  thrilling  story,  which  presents 
clearly,  succinctly,  a  full  and  absolutely  authentic  account  of 
this  great  human  tragedy — the  greatest  perhaps  of  all  time. 

11 


CHAPTER  I 

PROLOGUE 

THE  true  story  of  the  martyrdom  of  Nicholas  II,  ex-Tsar 
of  Russia,  and  of  his  wife  and  family  can  at  last  be 
told. 

It  is  based  upon  evidence  obtained  by  a  properly  constituted 
legal  investigation.  The  signed  depositions  of  eye-witnesses 
are  in  the  writer's  possession,  but  he  does  not  disclose  the 
identity  of  the  deponents  who  are  still  in  the  power  of  the 
Soviets — the  murderers.  The  time  will  come  when  the  guilty 
will  be  called  to  account,  but  a  long  while  may  elapse  before 
the  day  of  retribution  dawns.  The  writer  has  sought  to  present 
the  opening  for  the  prosecution,  fully  confident  that  the  even- 
tual hearing  of  the  evidence  before  a  court  of  law  will  substan- 
tiate his  statement  and  impose  a  verdict  of  '  Guilty.' 

At  Ekaterinburg,  on  the  night  of  July  i6,  1918,  the  Imperial 
Family  and  their  faithful  attendants — eleven  persons  in  all — 
were  led  into  a  small  room  in  the  house  where  they  had  been 
imprisoned  and  shot  to  death  with  revolvers.  There  had  been 
no  trial  of  any  kind.  Before  their  death  the  captives  were 
subjected  to  ill-treatment  amounting  to  horrible  torture,  men- 
tal if  not  physical.  After  death  the  bodies  were  taken  to  the 
woods  and  completely  destroyed.  These  acts  had  been  pre- 
meditated and  the  murders  elaborately  prepared. 

The  actual  arrangements  for  the  crime  began  some  weeks 
before  the  advent  of  anti-Bolshevist  forces.  Neither  fear  of 
rescue  by  the  Whites  nor  plots  to  release   the  captives — the 

13 


14    THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  THE  ROMANOVS 

existence  of  which  is  doubtful — can  be  reasonably  alleged  in 
extenuation  of  the  slaughter. 

The  official  statement  issued  by  the  Moscow  Government 
on  July  20 — four  days  afterwards — spoke  of  the  shooting  of 
Nicholas  as  an  act  of  necessity,  but  categorically  affirmed  that 
the  ex-Empress  and  the  children  had  been  conveyed  out  of 
the  city.  These  deliberately  concocted  reports  of  the  safe 
removal  of  the  family  were  intended  to  circumvent  any  investi- 
gation— and  did  so  at  first. 

It  is  established  beyond  doubt  that  the  ex-Tsar  fell  a  victim 
to  his  loyalty.  He  had  refused  offers  from  the  enemies  of 
Russia's  allies  proposing  that  he  should  endorse  the  Treaty  of 
Brest-Litovsk.i  Attempts  to  inveigle  him  into  an  unholy 
alliance  undoubtedly  preceded  the  murder.  All  the  Romanovs 
who  died  violent  deaths  were,  like  the  Tsar,  inconvenient  to 
German  as  well  as  to  Internationalist  plans. 
iti  *  *  *  * 

So  many  tales  have  been  circulated  regarding  the  fate  of 
the  Romanovs,  in  most  cases  without  the  slightest  approach 
to  the  truth,  that  I  consider  myself  bound  to  relate  the  cir- 
cumstances which  have  (i)  placed  in  my  possession  the  com- 
plete history  and  documents  of  the  case  ;  and  (2)  imposed  upon 
me  a  moral  obligation  to  publish  the  truth  to  the  world. 

In  March,  1919,  returning  from  Omsk  for  a  short  visit  to 

Vladivostok,  I  met  General  Diterichs,  an  old  acquaintance,  of 

the  Russian  Western  Armies.     After  the  Revolution  he  had 

piloted  the  Czechs  to  Siberia  and  then  taken  charge  of  the 

Uralian  Front.    By  one  of  the  fateful  blunders  that  have  marred 

1  Cf.  Ludendorff's  War  Memoirs,  Vol.  II,  page  658.  '  We  could 
have  deposed  the  Soviet  Government,  which  was  thoroughly  hostde 
to  us,  and  given  help  to  other  authorities  in  Russia  which  were  not 
working  against  us,  but  indeed  anxious  to  co-operate  with  us.  This 
would  have  been  a  success  of  great  importance  to  the  general  conduct 
of  the  war.  If  some  other  Government  were  established  in  Russia, 
it  would  almost  certainly  have  been  possible  to  come  to  some  compro- 
mise with  it  over  the  Peace  of  Brest.' 


PROLOGUE  15 

[itervention  in  behalf  of  Russia  he  had  been  superseded  by 
nferior  leaders,  and  was  devoting  his  energies  to  the  investi- 
ation  of  the  Tsarkoe  delo  (Tsar  case).  Knowing  Diterichs, 
felt  sure  that,  sooner  or  later,  he  would  again  become  comman- 
[er-in-chief  of  the  armies  then  fighting  the  Reds  with  British 
,nd  Allied  assistance.  Personal  regard  and  journalistic  con- 
iderations  equally  prompted  me  to  follow  his  fortunes,  good 
T  bad.  I  have  not  had  cause  to  regret  my  decision.  General 
)iterichs  was  found  to  be  indispensable  and  recalled  to  his 
ommand,  when  it  was  too  late.  From  the  first  he  had  seen 
inly  too  clearly  the  rocks  ahead  and  warned  everybody  con- 
erned,  and  he  knew  that  the  fate  of  Koltchak's  attempt  to 
estore  Russia  was  sealed.  Yet  he  accepted  the  leadership. 
Vith  equal  perspicacity  he  had  also  long  ago  realized  the  enor- 
nous  importance  of  the  Tsar  case.  Thanks  to  his  efforts  much 
i^as  accomplished  before  the  Reds,  having  recaptured  the  Urals, 
ould  obliterate  all  traces  of  the  crimes  committed  there.  He 
ontinued  to  follow  the  case  even  after  his  appointment  as 
'ommander-in-Chief  and  after  the  debacle. 

On  my  arrival  at  Ekaterinburg  a  month  later  I  met  the 
nvestigating  magistrate  who  had  been  specially  appointed  by 
he  Supreme  Ruler  (Koltchak)  to  conduct  the  inquiry  into  the 
rsar  case — Nicholas  Alexeievich  Sokolov.  He  had  left  his  home 
ind  family  in  Penza  to  avoid  service  under  the  Reds,  and  had 
nanaged,  after  innumerable  hardships  and  hairbreadth  escapes, 
o  cross,  disguised  as  a  peasant,  into  Siberia.  He  walked  the 
ast  25  miles  foodless,  his  feet  one  mass  of  sores  and  blisters. 
^n  ardent  sportsman,  he  had  lost  an  eye  through  the  careless- 
less  of  a  comrade.  He  had  made  a  name  for  himself  in  the 
nvestigation  of  famous  criminal  cases.  He  was  relentlesss, 
ireless,  full  of  resource  in  the  pursuit  alike  of  murderers  and 
)easts  of  prey.  The  Tsar  case  called  for  the  exercise  of  all 
he  skill  that  the  most  genial  and  courageous  of  magistrates 
;ould  display.     Sokolov  never  faltered.     It  is  thanks  to  him 


i6        THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  THE  ROMANOVS 

that  an  overwhelming  mass  of  evidence  has  been  built  up  into 
a  structure  that  cannot  be  overthrown — that  still  continues 
to  grow. 

At  all  the  centres  of  interest  for  the  investigation — Ekaterin- 
burg, Perm,  Omsk,  in  field  or  forest,  amid  the  disused  iron 
mines  which  hid  so  many  a  gruesome  record  of  Bolshevist 
'  justice  ' — I  was  for  many  months  in  constant  touch  with 
the  course  of  the  inquiry,  and  personally  took  part  in  the  search 
for  the  remains  of  the  victims.  Besides  Sokolov  and  Diterichs 
only  two  persons  signed  the  more  important  proces-verbaux — 

I  was  one  of  the  two. 

Hi  *  *  *  * 

When  the  fall  of  Omsk  appeared  to  be  imminent,  N.  A. 
Sokolov  departed  eastward,  taking  with  him  all  the  documents, 
material  clues,  etc.,  which  by  right  could  be  in  no  other  hands 
save  his.  I  followed  later  with  General  Diterichs,  after  he  had 
resigned  his  command,  in  despair  over  Koltchak's  suicidal 
decision  to  defer  the  evacuation  of  the  city — a  decision  that 
entailed  the  loss  of  countless  lives  and  the  death  of  the  Supreme 
Ruler.  We  found  Sokolov  at  Chita,  persecuted  by  the  myr- 
midons of  the  redoubtable  Ataman  because  they  personally 
desired  that  the  Romanovs  should  be  alive  for  certain  obscure 
purposes  of  their  own,  and  therefore  wished  to  get  rid  of  Sokolov 
for  proving  the  contrary.  After  many  vicissitudes  and  adven- 
tures he  reached  Harbin,  whither  I  had  also  made  my  way, 
and  was  joined  b\^  General  Diterichs. 

r 

The  ultimate  fate  of  the  dossier  there  had  to  be  decided. 
On  all  sides  were  hostile  or  doubtful  organizations.  To  leave 
the  originals  behind  and  take  away  only  duplicates  was,  to 
say  the  least,  risky.  Sokolov's  life  being  in  danger  he  hid  the 
dossier  in  my  car,  which  had  the  protection  of  the  British  flag. 
General  Lokhvitsky  rendered  invaluable  assistance  in  bringing 
about  a  decision.  I  must  express  my  feelings  of  gratitude  and 
personal  regard  for  this  very  gallant  soldier  and  gentleman, 


PROLOGUE  17 

«^ho  here  in  the  midst  of  a  veritable  Bedlam  preserved  his  un- 
ruffled courtesy  and  calm  just  as  he  had  done  in  the  turmoil  of 
cattle  in  France  and  of  disaster  in  Siberia. 

With  the  knowledge  and  approval  of  the  three  distinguished 
nen  above  mentioned — representing  the  Russia  that  was  and 
that  we  all  hope  will  be  again — I  took  charge  of  one  dossier,  it 
being  understood  that,  given  certain  contingencies,  I  should 
36  free  at  my  own  discretion  to  make  use  of  it  in  whole  or  in 
part.  The  contingencies  have  arisen,  and  I  am  free.  But 
that  is  not  all.  I  consider  the  circumstances  of  to-day  render 
it  an  imperative  duty  to  let  the  Allies  and  the  Russians  know 
the  truth.  Too  many  hostile  interests  are  served  by  deliber- 
itely  concocted  lies  and  legends  regarding  the  fate  of  the 
Romanovs.  It  is  time  to  let  the  light  of  day  into  this  tragic 
and  gruesome  history. 

When  I  first  came  into  personal  touch  with  the  Tsar  case 
many  points  were  still  obscure.  I  refer  to  the  actual  circum- 
stances of  the  murder  itself,  not  to  extraneous  aspects — political 
and  international — that  were  only  vaguely  hinted  at,  and  that 
have  since  attained  extraordinary  proportions.  The  confusion 
then  existing  was  due  to  two  causes  :  first,  to  the  inexperience 
of  the  officials  who  took  charge  of  the  investigation  ;  secondly, 
to  the  activity  of  Bolshevist  agents  who  remained  in  the  city 
or  were  concealed  among  the  ranks  of  the  White  Administra- 
tion. 

The  official  version  of  the  events  of  July  16-17,  given  out 
by  the  Reds  before  they  fled  from  Ekaterinburg,  was  that 
Nicholas  Romanov  had  been  executed  '  after  trial,'  but  that 
the  family  had  been  removed  to  '  a  safe  place.'  This  legend 
became  engrafted  upon  the  minds  of  a  great  many  people,  and 
still  continues  to  exercise  its  luring  appeal.  Every  sympathizer 
with  the  Soviets  considered  himself  or  herself  bound  to  foster 
this  version,  since  no  Russian,  however  hostile  to  the  ex-Sove- 

B 


i8         THE   LAST  DAYS  OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

reigns,  could  find  the  slightest  excuse  or  pretext  for  '  execut- 
ing '  a  whole  family  of  five  children  who  had  never  taken,  or 
been  able  to  take,  the  slightest  part  in  politics.  The  Russians 
who  still  belonged  to  the  German  '  orientation  '  were  also — 
curiously  enough — disposed  to  credit  any  tale  of  a  miraculous 
escape.  They  seemed  to  think  that  a  restoration  of  the  Mon- 
archy— which  formed  the  basis  of  their  political  creed — would 
be  furthered  by  the  '  miracle  '  theory.  Some  of  them  had 
more  practical  aims,  as  will  be  shown  later  on. 

N.  A.  Sokolov  was  not  deceived  for  an  instant.  If,  suppos- 
ing, the  family  had  been  removed,  their  death  was,  to  him, 
none  the  less  a  moral  certainty.  He  had  precise  information 
that  every  other  Romanov  within  Sovietdom  had  been  mur- 
dered, although  they  were  just  as  unconcerned  in  politics  as 
the  boy  Alexis  and  his  sisters.  But  the  evidence  of  eye-wit- 
nesses, coupled  with  and  corroborated  by  countless  material 
proofs,  could  leave  no  doubt  as  to  the  fact  of  a  wholesale 
murder  at  Ekaterinburg.  All  the  efforts  of  the  organizers  and 
the  supineness  of  the  earlier  investigators  could  not  completely 
tangle  the  threads.  But  it  became  a  harder  task  to  assemble 
the  evidence  that  would  secure  a  conviction  in  a  court  of  law. 


I  visited  the  house  where  the  victims  had  lived.  It  belonged 
to  a  certain  Ipatiev,  a  merchant  who  held  the  rank  of  captain 
in  the  Engineers.  By  one  of  the  ironies  of  Fate  he  bore  the 
name  of  the  monastery  whence  the  first  Romanov  sallied  to 
assume  the  Crown  of  All  the  Russias.  The  Ipatiev  of  Ekaterin- 
burg was,  however,  of  Jewish  origin. 

The  Engineer  Department  of  the  Siberian  Army  was  installed 
in  the  upper  storey.  Directly  after  the  occupation  of  the  city 
by  the  Czechs,  General  Gaida  had  forcibly  taken  possession 
of  the  premises,  despite  the  vehement  protest  of  the  judicial 
authorities,  alarmed  by  the  risk  of  losing  possible  clues.     The 


PROLOGUE  19 

00ms  underwent  extensive  alterations.  This  was,  of  course, 
,  flagrant  violation  of  the  most  elementary  principles  of  crimi- 
lal  investigation. 

The  lower  floor  was  tenanted  by  Ipatiev  himself,  on  the 
mderstanding  that  no  strangers  should  be  admitted.  The 
mall  basement  room — the  scene  of  the  murders — was  sealed 
ip.  I  saw  it  a  few  days  later.  Sokolov  took  me  over  the 
)remises,  explaining  step  by  step  the  enactment  of  the  tragedy. 
Ve  stood  in  the  little  room,  noted  the  trace  of  the  bullets,  the 
lirection  of  the  bayonet  thrusts,  and  the  splashes  of  blood  on 
he  walls.  The  room  had  been  a  shambles,  and  all  the  washing 
:nd  scouring  that,  according  to  the  evidence,  had  followed  the 
nurders  could  not  remove  tell-tale  signs.  We  knew  from  the 
lepositions  of  witnesses  and  the  mute,  gruesome  language  of 
he  death-chamber  where  each  of  the  victims  sat  or  stood  when 
he  assassins  fired  their  revolvers.  The  bullet-holes  in  the 
vails  and  in  the  floor  had  been  carefully  cut  out ;  human  blood 
lad  been  found  in  the  wood  and  on  the  bullets. 

Obscene  drawings  and  inscriptions  covered  the  upper  walls. 
)bviously  they  were  the  work  of  uncultured  peasants.  Their 
;haracter  showed  only  too  clearly  how  deeply  the  conscience 
>f  the  people  had  been  revolted  by  the  Rasputin  scandal, 
rhere  were  other  inscriptions — in  Hebrew,  in  German,  in 
tlagyar.  Regarding  them  I  was  to  learn  much  at  a  later 
late. 

4t  4!  4i  41  ♦ 

Soon  afterwards  I  was  in  the  woods,  10  miles  north  of  the 
ity,  where  the  peasants  had  found  jewellery  and  other  relics 
>f  the  murdered  family.  I  saw  the  tracks,  still  clear,  of  heavy 
orries  crashing  through  the  trees  to  a  group  of  disused  iron- 
)re  shafts.  All  went  in  one  direction,  ceasing  near  a  pit  round 
vhich  a  vast  collection  of  clues  had  been  discovered  ;  precious 
itones,  pearls,  beautiful  settings  of  gold  and  platinum,  some 
lacked,  broken,  bearing  traces  of  fire  ;   metal  buckles,  hooks, 


20  THE  LAST  DAYS   OF  THE  ROMANOVS 

buttons,  corset-frames,  pieces  of  charred  leather  and  cloth, 

human  finger  intact,  a  set  of  false  teeth.     The  character,  con 

dition,  and  numbers  of  these  various  articles  were  in  themselve 

sufficient  to  indicate  the  sex  and  ages  of  the  victims  and  th 

manner  in  which  their  bodies  had  been  disposed  of. 

First  on  the  scene  had  been  the  peasants.     For  thr-^e  day 

and  nights  they  were  cut  off  from  the  city  by  a  cordon  of  Re( 

Guards  placed  around  the  wood.     Knowing  that  the  White 

were  at  hand,  they  thought  the  Reds  were  burying  arms 

Vague  rumours  had  reached  them  of  the  death  of  Nicholas  II 

As  soon  as  the  cordon  had  been  removed  they  rushed  to  tb 

spot.     Woodcraft  and  native  astuteness  quickly  opened  thei 

eyes.     '  It  is  the   Tsar  that  they  have   been   burning  here, 

they  declared.     On  this  very  spot,  a  year  later,  I  found  topa 

beads,  such  as  the  young  Princesses  wore,  and  other  gems,  b; 

scratching  the  surface  of  the  hardened  clay  surrounding  th 

iron  pit. 

***** 

Led  off  on  a  false  scent,  the  earlier  investigator  had  neg 
lected  the  unerring  sagacity  of  the  peasants  and  had  eve: 
failed  to  make  an  immediate  examination  of  the  wood  and  pit 
— perhaps  afraid  to  leave  the  city,  because  Red  bands  wer 
reported  to  be  in  the  neighbourhood.  He  was  following  th 
red-herring  trailed  by  Soviet  agents  that,  to  wit,  the  famil; 
had  escaped  or  been  removed.  These  agents  did  not  kno^ 
the  truth  themselves.  They  merely  related  what  they  ha^ 
been  instructed  to  say.  The  local  Soviet  had  not  known  th 
facts.  There  had  been  no  trial.  The  murders  had  bee: 
the  work  of  a  separate  organization  which  directed  everythin 
from  a  distance.  Misled  by  the  versions  thus  spread,  th 
investigator  had  lost  himself  in  the  maze  of  conflicting  rumou 
in  Ekaterinburg. 

When  Sokolov  took  over  the  case — in  the  early  months  c 
1919 — it  wsis  almost  at  a  standstill  because  of  the  initial  mis 


PROLOGUE  21 

;akes  and  incapacity  of  the  investigator.  Yet  evidence  had 
:ome  from  another  quarter  that  should  have  compelled  him 
:o  take  the  right  course.  From  one  of  the  Imperial  servants 
A^ho  had  escaped  from  a  Red  shooting  squad  it  became  known 
:hat  several  grand  dukes  and  the  Grand  Duchess  Elizabeth 
lad  been  murdered  immediately  after  the  Ekaterinburg 
shooting,  and  that  some  of  the  bodies  had  been  found  in 
iisused  iron-pits.  In  no  case  had  there  been  any  semblance 
A  a  trial.  It  was  evident  the  wholesale  extermination  of  the 
Romanovs  had  been  pursued,  and  that  all  theories  of  the 
oairaculous  survival  of  the  children  should  be  abandoned. 

On  July  14,  1919,  the  Bolshevists  entered  Ekaterinburg,  and 
since  then  have  been  in  occupation  of  the  Urals.  They  were 
ible  to  satisfy  themselves  that,  in  spite  of  aU  their  efforts  to 
mislead  justice,  the  truth  about  the  murder  of  the  ex-Tsar 
md  his  family  would  become  known  and  arouse  popular  indig- 
mation.  They  then  decided  to  take  a  course  that  was  quite 
in  keeping  with  their  methods  of  government,  although  it  may 
ippear  to  be  almost  incredible  to  us,  with  our  notions  of  truth 
ind  justice — to  stage  a  '  fake  '  trial  of  pretended  '  murderers  ' 
in  order  to  divert  the  odium  of  the  crime  to  other  shoulders. 

Brazenly  ignoring  the  fact  that  they  themselves  had  officially 
'  sentenced  '  the  Tsar  in  July,  1918,  and  recorded  his  death 
a.t  the  hands  of  the  Soviet  at  Ekaterinburg,  they  announce 
a  trial  of  the  '  murderers  '  of  the  Tsar  in  September,  1919. 
Twenty-eight  '  accused,'  we  read,  were  charged  with  murder- 
ing '  the  Tsar  and  the  whole  family  '  in  order  '  to  throw  the 
discredit  of  the  murder  upon  the  Bolshevists,'  and  some  were 
actually  sentenced  to  death  and  '  executed.'  The  Bolshevist 
organ  Pravda  records  this  judicial  farce,  which  may  or  may  not 
have  been  actually  '  performed.'  I  shall  have  occasion  to 
deal  with  it  in  its  appointed  place. 


CHAPTER  II 

THE  STAGE  AND  THE  ACTORS 

SOME  idea  of  the  crime  of  Ekaterinburg  is  now  in  the 
reader's  possession ;  but,  in  deahng  with  the  evidence  in 
all  its  aspects,  it  is  necessary  to  give  an  account  of  conditions 
that  prevailed  in  the  country  then,  and  of  the  chief  actors  in 
the  drama.  The  murder  of  the  Tsar  and  his  family,  even  after 
his  abdication,  may  not  be  regarded  as  a  simple  act  of  vengeance 
or  casual  precaution. 

In  191 7,  the  Germans  had  sent  Lenin  with  a  horde  of  Jewish 
revolutionaries  to  take  possession  of  Russia.  A  Red  Govern- 
ment, composed  of  persons  selected  in  Berlin,  was  now  in 
power  ;  but  they  were  vassals.  Count  Mirbach,  representing 
the  suzerain  State,  figured  in  Moscow  as  the  virtual  ruler, 
before  whom  the  apostles  of  Karl  Marx  bowed  the  knee.  At 
the  period  under  review,  the  Reds  had  displayed  no  overt 
disposition  to  throw  off  the  German  yoke.  They  conformed 
with  all  the  humiliating  clauses  of  the  Treaty  of  Brest- Litovsk, 
dutifully  sending  the  tribute  gold  to  Berlin  which  had  been 
demanded  as  '  war  indemnity,'  plundering  the  national 
Exchequer  and  resources  by  order  of  their  German  masters. 
Apparently  everything  was  going  well  with  the  German  plan 
of  '  peaceful '  conquest,  whatever  secret  hopes  the  Red 
leaders  may  have  nurtured.  Instead  of  a  redoubtable  foe, 
Russia  was  now  a  willing  handmaid. 

Hf  *  *  m  ^n 

Ludendorff  has  related  frankly,  disingenuously,  how  simple 

22 


THE   STAGE  AND  THE  ACTORS  23 

and  wonderful  had  been  this  operation.^  Not  only  was  Russia 
out  of  the  war  ;  the  foodstuffs  obtained  from  the  Ukraine  had 
literally  saved  Germany  and  her  allies.  Hetman  Skoropadsky 
already  ruled  the  Ukraine  for  Germany.  Krasnov,  at  the  head 
of  the  Cossacks,  and  Alexeiev  with  the  gallant  Volunteer 
army  remained  neutral.  Ludendorff  hoped  to  lure  them  into 
his  net — a  radiant  combination  that  assured  dominion  over 
Russia  and  her  vast  resources.  He  explains  why  it  was  not 
realized.  The  German  Government  was  to  blame,  it  appears. 
There  was  a  divergence  of  views  between  Berlin  and  G.H.Q. 
The  latter  considered  that  the  Reds  had  '  done  their  work  '  ; 
so  the  Reds  '  must  go/  and  Krasnov  and  Alexeiev  be  diverted 

1  LudendorfE.     War  Memories. 

Vol.  II,  page  509. 

'  From  October,  191 7,  onwards,  Bolshevism  in  Russia  obtained  an 
ever  firmer  hold. 

'  I  could  not  doubt  that  the  disintegration  of  the  Russian  Army 
and  nation  involved  an  extraordinary  risk  for  Germany  and  Austria- 
Hungary.  All  the  greater  was  my  anxiety  when  I  thought  of  the  weak- 
ness of  our  Government  and  theirs. 

'  By  sending  Lenin  to  Russia  our  Government  had,  moreover, 
assumed  a  great  responsibility.  From  a  military  point  of  view  his 
journey  was  justified,  for  Russia  had  to  be  laid  low.  But  our  Govern- 
ment should  have  seen  to  it  that  we  also  were  not  involved  in  her  fall.' 

Vol.  II,  page  654. 

'  In  Russia  events  had  developed  along  lines  of  their  own,  illustrative 
of  the  lying  propensities  of  the  Soviet  Government.  With  the  consent 
of  this  Government  the  Entente  had  formed  Czecho-Slovak  units  out 
of  Austro-Hungarian  prisoners.  These  were  intended  to  be  used  against 
us,  and  were  therefore  to  be  conveyed  to  France  by  the  Siberian  railway. 
All  this  was  sanctioned  by  a  Government  with  whom  we  were  at  peace, 
and  we  actually  took  it  lying  down  !  At  the  beginning  of  June,  I  wrote 
to  the  Imperial  Chancellor  specially  on  the  subject,  and  pointed  out 
the  dangers  which  threatened  us  from  the  Soviet  Government.' 

Vol.  II,  page  656. 

'  I  had  got  into  touch  with  him  (General  Krasnov)  in  order  to 
prevent  his  joining  the  Entente.  The  situation  was  complicated  by 
the  fact  that  I  could  not  put  difficulties  in  the  way  of  the  home  Gov- 
ernment's pro-Bolshevik  policy,  of  which,  of  course,  I  was  informed, 
and  Krasnov  regarded  the  Soviet  Government,  and  not  the  Entente, 
as  his  enemy.' 


24  THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  THE  ROMANOVS 

at  once  from  their  sympathies  with  the  Entente  in  order  to 
preclude  any  possibiUty  of  a  revival  of  the  Eastern  front.  For 
this  purpose  it  was  necessary  to  order  the  German  divisions 
in  the  south  of  Russia  to  march  on  Moscow.  Ludendorff  felt 
quite  sure  that  even  Alexeiev  would  not  be  able  to  resist  the 
temptation  to  join  hands  with  the  enemies  of  Sovietdom.  But 
the  obstinate,  slow-witted  bureaucrats  in  Berlin  could  not  adapt 
themselves  to  these  lightning  changes.  Ludendorff  stormed 
at  them  :  Were  they  blind  not  to  see  that  the  Reds  were  hood- 
winking them  ?  Did  they  want  proofs  ?  Were  the  Czech 
prisoners  of  war  not  proceeding  eastward  with  the  avowed 
object  of  reinforcing  the  French  army  ? 

This  concrete  accusation  could  not  be  denied.  Lenin's 
organization  had  promised  Professor  Masaryk  to  permit  the 
Czecho-Slovaks  to  leave  the  country  by  way  of  Siberia  pro- 
vided they  went  peacefully.  1 1  was  an  easy  riddance  of  possible 
enemies.  The  Czechs  were  proceeding  quietly  to  Vladivostok, 
carefully  abstaining  from  violence  even  when  sorely  tried  by 
the  impudence  of  local  Soviets,  giving  up  their  arms  to  bribe 
the  Reds. 

Mirbach  received  instructions  to  call  his  Red  henchmen  to 
account ;  at  the  same  time  messages  were  conveyed  from  the 
two  Kaisers  to  their  warriors  imprisoned  in  Siberia,  enjoining 
upon  them  the  duty  of  organizing  resistance  to  the  '  invaders.' 
How  the  German  and  ]\Iagyar  officers  enrolled  Russian  con- 
victs and  flung  themselves  athwart  the  Czech  retreat  with  the 
energetic  concurrence  of  the  Soviets  is  a  matter  of  history. 
But  the  connexion  between  this  circumstance  and  all  that 
preceded  and  followed  is  less  known.  Ludendorff  feared 
above  all  the  re-establishment  of  the  Eastern  front,  yet  it  was 
Ludendorff  and  his  Government  that  brought  about  the  very 
consequences  that  they  least  wanted. 

Had  the  Czechs  been  allowed  to  depart  it  is  certain  that  there 
would  have  been  no  military  help  from  the  Entente  side,  and 


THE   STAGE  AND  THE  ACTORS  25 

the  chances  of  seducing  the  Russian  anti-Bolshevist  leaders 
night  not  have  been  still-born.  As  it  was,  the  whole  edifice 
Df  guile,  duplicity,  and  deceit,  raised  with  such  labour  and 
:ost,  fell  to  the  ground.  The  murder  of  Mirbach  sounded  the 
:all  of  its  collapse. 

But  at  the  time  when  the  fate  of  the  Tsar  and  his  family 
lung  in  the  balance,  Germany  was  absolute  mistress  of  the 
situation,  and,  had  there  been  unity  of  method  as  well  as  of 
purpose  between  the  German  High  Command  and  Berlin, 
:he  fate  of  Russia  and,  perhaps,  of  the  war  would  have  been 
changed.  Berlin  wanted  to  continue  to  rule  Russia  through 
the  Soviets  under  Mirbach  ;  Ludendorff  aimed  at  the  over- 
throw of  the  Soviets  in  order  to  enlist  the  support  of  the  Cos- 
jacks  and  Volunteers.  As  might  be  expected,  the  conflict 
between  them  resulted  in  a  fatal  compromise — an  attempt 
to  run  with  the  White  hare  and  hunt  with  the  Red  hounds. 

Ludendorff's  plan  was  to  substitute  a  more  agreeable  form 
Df  government  in  the  place  of  the  Soviets  and  to  modify  suit- 
ibly  the  Treaty  of  Brest-Litovsk.  Here  we  have  the  key  to 
the  removal  of  Nicholas  H  from  Tobolsk.  But  all  that  subse- 
q[uently  happened  was  conditional  upon  another  set  of  forces, 
Sovietdom  asserted  itself.  The  working  and  organization  of 
the  Soviets  fitted  in  admirably  with  German  requirements, 
and  incidentally  subserved  the  plans  of  the  murderers.  New 
names,  devised  to  appeal  to  the  fancy  of  the  mob,  concealed 
familiar  institutions. 

:{:  H:  ^  H<  4: 

There  were  three  principal  bodies — Sovnarkom,  Tsik,  and 
Chrezvychaika,  these  names  being  abbreviations  of  Soviet 
narodnykh  komisarov  (Council  of  People's  Commissaries), 
Tsentralny  ispolnitelny  komitd  (Central  Executive  Committee), 
and  Chrezvychainaia  komisia  dlia  borby  z  kontrrevolmtsiei 
(Extraordinary  Commission  for  Combating  Counter-revolution). 
Under  the  old  regime  the  Duma,  the  Council  of  Ministers, 


26         THE  LAST  DAYS   OF  THE    ROMANOVS 

and  the  Okhrana  had  occupied  the  same  relative  positions. 
Instead  of  the  former  ranks  and  dignities  there  were  komisary, 
all  supposed  to  be  elected,  but  in  reality  appointed  by  an  inner 
and  occult  body.  Sovdeps  (Councils  of  Deputies)  and  Komit- 
ety  bednoty  (Poor  Commissions)  took  over  the  functions  of  the 
old  zemstvos  and  municipalities,  grouped  into  regional  com- 
munes, just  as  it  had  been  proposed  to  group  the  zemstvos 
according  to  separate  ohlasti  (regions).  Sovietdom  (in  Russian 
Sovdepia)  had  invented  no  new  forms.  It  is  still  in  the  grip 
of  the  Red  Okhrana,  or  Inquisition. 

As  there  was  no  apparent  authority,  the  local  bodies  often 
acted  independently  ;  indeed,  Lenin  encouraged  this  tendency. 
Vlast  na  inestahh  (every  place  its  own  master)  was  his  motto. 
Lenin  did  not  rule  ;  the  Soviet  system  was  governed  by  other 
people,  the  fellow-passengers  who  came  with  him  under  Ger- 
man auspices.  He  delivered  impassioned  harangues  before 
the  Sovnarkom  and  received  deputations  from  minor  Soviets, 
the  real  power  was  elsewhere — in  the  Tsik  and  Chrezvychaika  ; 
and,  just  as  it  had  been  in  the  old  Russia,  the  last  word  was 
always  with  the  Police-Okhrana  organization. 

Mirbach  received  his  daily  report  from  the  Chrezvychaika, 
He  was  murdered  by  two  men  who  said  they  came  from 
that  office.  Lenin  had  as  much  to  do  with  his  death  as  he  had 
with  the  murders,  a  week  later,  of  the  ex-Tsar  and  his  family. 
The  Red  Okhrana  and  the  inner  circle  of  the  Tsik  were  the 
veritable  authors  of  the  crime  of  Ekaterinburg,  and  probably 
of  Mirbach's  assassination.^ 

Nonentities,  figureheads  of  the  Sovnarkom,  do  not  interest 
us.     We  are  concerned  with  great,  if  maleficent,  personages  in 

1  In  The  Times  of  July  8,  191 8,  appeared  a  wireless  from  the  Moscow 
Government,  issued  on  the  previous  night.  It  is  signed  '  Lenin  ' 
and   addressed   to  '  JofEe  '  (the   Soviet   representative),    '  Berlin  '  : — 

'  To-day  {i.e.,  July  7,  1918)  at  2  o'clock  two  unknown  men,  with 
false  [sic)  documents  from  the  Extraordinary  Commission  (Tsik) 
appeared  at  the  German  Embassy  and  threw  a  bomb  into  the  apart- 


THE   STAGE  AND  THE  ACTORS  27 

the  Red  world.  Most  of  them  are  still  unknown  outside  the 
ranks  of  professional  revolutionaries.  A  goodly  proportion 
3i  the  hundred  Jews  who  came  out  of  Germany  with  Lenin, 
a,nd  the  hundreds  who  came  from  Chicago,  deserve  to  be  in- 
:luded  in  this  gallery,  for  they  undoubtedly  held  Russia  under 
their  sway.  To  enumerate  and  describe  them  would  require 
1  small  volume.  I  need  sketch  only  those  who  act  prominently 
n  the  drama  of  Ekaterinburg.  The  most  important  were  : 
Sverdlov,  Safarov,  Voikov  and  Goloshchekin,  and  the  murderer- 
in-chief,  Yurovsky.     Others  will  be  introduced  later  on. 

The  names  of  Safarov  and  Voikov  figure  in  the  list  of  Lenin's 
:ellow-passengers.  Both  are  very  powerful  Bolshevists,  hold- 
ng  high  places  in  the  executive  and  police  branches.  Sverd- 
ov  was  the  uncrowned  Tsar  of  the  Soviets.  His  authority 
ivas  for  more  than  a  year  really  higher  than  that  of  Lenin 
3r  even  Trotzky.  He  dominated  the  Tsik,  and  his  crea- 
;ures  ruled  the  Chrezvychaika.  Sverdlov's  name  appears 
in  the  Bolshevist  Government  as  approved  by  Germany 
S verdlov  was — and  long  remained— a  paid  agent  of  Germany) . 
rhe  direct  connexion  between  S  verdlov  and  the  murders  of 
ikaterinburg  is  established  beyond  doubt. 

Goloshchekin  was  the  representative  of  the  above-named 
:onclave  in  the  Regional  Soviet  of  the  Urals  and  kept  that 

nent  of  Count  Mirbach.  Count  Mirbach  was  seriouslj''  wounded  and 
lied. 

'  The  representatives  of  the  Russian  Government  paid  a  visit  imme- 
liately  to  the  German  Embassy  and  expressed  their  indignation  at 
his  act  of  political  provocation.  The  Government  is  taking  all  necessary 
teps  to  discover  the  murderers  and  to  hand  them  over  to  an  Extra- 
ordinary Tribunal.  Steps  were  taken  to  strengthen  the  guard  of  the 
German  Embassy  and  to  protect  German  citizens.   .  .  . 

'  An  extraordinary  plenipotentiary  will  be  dispatched  to  Berlin  with 
he  mission  of  expressing  to  the  German  Government  our  indignation 
.gainst  the  criminal  act  and  our  sympathy  with  the  German  represen- 
ative  who  fell  a  victim  to  this  crime.  .  .  .' 


28         THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

rather  recalcitrant  body  under  secret  subjection  to  his  chiefs. 
The  UraHan  Reds  were  particularly  self-willed  and  jealous  of 
Moscow  because  the  population  consisted  almost  entirely  of 
miners  and  metal-workers — a  very  advanced  and  independent 
class,  having  little  in  common  with  the  peasant-farmer,  for 
whom  they  professed  contempt.  Goloshchekin  did  whatever 
Sverdlov  wished.  A  stratagem  had  given  him  absolute  power. 
The  president  of  the  Regional  Soviet  was  a  Russian  named 
Beloborodov.  He  was  arrested  by  the  Chrezvychaika  and 
imprisoned  on  a  charge  of  appropriating  30,000  roubles.  The 
punishment  would  be  death.  Together  with  Safarov  and 
Voikov,  Goloshchekin  arranged  to  release  him.  Beloborodov 
resumed  the  presidency  of  the  Regional  Soviet  as  if  nothing 
had  happened.  Dishonesty  was  so  rampant  among  the  Komi- 
sars  that  the  transition  surprised  no  one.  But  after  that, 
Beloborodov  gave  up  all  attempts  to  resist  Moscow — if  he 
had  ever  done  so.  He  was  henceforth  a  mere  man  of  straw, 
kept  in  his  place  to  deceive  the  obstreperous  Uralian  miners, 
who  did  not  wish  to  be  ruled  from  Moscow,  much  less  by  Jews. 

The  closest  personal  bonds  had  existed  for  many  years 
between  Goloshchekin  and  Sverdlov.  They  had  been  together 
in  prison  and  exile.  Goloshchekin  ranked  as  an  international- 
ist of  the  most  pronounced  type.  He  had  been  selected  for 
the  rulership  of  the  Urals  with  an  eye  to  other  than  political 
activities.  He  was  bloodthirsty  in  an  abnormal  degree,  even 
for  a  Red  chieftain.  People  who  knew  him  at  Ekaterinburg 
describe  Goloshchekin  as  a  homicidal  sadist.  He  never  at- 
tended executions,  but  insisted  upon  hearing  a  detailed  account 
of  them.  He  huddled  in  bed  shivering  and  quaking  till  the 
executioner  came  with  his  report,  and  would  listen  to  his 
description  of  tortures  with  a  frenzy  of  joy,  begging  for  fur- 
ther details,  gloating  over  the  expressions,  gestures  and  death- 
throes  of  the  victims  as  they  passed  before  his  diseased  vision. 

Yurovsky  had  a  humbler  task  ;   he  was  not  one  of  the  mighty 


THE   STAGE  AND  THE  ACTORS  29 

ones  of  the  Soviet.  When  the  German  plan  to  restore  Nicholas 
as  a  vassal  sovereign  had  failed,  and  the  Jewish  conclave  in 
Moscow  was  free  to  carry  out  its  vengeful  purpose,  Yurovsky 
was  installed  as  chief  jailer  and  tormentor  of  the  doomed 
family.  The  Russian  commandant  and  guards  were  dismissed, 
ostensibly  because  they  were  pilfering.  Magyarized-German 
soldiers  under  a  Jewish  commandant  took  their  places  and 
were  able  to  rob  wholesale  the  unfortunates  whom  they  were 
supposed  to  protect. 

The  origins  of  Yurovsky  have  been  fully  investigated.  His 
parents  and  relatives — all  poor  Jews — remained  in  Siberia 
after  the  murderer  and  his  chiefs  and  accomplices  had  fled 
from  Ekaterinburg.  He  had  been  a  watchmaker  at  Tomsk, 
scarcely  able  to  make  ends  meet.  Naturally  ambitious,  he 
despised  the  people  around  him.  He  was  waiting  for  an  op- 
portunity. It  came  suddenly  and  mysteriously.  Yurovsky 
disappeared.  This  was  before  the  war.  He  is  next  heard  of 
in  Ekaterinburg  as  a  photographic  dealer.  It  leaked  out  that 
he  had  been  to  Berlin  and  become  possessed  of  some  capital. 
When  war  came,  he  evaded  service  in  the  trenches  by  qualify- 
ing as  a  red-cross  assistant  (feldsher)  and  remained  in  Ekaterin- 
burg. When  the  Bolshevists  seized  the  government,  Yurovsky 
became  one  of  the  local  agents  of  the  new  power. 

At  a  time  when  he  was  seeking  any  and  every  means  of 
advancement,  Yurovsky  had  been  baptized  into  the  Lutheran 
Church.  He  used  to  attend  prayers  in  Ipatiev's  house.  He 
even  chatted  pleasantly  with  the  sick  boy  Alexis,  whom,  a 
few  days  later,  he  shot  with  his  own  hand. 


CHAPTER  III 

NO   ESCAPE  :     ALEXANDRA   MISJUDGED 

APART  from  the  bald  assertions  of  parties  interested  in 
spreading  false  reports,  there  is  no  evidence  of  any 
attempt  on  the  part  of  the  Romanovs  to  escape  from  any  of 
their  prisons.  All  the  compromising  '  documents '  produced 
by  Soviet  apologists  on  this  subject  are  transparent  fabrica- 
tions. Loyal  Russians  wished  to  save  the  Tsar  from  the 
Soviets,  knowing  full  well  the  danger  of  treachery  that  he 
incurred,  and  there  were  several  organizations,  working 
independently,  but  none  ever  began  putting  a  plan  into 
execution. 

During  the  captivity  at  Tobolsk  some  money  reached  the 
family  secretly.  It  helped  the  prisoners  to  eke  out  the 
starvation  allowance  ordained  by  the  Soviets,  Attempts  to 
render  further  aid  were  frustrated  by  a  German-Bolshevist 
agent  stationed  at  Tiumen.  This  person,  a  Russian  officer 
who  had  married  a  daughter  of  Rasputin,  ingratiated  himself 
with  doubtful  travellers  for  Tobolsk  and  betrayed  them  to  the 
Soviet.  The  Germans  had  thus  taken  elaborate  precautions 
not  to  allow  the  ex-Tsar  to  slip  out  unawares.  Perhaps  they 
thought  that  the  Allies  of  Russia  might  try  to  rescue  him  ! 
At  Ekaterinburg  nothing  could  be  done.  The  Reds  claim  to 
have  intercepted  some  letters  between  the  captives  and  con- 
spirators. But  it  may  be  pointed  out  that  not  a  single  person 
was  arrested  there  for  conspiracy  to  help  the  exiles.     Remem- 

30 


NO  ESCAPE:    ALEXANDRA  MISJUDGED         31 

ering  the  lavish  repressions  ever  appHed  by  the  occult  powers 
f  the  Chrezvychaika,  it  will  be  conceded  that  they  would 
ave  missed  no  opportunity  to  exert  them  in  such  a  cause, 
he  British  Consul  (Mr.  Preston),  remaining  gallantly  at 
is  post  throughout  the  Red  terror,  and  rendering  incalculable 
jrvice  to  the  victims  of  Bolshevist  oppression,  was  unable 
)  do  anything  to  alleviate  the  sufferings  and  torture  of  the 
Romanovs.  Yet,  strange  to  relate,  a  monarchist  organization 
ad  its  agents  in  the  city.  It  even  succeeded  in  conveying 
)me  food  and  comforts  through  the  nuns  of  the  local  monas- 
jry.     Beyond  that  it  was  unable  to  go. 

There  is  no  evidence  to  show  that  at  any  time  during  the 
iptivity  was  any  active  attempt  made  to  rescue  the  Romanovs, 
his  applies  equally  to  the  ex-Sovereigns  and  to  their  kinsmen, 
.t  Tobolsk,  Ekaterinburg,  Perm,  and  Alapaievsk  the  pretext 
)r  wholesale  murder  was  always  the  same  ;  an  alleged  attempt 
D  escape  or  rescue.  And  from  the  testimony  of  persons  who 
'^ere  in  daily  intercourse  with  the  imprisoned  family,  it  is 
tear  that,  had  any  serious  efforts  to  procure  their  escape  been 
lade,  they  would  have  met  with  no  encouragement.  Nicholas 
I  repeatedly  said  that  he  would  not  leave  Russia  ;  Alexandra 
ated  above  everything  the  idea  of  going  to  Germany.  At  that 
ime  Russia  offered  no  sure  place  of  refuge. 

The  Rasputin  propaganda  had  poisoned  the  minds  of  the 
eople,  but  not  all  the  people.  In  the  villages,  among  the  old 
Dlk,  feelings  of  loyalty  still  held  sway,  ready  at  the  first  signal 
0  assert  themselves  openly.  The  volumes  of  evidence  in  my 
lossession  prove  this  statement.  Many  of  the  witnesses  were 
•easants  who,  consciously,  willingly  risked  their  lives  in  order 
hat  the  truth  about  the  fate  of  the  Tsar  should  be  established. 
Vho  knows  how  many  of  these  simple  souls  have  been  martyred 
or  their  boldness  ? 

Among  the  obscenities  that  disfigured  the  walls  of  the 
patiev   house,   one   inscription    struck    a   loyal    note.       In 


32         THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

uncouth  peasant  writing  and  spelling  the  author — evidently 
one  of  the  guards — asked  how  long  were  the  people  going  to 
put  up  with  the  Komisars,  and  urged  the  Tsar  to  come  forward 
and  drive  away  the  horde  of  usurpers  that  were  ruining  the 
country  ! 


I  cannot  help  thinking  that  the  Rasputin  legend  did  not 
suffice  to  kill  the  people's  faith  in  the  Tsar,  It  certainly  dis- 
credited Alexandra,  and  he  shared  her  disgrace  ;  but  that  was 
not  enough  to  account  for  the  virulence  of  popular  clamour 
against  Nicholas  II.  His  fate  would  not  have  been  so  much  a 
matter  of  indifference  to  the  multitude  had  the  vile  story  of 
Rasputin  not  been  preceded  by  blunders  that  deeply  incensed 
the  popular  conscience.  I  recaU  the  dreadful  murder  of  women 
and  children  before  the  Winter  Palace  on  Bloody  Sunday. 
That  crime  was  prepared  by  the  Okhrana  and  attributed  to  the 
Tsar.  It  seems  to  me  that  had  it  not  been  for  that  hideous 
slaughter  of  innocents  no  one  would  have  ever  dared  to  raise 
a  hand  against  the  Tsar  and  his  children.  I  wish  to  be  quite 
fair  to  the  Russians,  without  in  any  way  extenuating  the 
heinousness  of  the  crime  of  Ekaterinburg. 

The  ex-Empress  was  the  object  of  special  hatred.  She 
completely  dominated  her  spouse  in  the  imagination  of  the 
people,  and  occupies  a  place  apart  in  the  evidence.  Many  new 
facts  have  been  brought  to  light  substantially  modifying  the 
current  estimate  of  her  life  and  character.  Several  trunks 
full  of  papers  and  effects  belonging  to  his  victims  were  taker 
by  Yurovsky  to  Moscow  after  the  murder.  Sverdlov  then 
announced  that  all  would  be  published,  so  that  the  people 
should  see  what  manner  of  persons  had  ruled  them.  That 
promise  has  not  been  kept,  and  for  a  good  reason  :  the  diaries 
and  correspondence  of  Nicholas  and  Alexandra  contained  nc 
hint    of    treachery.    They   proved    tv/o    things — iinbounded 


NO  ESCAPE:    ALEXANDRA   MISJUDGED        33 

oyaity  to  Russia  and  to  the  Allies  ;  and,  alas  !  complete 
.ubserviency  of  Nicholas  to  his  wife.  But  neither  of  these 
natters  interested  the  Soviet  leaders,  and  most  of  these  price- 
ess  documents  have  been  suppressed  in  Moscow.  Many  others 
vere  overlooked  or  forgotten  in  Ekaterinburg,  and  figure  in 
he  dossier  of  the  Tsar  case.  Among  them  is  a  collection  of 
Uexandra's  letters  to  her  maid-of-honour.  There  are  also 
he  depositions  of  servitors  and  members  of  the  household. 

Analysing  this  mass  of  first-hand  evidence,  one  obtains  a 
rue  picture  of  Alexandra.  Proud,  domineering,  self-restrained, 
gifted,  mystical  she  had  been  from  youth.  Her  troubles, 
nental  and  physical,  had  distorted  these  characteristics. 
Nicholas  fell  in  love  with  her  when  she  was  15,  and  waited 
)atiently  for  her  eight  years.  Even  as  a  girl  she  dominated 
lim.  After  their  marriage  there  was  never  any  doubt  who 
vas  master.  Her  dominion  was  not  even  challenged.  Nicho- 
as  never  acted  without  his  wife's  approval,  except  when  he 
vas  separated  from  her — for  instance,  when  he  signed  the  writ 
)f  abdication.  These  were  not  the  best  qualifications  for 
fsardom  at  a  time  of  transition.  Alexandra  could  not  attain 
)opularity,  nor  would  she  admit  the  necessity  of  it  for  herself 
)r  the  Tsar.  Indeed,  as  the  years  passed  she  became  less  and 
ess  responsive  to  the  demands  and  requirements  of  public 
)pinion,  which  cannot  be  defied  with  impunity  even  by  an 
mtocrat. 

i|e  H:  4:  4:  4: 

Many  Russians  attributed  these  failings  to  the  Hesse  disease 
bolezn  Gessenskikh),  the  hereditary  taint  that  had  carried  off 
nany  of  Alexandra's  relations.^  The  fact  that  her  only  son 
;uffered  from  and  might  at  any  moment  die  of  it  only  made 
ler  own  trouble  worse.     The  disease  is  dangerous  to  boys  and 

1  Haemophilia,  the  disease  from  which  the  Tsarevich  suffered,  is  as 
I  general  rule  transmitted  through  the  females  to  the  males.  The 
emales  do  not  suffer  from  it  till  late  in  life. 


34         THE  LAST  DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

adult  women  ;  girls  do  not  feel  its  effects  till  they  are  grown  up, 
whereas  boys  become  immune  after  reaching  manhood.  In 
the  case  of  women  it  is  apt  to  prey  on  the  mind,  aggravating 
and  intensifying  any  morbid  predisposition.  Hysteria  in  its 
worst  forms  is  an  almost  invariable  accompaniment.  She  also 
suffered  intensely  from  heart  trouble.  Her  life  must  have  been 
one  long  agony. 

Alexandra  was  not  normal.  Her  belief  in  Rasputin  indi- 
cated as  much.  The  evidence  of  Dr.  Botkin  is  explicit.  People 
who  suffer  from  hysteria  in  an  acute  congenital  form  repel  and 
estrange  all  persons  that  do  not  blindly  accept  their  domina- 
tion. Rasputin  had  to  be  treated  as  a  saint  because  Alexandra 
imagined  him  to  be  one.  The  Court  of  Russia  became  peopled 
with  time-servers  and  nonentities. 

4:  4:  #  %  4c 

I  shall  deal  with  Rasputin  presently.  The  new  materials 
in  my  possession  show  that  he  was  simply  a  peasant  afflicted 
with  a  pathological  condition.  The  legend  that  has  grown  up 
regarding  his  occult  powers  can  be  traced  not  to  Rasputin 
but  to  his  '  friends.'  He  was  a  mere  tool.  Alexandra 
wanted  him — to  cure  her  son  ;  others  used  him  for  personal 
or  political  intrigues  because  Alexandra,  the  veritable  Autocrat 
of  All  the  Russias,  had  need  of  him.  In  the  tragedy  of  the 
Romanovs  every  thread  leads  us  to  this  Woman  of  Destiny. 

The  very  exhaustive  records  of  their  life  before  and  after  the 
Revolution  give  a  true  presentment  of  the  family,  such  as  no 
individual  could  furnish  even  if  he  or  she  had  been  in  the 
closest  intimacy  with  Nicholas  or  Alexandra.  One  is  struck 
by  the  almost  superhuman  secretiveness  of  the  ex-Sovereigns. 
They  did  not  trust  anyone  completely.  Most  of  the  persons 
who  were  supposed  to  be  particularly  attached  to  them  knew 
little  or  nothing  of  their  inner  life  and  thoughts.  This  explains, 
perhaps,  why  so  few  decided  to  follow  them  into  exile.  Only 
between  themselves  does  there  appear  to  have  been  no  reserve. 


NO   ESCAPE:    ALEXANDRA   MISJUDGED        35 

Alexandra's  personality  is  reflected  in  her  family — Nicholas, 
ke  herself,  an  embodiment  of  all  the  domestic  virtues,  religious 
)  the  verge  of  mysticism,  expert  in  dissimulation,  never  show- 
ig  anger,  perhaps  never  really  feeling  angry ;    incapable  of 

decision — so  utterly  had  he  surrendered  himself  to  his  wife  ; 
le  daughters  relegated  to  the  background  entirely  unprepared 
)  take  their  proper  place  in  the  world ;  Alexis  monopolizing 
[1  the  care  and  attention  of  his  mother  ;  the  children  ashamed 
[  her  belief  in  Rasputin,  yet  not  daring  openly  to  resent  it. 

Among  the  Court  favourites,  male  or  female,  nobody  exer- 
sed  any  real  influence  except  in  so  far  as  it  suited  the  Empress, 
nly  one  person  appears  to  have  been  admitted  for  any  length 
E  time  to  the  Imperial  confidence.  That  person  was  Anna 
yrubova.  Regarding  her,  Rasputin  used  to  speak  in  the 
rudest  terms  to  the  companions  of  his  tavern-revels,  who,  of 
3urse,  repeated  his  drunken  boasts.  That  was  the  origin  of 
er  infamous  notoriety.     She  herself  could  not  have  devised 

surer  way  of  retaining  Alexandra's  favour.  The  detractors 
f  Vyrubova  had  also  dared  to  retail  the  foulest  stories  about 
lexandra,  alleging  the  same  source.  Alexandra  rightly 
Dnsidered  herself  a  victim  of  slander,  and  naturally  included 
nna  under  the  same  designation. 

The  fact  is,  Anna  Vyrubova  was  Rasputin's  accomplice — 
othing  more.  She  kept  him  in  touch  with  everything, 
specially  with  the  boy's  health.  It  was  at  her  house  that 
:asputin  saw  the  Emperor  and  Empress  when  it  became  too 
:andalous  for  him  to  appear  daily  in  the  Palace — after  the 
ismissal  of  governesses  who  had  raised  an  outcry  against 
:asputin's  familiarities  with  their  charges. 

:):  4:  4:  ^f:  4: 

Another  person  deserves  mention.  It  is  not  positively 
lown  how  far  his  influence  was  felt,  but  certainly  he  played 
n  important  part  in  the  Romanov  tragedy.  He  was  in  many 
'ays  a  mystery  man — a  doctor  of  Tibetan  medicine,  by  birth 


36    THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  THE  ROMANOVS 

a  Buriat,  named  Badmaiev.  Besides  dispensing  nostrum 
that  cured  all  ills — often  bringing  relief  where  modern  scienc 
had  failed — he  dabbled  in  politics,  and  who  knows  what  dar] 
forces  were  served  by  him  ?  Rasputin  was  one  of  his  bes 
clients.  According  to  Rasputin  one  could  immediately  regai: 
all  the  vigour  of  youth  by  swallowing  a  powder  composed  c 
Tibetan  herbs ;  another  kind  of  powder  made  one  quit 
indifferent  to  worry.  Badmaiev  reserved  these  specifics  fo 
people  whom  he  could  trust.  The  first-named  kind  was  fc 
Rasputin,  but  who  was  the  recipient  of  the  '  dope  '  tha 
'  made  you  forget ' — who  if  not  the  hapless  Nicholas  ?  Am 
once  it  is  admissible  that  the  peasant  had  taken  to  drugs  fo 
specific  purposes,  one  may  seriously  entertain  other  accusa 
tions  against  him  and  his  accomplices. 

According  to  indications  contained  in  the  evidence,  Ann 
Vyrubova  arranged  the  '  miracles  '  of  healing  that  Rasputi 
performed  on  the  sick  boy.  It  was  not  difficult.  The  malad 
always  followed  the  same  course.  A  slight  bruise  set  u 
internal  hemorrhage.  The  patient  suffered  terrible  par 
while  the  blood  flowed,  clotted,  and  finally  began  to  b 
resorbed.  Anna  knew  from  experience  how  to  read  th 
symptoms.  Rasputin  would  come  to  pray  when  the  crisi 
was  over,  so  that  it  should  seem  as  if  his  intercession  ha' 
brought  relief.  Things  happened  in  this  way  on  severs 
known  occasions.  Rasputin  did  not  wish  to  lose  the  Empress' 
favour.  He  and  Vyrubova  took  their  precautions.  An^ 
Badmaiev' s  powders  may  here  also  have  been  used  with  benefi 
to  all  concerned.  Alexandra's  eyes  were  never  opened  to  th 
fact  that  Rasputin's  prayers  did  not  affect  the  disease. 

It  will  be  argued  by  those  who  knew  Vyrubova  that  sh 
was  too  garrulous  to  keep  a  secret,  too  child-like  to  conceiv 
or  carry  out  any  intrigue,  and  still  less  any  act  affecting  th 
Empress  in  whose  hands  she  was  as  wax.  To  have  lived  fo 
twenty  years  in  the  confidence  of  such  a  woman  as  the  Empres 


NO   ESCAPE:    ALEXANDRA   MISJUDGED         Z7 

resumes  the  possession  of  no  ordinary  faculties,  whether  of 
xtreme  innocence  combined  with  serpent  wisdom  or  of  pro- 
3und  guile  hidden  under  an  appearance  of  candour.  Vyru- 
ova's  apologists  would  have  us  believe  that  she  was  nothing 
etter  than  an  idiot.  The  skill  with  which  she  crept  into  the 
cod  graces  of  the  Imperial  Family,  ably  seconding  all  the 
loves  of  the  practised  courtier  Taneiev,  her  father,  shows  the 
bsurdity  of  such  a  theory  and  sufficiently  denotes  her  real 
isposition. 

Woman-like,  the  Empress  regarded  all  things  from  a  personal 
tandpoint.  Her  malady  only  served  to  intensify  her  likes  and 
islikes.  One  of  her  particular  aversions  was  Wilhelm  of 
'russia,  first  because  the  Hohenzollerns  had  been  exalted  at 
he  expense  of  her  own  House ;  secondly  because  Wilhelm 
ad  not  counted  with  her.  Germany,  ruled  by  Wilhelm,  was 
ver  the  foe  of  Russia  ruled  by  Alexandra.  She  could  not 
dmit  the  possibility  of  a  compromise  or  truce  with  Wilhelm's 
rermany,  any  more  than  she  would  permit  the  Tsar  to  sum- 
ion  a  Ministry  composed  of  Rasputin's  detractors  and  enemies. 
L  complete  and  ludicrous  misapprehension  prevailed  in  Russia 
nd  among  the  Allied  peoples  about  the  alleged  pro-German 
endencies  of  the  ex-Empress.  She  hated  Germany  with  a 
itterness  and  a  fervour  equalled  only  by  her  contempt  and 
)athing  for  the  Russians — always  excepting  the  peasants, 
^hom  she  '  imagined  '  to  be  endowed  with  all  the  virtues 
nd  qualities  that  Rasputin  was  supposed  to  possess. 

Wilhelm  was  described  by  her  as  '  that  low  comedian  '  and 
man  of  falsehood,'  who  had  '  stooped  to  associate  himself 
dth  Bolshevists.'  With  fierce  and  joyful  anticipation,  she 
Dresaw  his  punishment :  '  The  day  will  come  when  they  will 
estroy    him  ! '     She  did  not  live  to  see  her  vision  fulfilled. 

*  4:  4e  4:  4c 

Such  was  the  so-called  pro-German  Empress.     It  is  easy  to 


38    THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  THE  ROMANOVS 

recall  the  outcry  that  was  raised  in  Entente  countries  in  tl 
spring  of  1917  when  it  became  known  that  the  Romanovs 
would  be  permitted  to  come  to  England.  '  How  can  we  toler- 
ate this  friend  of  Germany  in  our  midst  ?  '  The  public  had 
been  so  deeply  affected  by  the  Rasputin  propaganda,  that  thej 
would  not  hear  of  Alexandra  coming  to  this  country.  And  as 
the  family  could  not  be  disunited,  they  had  all  to  remain  ir 
Russia.  The  ex-Tsar's  servants  had  even  prepared  his  English 
uniforms.  Sorrowfully,  without  understanding  the  reason, 
they  obeyed  the  order  to  pack  them  away.  Thus,  aftei 
depriving  them  of  the  throne,  Rasputin's  foul  influence  toot 
from  the  Romanovs  their  hope  of  an  asylum  and  left  them  tc 
suffer  a  shameful  death. 


CHAPTER  IV 

RASPUTIN   THE   PEASANT 

rHE  walls  of  Ipatiev's  house  epitomized  the  Revolution. 
One  name  and  one  effigy  predominated  :  the  name  of 
jrishka,  the  silhouette  of  Rasputin,  lasciviously  caricatured. 
)ne  met,  here  and  there,  allusions  to  the  'Tsar-bloodsucker' 
md  other  catch-phrases  of  the  Revolution,  but  one  felt  that 
hey  were  perfunctory.  The  one  and  only  unpardonable  crime 
n  the  eyes  of  the  Red  guards  had  been  the  preference  shown  by 
he  Empress  for  a  peasant — a  common  man  like  one  of  them- 
-elves.  What  a  commentary  on  the  blindness  of  the  unfor- 
unate  Alexandra  ! 

Political  propaganda  had  represented  Rasputin  as  a  monster 
)f  iniquity  and  occult  powers,  whereby  he  held  the  Empress 
mder  his  thraldom.  The  dossier  kills  this  legend — it  is  nothing 
nore. 

Gregory  Rasputin  was  forty-five  at  the  time  of  his  death 
1916).  Till  the  age  of  thirty-four  he  had  lived  as  an  ordinary 
(easant  in  his  native  village  of  Pokrovskoe,  between  Tobolsk 
.nd  Tinmen.  He  had  a  wife  and  three  children,  a  comfortable 
Lome,  and  enough  land  to  feed  himself  and  family.  Griskha 
-to  use  the  familiar  diminutive  of  his  Christian  name,  as  is 
ustomary  in  the  villages — was  a  fair  type  of  the  Siberian 
•easant-farmer.  They  are  endowed  with  an  abundance  of 
lother-wit,  wield  the  vernacular  with  consummate  skill,  and 
re  fine,  upstanding  fellows,  able  to  do  a  day's  work  or  celebrate 
festival  equally  well.  Such  was  Gregory  Rasputin.  Nothing 
idicated  a  future  for  him  different  from  the  rest.  He  might 
le  expected  to  plough,  drink  vodka,  beat  his  wife,  trick  his 


40  THE   LAST  DAYS  OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

neighbours,   and  pray  before  the  Holy  Ikons  in  the  usual 
sequence  till  he  died. 

*  «  *  *  *  J 

One  day  he  heard  the  Voice.  It  happened  to  peasants  now 
and  then  in  youth,  sometimes  in  the  prime  of  life,  and  often  in 
their  old  age.  After  that  they  left  their  mundane  affairs  and 
prepared  themselves  for  Eternity.  Grishka  had  been  '  called  ' 
when  he  was  fourteen,  and  in  an  ecstasy  had  tried  to  mutilate 
himself.  But  he  had  fallen  from  grace.  Now,  twenty  years 
later,  the  call  came  again.  Grishka  was  '  converted  '  by 
Dmitri  Pecherkin,  a  strannik  (wanderer),  who  had  deserted 
his  home  in  the  same  province  of  Tobolsk  to  pray  at  the  Holy 
Places.  In  1905  Rasputin  turned  over  his  farm  to  his  wife, 
son,  and  daughters,  and  joined  Dmitri  in  his  wanderings. 
Together  they  visited  Mount  Athos,  Jerusalem,  Kiev,  Moscow 
and  Petrograd. 

I  have  a  copy  of  his  work,  My  Thoughts  and  Reflections  (pub- 
lished in  Petrograd,  1915),  describing  his  pilgrimages.  It  is 
an  assortment  of  stereotyped  phrases,  texts  from  Scripture, 
homely  proverbs — just  the  conversation  of  an  ordinary  strannik. 
One  is  struck  with  wonderment  that  the  '  author '  of  such 
utter  commonplace  should  have  influenced  the  destinies  of  a 
vast  Empire,  or  could  for  one  moment  impose  upon  the  cultured 
intellect  of  an  Empress. 

I  believe  that  Rasputin  was  quite  sincere  in  following  Pecher- 
kin, and  that  during  his  earUer  days  in  the  capital  he  was  still 
an  earnest  devotee.  Bishop  Feofan  met  him  in  Petrograd, 
and  was  impressed  by  his  sincerity.  But  even  at  this  time 
(about  1907)  he  was  already  inclining  once  more  towards 
worldly  things.  Pecherkin  tried  in  vain  to  persuade  him  to 
take  the  vows  and  join  him  in  a  monastery.  Rasputin  had  a 
fancy  for  the  drawing-rooms  of  the  great  city,  where  he  was 
petted  and  paraded  by  hostesses  in  search  of  a  sensation.  And 
thus  it  came  to  pass  that,  with  the  help  of  Feofan  and  the 


Plate  II 


RASPUTIN 

WOUNDED  AT  HIS  VILLAGE   HOME 

Just  before  the  hostilities  in  1914, 
the  '  saint '  had  been  stabbed  by  a 
peasant  girl  whom  he  had  wionged, 
and  was  being"  nursed  by  his  wife  and 
daughters  at  Pokrovskoe  (Tobolsk 
Province).  Here  he  received  the  only 
letter  that  he  ever  had  from  Nicholas 
II.,  and  here  he  boasted  that  if  he 
had  been  in  Petrograd  at  the  time  he 
would  have  stopped  the  war.  Nicholas 
and  Alexandra  had  no  suspicion  that 
'Grishka'  was  a  German  agent.  On 
this  portrait  the  'saint'  has  inscribed 
some  of  his  pious  reflections — '  What 
of  to-morrow  .''  Thou  art  our  Guide, 
O  God.  How  many  Thorny  paths  in 
this  life  ?' 


ALEXANDRA'S  DESPAIR  OVER 
RASPUTIN'S   DEATH 

Facsimile  of  a  letter  in  which  the  Empress  for 
once  betrays  her  feelings.  The  closing  sentence, 
written  disjointedly,  refers  to  his  'murder,'  which 
occurred  a  week  beforehand,  and  her  anxiety  for 
the  safety  of  the  Tsar,  showing  that  she  knew  of 
a  plot  against  his  life.  '  Besides  everything,  try 
for  a  moment  to  realise  what  it  is  to  know  a 
friend  in  thu'Iv,  hourly  danger  of  also  being  foully 
murdered.      Hut  God  is  all  mercy.' 


II   3TA.i4 


Plate  II 


RASPUTIN 


P- 


1.^  "1/:^.  - 


e'\  '■ 


'T 


^  ju.^:.^v  K-t.^^-^^^  r^X<i-^  ^  ^^Mu.,^ 


Ua^ 


M^A 


-  'j&a>Aaft:^«'*-^^--> 


Alexandra's  despair 


RASPUTIN  THE   PEASANT  41 

land  Duchesses  Militza  and  Anastasia  (the  Montenegrin 
( incesses  who  had  already  introduced  various  '  saints '  to  the 
l/stically  disposed  sovereigns),  Rasputin  came  to  the  Court. 

The  diaries  and  depositions  of  his  daughter  Matrena  form 
Jt  of  the  dossier.  Amidst  a  mass  of  verbiage  one  is  able  to 
scover  here  and  there  precise  landmarks  of  the  Rasputin 
story.  One  sees  the  '  saint '  gradually  drawn  into  the 
altiple  cog-wheels  of  Court  intrigue  ;  bound  firmly  to  the 
mily  chariot,  as  his  daughters  are  put  to  fashionable  schools  ; 
Lving  to  make  money  for  the  girls ;  obliged  to  remain  a 
lasant  in  garb  and  language  to  please  his  protectress.  But  a 
;asant  who  is  divorced  from  his  normal  occupation  and  has 
sobeyed  the  Voice  takes  to  drink.  There  is  no  alternative. 
The  unhealthy  life  of  the  city  set  its  mark  on  him.  '  Fish- 
up,  bread  and  kvass  with  onions,  were  his  daily  fare,  but  he 
•ank  red  wine  and  Madeira  .  .  always  jolly  in  his  cups, 
aging  and  dancing  as  the  villagers  do ;  whenever  we 
monstrated  with  him,  he  would  say  that  he  could  never  drink 
lough  to  drown  the  sorrow  that  was  to  come.'  That  is  the 
ascription  given  by  hisj  daughter  of  Rasputin  '  at  home  '  in 
strograd.  But  these  mild  debauches  were  constantly  supple- 
ented  by  swinish  orgies  outside.  Many  a  peasant,  placed  in 
le  same  position,  would  have  acted  in  the  same  way. 
Rasputin  was  just  an  ordinary  peasant.     He  was  rustic  even 

the  measure  of  his  '  perquisites.'  In  his  native  Pokrov- 
:oe  it  was  not  considered  dishonourable  to  cheat  one's  neigh- 
)ur,  but  always  in  a  small  way,  of  course.  So  here,  this 
an,  who  could  have  amassed  a  colossal  fortune,  contented 
mself  with  dabbling  in  small  '  affairs  '  that  brought  in  a 
w  hundred  roubles.  His  whole  estate  at  the  time  of  his 
jath  did  not  much  exceed  £10,000.  Matrena  declares  most 
jsitively  that  he  never  possessed  or  attempted  to  display  at 
)me  any  occult  gift  of  mesmerism,  healing,  or  clairvoyancy. 


42  THE   LAST   DAYS   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

This  drunken  immoral  peasant  nevertheless  played  a  politica 
role.  He  gave  advice  to  the  Tsar  on  all  sorts  of  importan 
matters.  He  even  had  the  audacity  to  stamp  his  foot  a 
Nicholas  for  not  heeding  it.  We  know  that  at  least  on  om 
occasion  he  directly  influenced  the  Tsar  to  take  a  fatal  decision 
For  the  Imperial  fete  day,  December  6/19,  1916,  all  politica 
Russia,  nobles,  burgesses  and  peasants,  expected  the  Tsa: 
to  go  to  the  Duma  and  announce  the  formation  of  a  Ministr} 
enjoying  public  confidence.  Alexandra  was,  of  course,  via 
lently  opposed  to  any  concession,  but  she  feared  the  influenc( 
of  the  Army  on  Nicholas,  and  Rasputin  was  produced  for  th( 
occasion.  He  succeeded  in  dissuading  the  hapless  monarch 
to  his  undoing  and  to  the  ruin  of  the  Army  and  of  Russia. 

I  do  not  propose  to  rehearse  the  well-known  stories  aboui 
Rasputin's  influence  on  the  dismissal  or  appointment  of  minis 
ters  or  prelates.  Those  stories  are  true  only  in  so  far  as  the) 
represent  Grishka  acting  as  the  instrument  of  another  person's 
will,  in  most  cases  Alexandra's.  He  was  too  ignorant,  toe 
petty,  to  understand  political  questions.  For  instance,  he  was 
always  urging  the  Emperor  to  come  into  direct  contact  with 
the  people.  '  Get  rid  of  the  ministers.  They  lie  to  you, 
Address  yourself  direct  to  the  people.  You  will  then  know 
the  truth  and  everything  will  right  itself.'  Nicholas  became 
rather  tired  of  this  parrot-hke  repetition.  He  had  heard  it  all  so 
often  from  his  wife.  One  day  he  told  Rasputin  :  '  It  sounds 
very  nice,  but  how  is  it  to  be  done  ?  You  know  quite  well  that 
if  I  took  yom:  advice  I  should  very  soon  lose  my  hfe.'  '  No, 
never,'  was  the  reply.  '  You  will  be  killed  by  an  intellectual, 
not  by  a  peasant ' — not  a  convincing  or  cheerful  response. 

On  one  point  Rasputin  took  what  seemed  to  be  a  line  of 
his  own  :  he  was  against  the  war  with  Germany.  '  She  is 
too  strong.  We  must  be  friends,'  he  declaimed.  This  view 
did  not  reflect  the  mind  of  the  Empress.  Who  had  instilled 
it  into  him  ?     It  is  not  difficult  to  guess.     His  daughter  and 


RASPUTIN   THE   PEASANT  43 

er  husband  are  known  to  have  been  acquainted  with  one  of 
he  secret  agents  of  Germany.  Besides,  there  were  also  Bad- 
laiev  and  a  number  of  other  doubtful  personages  around  him. 
Vhen  war  broke  out  Rasputin  was  lying  wounded  at  Pokrov- 
koe.  The  Tsar  telegraphed  to  him  about  the  war.  Grishka 
3ll  into  such  a  rage  that  his  wound  reopened.  Nicholas  wrote 
o  Rasputin  only  one  letter.  It  was  stolen  from  Grishka  by 
liodor,  his  disappointed  rival.  It  contained  nothing  of  special 
mportance. 

He  served  the  German  interest  in  a  more  subtle  and  redoubt- 
ble  manner.  His  very  existence  was  bringing  about  the 
ollapse  of  Russia  by  destro3dng  the  faith  of  the  people  in  the 
.^sar.  All  the  foremost  supporters  and  friends  of  the  '  saint ' 
veie  of  the  German  orientation.  That  was  not  a  coincidence. 
i)very  one  who  even  tolerated  Rasputin  was  helping  the  enemy. 

It  being  pretty  well  established  that  Rasputin  was  the  direct 
ause — in  the  Empress's  hands — of  the  Revolution  and  down- 
all  of  Russia,  I  would  ask  what  the  Ludendorffs  and  their 
Russian  dupes  have  to  say  in  justification  of  the  argument 
hat  it  was  the  Entente  that  brought  about  the  Revolution, 
iasputin's  relationship  to  the  defeatists  was  so  clear  to  every- 
•ody  in  Russia  that  people — Russians  as  well  as  Allies — fell 
aturally  into  the  mistake  of  supposing  that  the  Empress  must 
•e  pro-German,  since  she  supported  Rasputin.  Who  magnified 
iasputin  before  the  war  ?  The  Cologne  Gazette.  Who  was 
is  arch-apologist  ?  The  pro-German  Witte.  The  Germans 
ad  almost  as  much  to  do  with  the  Rasputin  scandal  as  they 
ad  to  do  with  Lenin  and  the  exploits  of  his  hundred  Jews.* 

^Ludendorff.  War  Memories,  Vol.  II,  page  413.  '  .  .  .  The  Tsar 
^as  overthrown  by  the  Revolution,  which  was  favoured  by  the  Entente, 
he  Entente's  reasons  for  backing  the  Revolution  are  not  clear.  At 
11  events,  it  is  certain  that  the  Entente  expected  the  Revolution  to 
ring  them  some  advantage  in  the  war.  They  wished  at  least  to  save 
nylhing  that  could  be  saved  and,  consequently,  did  not  hesitate  to 


44  THE   LAST   DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

The  murder  of  Rasputin  evoked  the  greatest  outburst  c 
popular  rejoicing  that  any  act  had  ever  produced.  '  TJbili ! 
(they  have  killed)  was  the  universal  greeting.  People  did  nc 
stop  to  ask  who  had  been  killed.  They  knew.  The  whol 
nation  had  desired  his  death,  and  one  wonders  that  he  so  Ion 
survived.  But  his  murder  was,  none  the  less,  a  mistake,  sine 
he  was  merely  an  ignorant  tool,  and  the  circumstances  of  hi 
end — the  lawless  joy  that  it  evoked — only  helped  the  revolu 
tionaries.  Thenceforth,  the  Empress's  name  was  in  the  guttei 
and  there  was  only  one  hope  of  salvation  for  the  Tsar — t 
dissociate  himself  from  his  wife.  To  do  that — to  put  he 
away  into  a  monastery  as  Tsar  Peter  Alexeievitch  would  hav 
done — was  quite  beyond  the  capacity  of  a  gentle  soul  lik 
Nicholas  Alexandrovich.  .  .  . 

It  had  been  suggested  before  the  Revolution  that  she  shoul 
go  alone  to  England  '  on  a  visit.'  This  argued  complet 
ignorance  of  the  inner  life  of  the  sovereigns.  The  Rasputi: 
scandal  had  arisen  because  Alexandra  morbidly  imagined  tha 
the  destinies  of  Russia  depended  upon  their  joint  faith  am 
prayers — hers  and  the  '  saint's.'  Also  she  was  convinced  tha 
without  her  constant  presence  and  support  Nicholas  would  b 
lost.  Sooner  would  she  have  died  than  go  away,  particularl; 
after  the  death  of  her  '  saint.' 

Speaking  to  her  maid  (Tutelberg),  who  had  ventured  t 
express  some  doubts  about  Rasputin,  the  Empress  said  on 
day  at  Tsarskoe  :  '  Our  Saviour  chose  his  disciples  amon 
simple  fishermen  and  carpenters,  not  among  learned  theolc 
gians.  It  is  said  in  the  Gospel  that  faith  can  move  mountains 
...  I  believe  that  my  son  will  rise.  ...  I  know  tha 
people  think  me  mad  for  my  faith,  but  so  did  they  think  of  th 
Martyrs.  .  .  .'  Another  day  she  remarked  :  '  The  Revolu 
tion  was  prepared  long  ago.     Our  sufferings  are  nothing  ;   w 

act.     The  Tsar,  who  had  begun  the  war  in  order  to  please. the  Entente 
had  to  be  removed.' 


RASPUTIN  THE   PEASANT  45 

re  ready  to  offer  up  our  lives  and  sacrifice  everything  if  needs 
e.  .  .  .'  The  same  witness  deposed  that  Rasputin  came 
eldom  to  the  Palace — '  only  when  Alexis  was  ill.' 

:|c  H:  H:  ^  :ic 

It  is  the  writer's  belief  that  Alexandra  was  tempted  to  dabble 
1  black  magic  ;  her  religious  faith  did  not  preclude  knowledge 
f  occult  science,  as  witness  her  predilection  for  cabalistic 
igns,  the  swastika,  etc.  There  were  persons  suspiciously  like 
•lack  magicians  around  and  inside  the  Palace  at  various  times  : 
'hilippe,  Papus,  Badmaiev.  Now  Rasputin  bore  a  certain 
esemblance  to  Tsar  Ivan  Grozny,  and  may  have  been  regarded 
)y  Alexandra  as  an  incarnation  of  the  Terrible  One — combining 
a  his  person  the  Peasant  and  Autocrat,  the  mystic  union  in 
vhich  she  saw  the  salvation  of  Russia. 

There  had  been  plots  to  kill  Alexandra  and  even  the  Tsar, 
t  is  curious,  indeed,  that  her  life  should  have  been  spared. 
)ne  must  bear  in  mind  the  probability  of  German  '  protec- 
;ion.'  It  is  evident  that  Alexandra's  death  would  have  put 
m  end  to  the  Rasputin  scandal  and  therefore  been  unprofitable 
"or  Germany.  As  for  Nicholas,  the  people  were  on  his  side 
to  the  last — till  the  Revolution  extinguished  in  men's  minds 
the  last  vestige  of  all  that  was  seemly. 

The  manner  of  Rasputin's  murder  is  known  to  all.  The  man 
who  killed  him  is  no  more.  His  diary  has  been  published, 
[t  gives  almost  a  complete  account  of  the  murder.  One  feature 
tias  escaped  attention,  and  I  mention  it  because  it  gives  point 
to  the  true  version  of  Rasputin's  character  as  related  above, 
rhe  accomplices  had  prepared  a  most  elaborate  scheme  for 
killing  him,  yet  in  the  end  it  was  Purishkevitch  with  a  vulgar 
revolver  that  effected  the  deed.  Poisoned  tarts,  '  doctored ' 
wine,  and  even  a  revolver  shot  had  been  in  vain.  The  con- 
spirators had  innocently  administered  an  antidote  with  the 
poison  ;  the  shooter's  hand  had  trembled  so  that  he  had  failed 
to  hit  Rasputin  standing  a  few  paces  away.     But  why  all  this 


46    THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  THE  ROMANOVS 

rigmarole  ?  The  fact  is  the  conspirators  were  affected  by  tf 
Rasputin  propaganda  ;  they  also  believed  that  the  man  wi 
more  than  mortal.  Purishkevitch  thought  that  the  devil  Wi 
in  him  till  the  third  bullet  brought  him  down.  That  was  a 
epoch-making  shot. 

*  *  *  *  Hf 

Rasputin  was  fond  of  identifying  his  own  well-being  wii 
that  of  Russia.  In  this,  as  in  other  things,  he  merely  copie 
the  Empress.  When  Khionia  Guseva,  incited  by  the  mon 
Iliodor,  who  had  fallen  out  with  Grishka,  stuck  a  knife  into  tl 
'  saint,'  he  announced  that  '  much  blood  would  flow  '  an 
that  there  would  be  '  woe  unutterable  if  and  when  he  died 
But  he  was  ever  prophesying  all  sorts  of  things,  good  and  ba( 
like  the  proverbial  tipster.  It  suited  the  interested  or  supe 
stitious  to  proclaim  him  infallible.  Anyhow,  it  did  not  requii 
much  acumen  to  read  the  signs  of  coming  disaster  in  Russii 
Grishka  was  no  fool,  and  he  must  have  had  a  shrewd  idea  whj 
his  own  friends  and  supporters  were  doing.  But  charlatanis: 
'  paid,'  and  he  had  a  family  to  support  and  lots  of  '  friends 
coming  for  assistance,  all  of  which  flattered  Grishka's  cheap  litt 
soul  and  kept  him  on  his  daily  round  of  prayer  and  debauch. 

Rasputin  the  monster  is  a  fiction,  bred  in  the  busy  braii 
of  politicians  and  elaborated  by  the  teeming  imagination  < 
sensational  novelists.  Rasputin  the  saint  is  an  imaginary  pr( 
duct  of  a  woman's  diseased  mind.  Even  the  stories  of  tl 
'  sanctifying  '  baths  and  other  '  flagellant  '  (khlyst)  rite 
supposed  to  have  been  practised  by  a  demoniacal  Grishk< 
turn  out  to  be  imaginary.  It  is  not  unusual  for  the  peasani 
in  certain  parts  of  Russia  to  take  the  steam  bath  in  commoi 
They  admit  no  strangers,  but  there  is  nothing  unseemly  i 
their  intention.  It  was  quite  appropriate  for  a  native  ( 
Tobolsk  to  practise  it.  And  in  this  and  in  his  gross  familiaritie 
with  the  other  sex  Grishka  was  merely  Rasputin  the  Peasan 
a  village  Satyr. 


CHAPTER  V 

'THE  TSAR   IS  INNOCENT' 

3EF0RE  the  Revolution,  propagandists  of  all  descriptions 
aimed  their  poisoned  shafts  at  the  Empress.  Her  fatal 
ilief  in  Rasputin  rendered  her  an  easy  prey.  The  revolu- 
onary  section  watched  over  Grishka,  just  as  their  German 
xomplices  '  protected '  Alexandra.  Nicholas  was  left 
one,  comparatively  speaking.  After  the  Revolution  all  the 
lergies  of  the  dark  forces  involved  were  concentrated  upon 
im.  It  was  not  enough  that  he  had  voluntarily  abdicated  ; 
i  had  to  be  shorn  of  all  prestige,  so  that  the  inveterate  devo- 
on  and  loyalty  of  the  people,  which  had  formed  the  very 
)undation  of  Russia's  existence,  should  be  swept  away  for 
/er.  '  The  Tsar  was  a  traitor  ;  he  and  tiis  wife  had  been 
I  secret  com.munication  with  the  Germans.'  In  city,  village 
id  camp  this  poisonous  rumour  spread. 
Blindly,  the  Provisional  Government  did  nothing  to  stop 
.  The  Order  of  the  Day  to  the  Armies,  in  which  Nicholas, 
idding  good-bye  to  his  soldiers,  proclaimed  his  unshaken 
lyalty  to  the  sacred  cause  of  Russia,  and  besought  them 
ever  to  lay  down  their  arms  to  Germany,  was  suppressed 
y  telegram  from  the  War  Office  in  Petrograd.^  Evil  deeds 
3me  back  to  roost  whence  they  have  issued.     The  people 

^  Here  is  the  text  of  the  suppressed  document  : — 
'  My  dearly  loved  troops,  I  address  you  for  the  last  time.      After 
ly  abdication,  for  me  and  for  my  son,  from  the  Russian  Throne,  the 
3wer  is  transferred  to  the  Provisional  Government  which  rose  on 
le  initiation  of  the  Duma.     God  help  them  to  lead  Russia  on  the  way 

47 


48        THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  THE   ROMANOVS         | 

who  besmirched  the  Tsar  to  please  the  revolutionaries  we 
themselves  punished.     One  does  not  undermine  the  faith 
a  whole  nation  without  destroying  all  authority.  , 

*****  " 

When  the  Empress  and  her  sick  children  were  proclaim) 
prisoners  of  state,  and  a  few  days  later  Nicholas  arrived  und 
custody  at  Tsarskoe,  this  foul  charge  of  treachery  hung  ov 
them,  poisoning  their  lives  by  the  mental  and  even  physic 
torture  that  ensued.  It  was  because  of  this  abominable  ] 
that  the  ex-Sovereigns  were  first  treated  hke  common  ma] 
factors,  kept  in  separate  rooms,  and  forbidden  to  see  or  coi 
municate  with  each  other  ;  and  the  soldiers  and  officers 
the  guard  considered  themselves  justified  in  persecuting  ai 
insulting  them,  and  even  their  followers  deserted  them. 

After  the  overhauling  of  all  their  private  papers  by  a  sped 
court  of  inquiry  instituted  by  order  of  the  revolutionary  chi( 
tain,  Kirbiss-Kerensky,  even  he  had  to  amend  his  demeanoi 
'  Tsar  chist '  (the  Tsar  is  clean),  he  declared.  The  Russi; 
phrase  means  more  than  '  innocent  '  ;  it  is  really  '  beyoi 
reproach.'     But  the  Jewish  Press  and  the  Soviet  did    n 

of  glory  and  prosperity.     God  help  you  also,  valiant  troops,  to  h( 
our  native  land  firmly  against  the  evil  enemy. 

'  During  two  and  a  half  years  3'ou  endured,  daily,  the  hardsh: 
of  active  service.  Much  blood  has  been  shed,  many  efforts  have  be 
made,  and  the  hour  is  already  near  when  Russia,  bound  to  her  valia 
Allies,  by  one  general  impulse  to  victory,  will  break  the  last  effo 
of  the  adversary. 

'  This  unprecedented  war  must  be  brought  to  a  full  victory.  ] 
who  thinks  now  of  peace,  who  wishes  it — that  man  is  a  betrayer 
his  Fatherland,  a  traitor.  I  know  that  every  honest  soldier  thir 
thus.  Then  fulfil  your  duty,  defend  our  native  land  valiantly,  subr 
yourselves  to  the  Provisional  Government,  obey  your  commande 
remember  that  every  weakening  of  discipline  in  the  service  is  01 
an  advantage  to  the  enemy. 

'  I  firmly  believe  that  the  infinite  love  of  our  great  native  land  t 
not  died  out  of  your  hearts.  May  God  bless  3'ou,  and  Saint  Geoi 
the  great  Vanquisher  and  Martyr  guide  you. 

'  Nicholas.' 

The  Order  was  counter-signed  by  General  Alexeiev,  Chief  of  Stc 


'THE  TSAR  IS   INNOCENT'  49 

cant  their  foul  slanders.     No  justice  could  be  shown  to  the 

an  whom  they  hated.     Captivity  lost   some  of  its  worst 

rms  after  the  innocence  of  the  ex-Tsar  had  been  established. 

ut  Tsarskoe-Selo  was  only  a  prelude  to  worse  mart5nrdom. 

I  do  not  wish  to  go  over  the  details  of  the  first  captivity, 

good  deal  being  already  known  about  the  five  months  at 

sarskoe-Selo.      Only  the  more  important  episodes  are  given 

ire,  based  upon  the  depositions  of  members  of  the  Imperial 

Dusehold.     But  before  relating  these  sad  memories,  I  would 

:ke  the  reader  a  little  farther  back,  and  touch  upon  fateful 

cidents  that  have  not  yet  been  recorded  in  their  proper 

taring. 

I  have  referred  to  the  estrangement  of  nearly  every  one 

:  the  ex-Empress's  friends  as  a  consequence  of  her  malady. 

his  exodus  of  intimates  included  kinsfolk  as  well  as  humbler 

3ople.     Even    the    Montenegrin    Princesses    Anastasia    and 

lilitza  ^  were  no  exceptions  to  the  rule.     Coldness  between 

le  wives  in  this  case  was  bound  sooner  or  later  to  affect  the 

usbands.     Alexandra  resented  the  popularity  of  the  Grand 

»uke  Nicholas  as  a  personal  affront.     In  the  end  she  succeeded 

1  persuading  her  husband  to  dismiss  him  and  to  assume  the 

hief  Command.     But  she  punished  herself.     The  Tsar  at 

le  Stavka  (G.H.Q.)  began  to  do  things  without  her  know- 

idge  and  consent.     He  actually  listened  to  dreadful  stories 

bout  the  '  saint,'  dismissed  Stuermer,  and  might  go  further. 

iasputin's  death  helped  the  Empress  to  reassert  her  usual 

ifluence.     Then,  once  more,  the  Tsar  went  off  to  Moghilev, 

nd  anxiety  crept  again  into  the  mind  of  Alexandra. 

The  illness  of  the  children — they  all  contracted  measles  in 

very  bad  form — caused  her  worry  of  another  sort.     For  a 

ime  the  Autocrat  was  forgotten  in  the  mother  ;    and  so, 

^  They  are  the  wives  of  the  Grand  Dukes  Nicholas  and  his  brother 
*eter,  and  sisters  of  the  Queen  of  Italy.  At  one  time  they  were  very 
riendly  with  the  Empress,  and  through  them  Rasputin  came  to  the 
LOtice  of  the  Court.     Afterwards  they  became  enemies  of  Rasputin. 

D 


50         THE  LAST  DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

when  the  rumbling  of  the  Revolution  was  already  loud,  sh 
did  not  discern  it.  Protopopov,  the  friend  of  the  departet 
'  saint,'  was  assuring  her  that  nothing  serious  had  occurred 
When  the  children  were  out  of  danger,  she  had  leisure  to  tak 
stock  of  affairs.  Realizing  that  Protopopov  was  not  to  b 
trusted,  she  sent  for  the  Grand  Duke  Paul.  Rumours  abou 
the  Tsar  tormented  her.  He  was  going  to  abdicate.  Th< 
idea  of  such  a  surrender  made  her  frantic.  Paul  could  no 
help.  She  tried  to  get  into  communication  with  her  husbanc 
by  aeroplane.  A  trusty  fl3dng  officer  was  summoned,  bu 
even  this  venture  failed. 

Remaining  outwardly  calm,  she  showed  the  measure  o: 
her  anxiety  by  abandoning  the  reserve  that  she  had  always 
displayed.-  Thus  she  herself  came  out  to  the  guards  battalion' 
and  units  that  had  been  concentrated  around  the  Palace 
and  actually  made  a  speech  to  them. 

***** 

On  the  morning  of  March  21,  General  Kornilov  cam( 
to  inform  Alexandra  '  that  upon  him  had  fallen  the  painfu 
duty  of  announcing  the  ordinance  of  the  Council  of  Minister; 
that  from  that  hour  Her  Majesty  must  consider  herself  to  b( 
under  arrest.'  This  announcement  was  made  to  the  Empres; 
in  the  children's  play-room  in  the  presence  of  Colonel  Koby 
linsky,  the  new  commandant  of  the  Palace.  Then  Genera 
Kornilov  asked  to  speak  to  the  Empress  alone.  He  assurec 
her  that  there  was  no  danger,  and  then  gave  instruction; 
for  the  treatment  of  the  prisoners,  based  upon  kindness  and 
courtesy. 

The  meeting  between  husband  and  wife  was  a  very  affecting 
one.  Nicholas  came  straight  to  the  nursery.  They  embraced 
each  other  tenderly,  '  forgetting  the  world  and  its  troubles 
in  the  joy  of  reunion  with  their  children.'  Prison  rules, 
rigorously  applied,  thenceforth  prevented  any  communication 
with  the  outside,  and  for  a  time  even  between  the  prisoners. 


'THE  TSAR   IS   INNOCENT'  51 

Kerensky  set  about  trying  to  discover  some  evidence  of 
)llusion  with  the  enemy.  Alexandra  was  isolated.  A 
eature  of  Kerensky's,  named  Korovichenko,  came  to  search 
te  Imperial  papers.  The  Tsar  politely  offered  to  help  him, 
it  met  with  a  rude  rebuff,  after  which  he  left  Korovichenko 
one.  Having  satisfied  himself  that  no  such  evidence  existed 
■  erensky  somewhat  altered  his  demeanour.  At  his  first 
eeting  with  the  ex-Tsar,  he  had  adopted  a  tone  of  haughty 
miliarity.  Later,  he  became  polite,  even  respectful,  address- 
g  him  as  '  Your  Majesty,'  instead  of  plain  '  Nicholas 
lexandrovich.' 

Although  the  soldiers  guarding  the  Palace  were  not  sup- 
)sed  to  enter  its  precincts,  the  prisoners  did  not  enjoy  im- 
unity  from  their  prying  gaze  and  offensive  curiosity.  They 
:oke  into  the  Palace  and  pilfered,  ransacking  trunks.  On 
le  occasion  they  rushed  into  the  sitting-room  where  the 
mily  had  assembled.  One  of  the  girls  sat  between  the 
^ht  and  the  window,  doing  some  sewing.  Her  movements 
Ihouetted  outside  had  been  suspected  to  be  signals. 
An  officer  accompanying  the  Minister  of  War  (Guchkov) 
1  one  of  his  visits  loudly  accused  the  occupants  of  the  Palace 
;  being  '  sold  to  the  enemy  '  {Vy  vsie  prodazhnyie).  The 
.ct  that  he  was  intoxicated  did  not  lighten  the  insult.  It 
lowed  what  unworthy  suspicions  animated  people  in  the 
inistries.  The  ignorant  soldiers  who  imbibed  their  daily 
ose  of  revolutionary  lore  from  the  Soviets  were  not  better 
r  worse  than  their  chiefs.  By  dogging  the  ex-Tsar's  foot- 
;eps  when  he  went  out  for  exercise,  by  shooting  the  boy's 
et  goats,  and  taking  away  his  toy  rifle,  and  by  other  acts 
f  the  same  kind  the  soldiers  were  merely  copying  their  officers, 
hese  demonstratively  donned  red  badges  and  ignored  the 
sar's  salute. 

Senseless  clamour  had  led  to  daily  espionage  of  the  family, 
fficers  of  the  guard  went  into  the  dining-room  at  lunch  time 


52    THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  THE  ROMANOVS 

to  see  if  the  prisoners  were  all  in  the  Palace.  The  Tsar  alway 
greeted  them.  On  one  occasion  an  officer  declined  the  extendec 
hand.  Nicholas,  deeply  hurt,  asked  him :  '  Why  ?  '  Thi 
man,  putting  his  hand  behind  his  back,  declaimed  :  '  I  an 
of  the  people.  When  the  people  stretched  their  hands  ou 
to  you,  you  did  not  meet  them  !  ' 


At  the  end  of  July  the  captives  heard  that  they  woul 
shortly  go  away.  It  was  impossible  to  leave  them  there  an; 
longer.  The  Soviets  of  Petrograd  and  Kronstadt  had  trie 
to  obtain  possession  of  them  by  force  and  by  stealth.  One 
an  individual  attired  in  uniform,  styling  himself  Colon( 
Maslovsky,  had  made  his  appearance,  and,  producing  a  pape 
signed  Chkheidze,  demanded,  in  the  name  of  the  Soviet  ( 
Petrograd,  the  transfer  of  the  prisoners  to  the  Fortress  of  Sv 
Peter  and  Paul,  threatening  to  call  in  the  troops  if  his  demand 
were  not  immediately  complied  with.  It  was  with  the  greates 
difficulty  that  Colonel  Kobylinsky  averted  the  danger,  Tl: 
Pro\dsional  Government  could  not  afford  to  let  the  Soviel 
obtain  the  custody  of  such  valuable  hostages.  It  had  i 
remove  them  to  a  place  of  safety — above  all  to  a  place  whei 
the  Soviets  could  not  easily  reach  them.  Perhaps  this  explaii 
the  selection  of  such  a  remote  place  as  Tobolsk.  It  was  chose 
by  Kerensky  without  the  knowledge  of  the  captives.  The 
thought,  till  the  train  was  conveying  them  eastward,  the 
they  were  bound  for  the  south.  The  ex-Tsar  did  not  lil 
his  destination.  He  suspected  a  trap,  though  what  shoul 
have  made  him  suspicious  is  not  known. 

Permission  had  been  given  to  the  banished  sovereigns  \ 
choose  the  persons  who  were  to  accompany  them  into  exil 
Nicholas  selected  his  aide-de-camp  Naryshkin,  but  as  th 
favourite  hesitated,  he  at  once  crossed  out  his  name  an 
proposed    Ilya   Leonidovich    Tatishchev,    who,    with    Prin( 


'THE  TSAR  IS   INNOCENT'  53 

asily  Alexandrovich  Dolgoruky,  remained  with  him  to  the 
id,  paying  for  their  loyalty  and  devotion  with  their  lives. 
1  a  separate  chapter  I  shall  describe  the  heroism,  sufferings, 
ad  end  of  those  who  were  faithful  unto  death — of  the  two 
i  'hom  I  have  just  named,  of  Dr.  Botkin  and  of  young  Countess 
ijiastasia  Vasilievna  Hendrykova,  angel  of  purity  and  grace, 
^hose  mere  presence  at  the  Court  of  Alexandra  should  have 
ept  away  all  things  evil,  and  of  devoted  Mile.  Schneider, 
nd  of  the  humbler  servitors.  The  ex-Empress  was  not 
'Crmitted,  for  some  unexplained  reason,  to  take  her  favourite 
laid. 

The  evil  genius  of  the  household,  Anna  Vyrubova,  had  been 
Dcked  up  in  the  fortress.  She  and  Voeikov,  the  ex-palace 
ommandant,  had  been  subjected  to  the  most  searching  interro- 
;ation  by  the  members  of  the  '  Extraordinary  Commission 
»f  Inquiry  regarding  the  Dark  Forces.'  Such  was  the  high- 
.ounding  title  invented  by  Kerensky  to  mobilize  all  methods 
)f  bringing  home  to  the  Tsar  the  abominable  charges  invented 
igainst  him.  Nothing  could  be  proved,  because  there  was 
lothing  to  prove.  But  Kerensky  had  his  spies  all  the  time 
it  the  Palace  and  sent  one  to  Tobolsk. 

4:  H:  4:  :):  4: 

Young  Alexis  celebrated  his  thirteenth  birthday  on  the  eve 
)f  departure.  The  family  attended  a  special  service  and 
ifterwards  offered  up  the  customary  prayers  for  a  safe  journey, 
rhey  were  going  into  the  unknown.  Here  in  their  own  familiar 
iurroundings  life  had  not  been  so  terrible  towards  the  end 
)f  their  captivity.  What  had  the  future  in  store  ?  The  war 
vas  still  in  progress.  They  could  not  leave  the  country. 
Perhaps  when  peace  came,  some  quiet  refuge  would  open  its 
jates,  and  they  could  live  happily  together.  The  girls  and 
:he  boy  were  delighted  like  all  young  things  over  the  prospect 
3f  a  journey.  Alexis  and  his  sisters  had  quite  recovered 
irom  their  illness. 


54  THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

At  midnight  of  August  13  Kerensky  came  to  th( 
Palace,  assembled  the  soldiers  who  had  been  selected  to  escor 
the  family,  and  made  them  a  speech.  '  You  have  guardec 
the  Tsar's  family  here,'  he  said,  '  you  also  will  have  to  guarc 
them  in  the  new  place  where  they  are  going  by  order  of  th( 
Council  of  Ministers.  Remember,  one  does  not  hit  a  mai 
who  is  down.     Bear  yourselves  like  men,  not  like  cads.' 

He  then  entered  the  Palace.  The  ex-Tsar's  only  brother 
the  Grand  Duke  Michael,  had  been  permitted  to  come  to  saj 
good-bye.  Kerensky  gave  him  ten  minutes  with  Nicholas 
remaining  in  the  room  with  them.  The  brothers  were  nevei 
to  meet  again.  Michael  did  not  see  any  other  member  o; 
the  family. 

Learning  that  the  Tsar's  family  was  to  be  removed  fron 
Tsarskoe-Selo  the  men  employed  at  the  railway  station  refusec 
to  let  out  the  engine.  All  night  the  exiles  waited  for  the  train 
It  came  at  six  o'clock  in  the  morning. 


•  CHAPTER  VI 

EXILE   IN   SIBERIA 

rHE  period  between  autumn,  1917,  and  the  following 
spring  furnishes  much  material  for  this  tragic  history, 
t  was  during  their  exile  in  Siberia  that  the  fate  of  the  Roman- 
vs  was  decided — not  in  the  Urals.  It  was  at  Tobolsk,  in  the 
lose  intimacy  that  misfortune  naturally  brings,  that  the  true 
iharacter  of  each  captive,  high  and  low,  asserted  itself.  Thus, 
nvaluable  data  have  been  obtained  for  the  historian. 

At  first  the  captives  enjoyed  the  respite  of  remoteness  from 
he  storm  centre  of  Petrograd.  But  many  circumstances 
gradually  impaired  this  advantage.  They  began  to  suffer 
)rivations  even  before  the  Reds  captured  the  government. 
?he  remittances  promised  by  Kerensky  did  not  arrive.  After 
he  Bolshevist  usurpation,  the  captives  were  allowed  starvation 
ations,  and  had  to  eke  out  their  livelihood  by  needlework, 
[rawings,  etc.  Then  the  boy  fell  ill  with  one  of  his  periodical 
ttacks,  aggravated  by  the  exhausting  effects  of  the  Siberian 
/inter  and  inadequate  diet. 

At  Tobolsk  Alexandra  showed  herself  to  be  strong,  brave, 
entle.  Adversity  seemed  to  bring  out  all  that  was  best  in 
.er  nature.  Yet  here  the  family  physician,  who  had  followed 
hem  into  exile  and  afterwards  shared  their  fate  in  Ekaterin- 
burg, became  entirely  convinced  that  she  was  not  quite  normal, 
t  required  only  a  chance  remark  on  political  topics  to  provoke 
n  hysterical  outburst.  As  usual,  she  could  see  nothing  bad 
1  the  peasants,  even  when  the  peasant  soldiers  of  the  guard 

55 


56  THE   LAST  DAYS  OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

were  constantly  behaving  '  like  cads '  despite  Kerensky's 
exhortations, 

Nicholas  sawed  wood  and  gave  lessons  to  the  children 
Indeed,  with  the  help  of  Mr.  Sidney  Gibbes  and  M.  Gillard  anc 
other  teachers,  they  were  making  up  for  time  lost  in  then 
education. 

With  so  many  and  such  powerful  influences  interested  in 
their  existence,  it  was  only  to  be  expected  that  efforts  would  hi 
made  to  enter  into  communication  with  the  exiled  monarchs 
Each  of  the  parties  then  fighting  for  power  in  Russia  had  its 
spies  and  emissaries  in  Tobolsk.  It  is  certain  that  the  German; 
were  represented  in  many  ways.  It  is  equally  certain  thai 
the  Entente  had  nobody.  The  talk  of  a  rescue  by  some  bole 
Englishman  ascending  the  Ob  and  Irtysh  from  the  Arctic  Oceai 
and  wafting  away  the  prisoners  is  not  only  unfounded,  it  ii 
the  merest  moonshine.  Winter  in  Siberia  lasts  seven  months 
during  which  time  there  is  no  means  of  reaching  the  northeri 
shores  except  on  sleighs.  Any  attempt  to  enter  or  leav^e  th 
country  would  have  been  easily  discovered  and  notified  b] 
telegraph,  which  was  wholly  in  the  hands  of  the  Soviets. 

One  comfort  was  not  denied  to  the  captives — they  sent  an( 
received  letters,  in  some  cases  without  censorship.  They  wer 
also  able  to  get  newspapers  and  other  literature.  Thus  the; 
were  in  touch  with  the  happenings  of  the  outer  world,  Thes 
did  not  bring  them  much  consolation,  it  must  be  admitted 
Nicholas  never  recovered  from  the  blow  of  learning  in  thi 
manner  of  the  Treaty  of  Brest-Litovsk.  Up  to  that  time  h 
had,  in  spite  of  everything,  kept  alive  some  hope  for  the  futur 
of  his  country.  Thenceforth  he  was  a  man  without  hope,  an^ 
all  that  happened  afterwards  left  him  indifferent.  If  he  coul' 
have  died  without  causing  pain  to  his  wife  and  children,  h 
would  have  died  gladly,  unable  to  live  down  the  stain  c 
dishonour. 


Platk  II! 


{a) 

The  Tsar  sawing  wood  in  the 
cointyavd  of  the  Governor's  Palace, 
Tolx)lsk.  It  is  winter.  He  wears 
the  />,t/>^f/ici  (mihtary  fur  hat)  and 
felt  bootg. 


(*)  <^' 

^               .1          1  The    Tsarevich    Alexis 

•    T,'' r3rn;.^s  Pah"  anJhis  spaniel  '  Joy,>  in 

Tobolsi?  ^^^  P""'^  ""^  Tsarskoe. 


PHOTOGRAPHS   TAKEN   DURING 
THEIR   CAPTIVITY 


I 


iiV 


Plate  III 


t 

^^ 

M 

^^3H 

Wk 

^^^~i|flH 

MM 

l^^^^o 

Vr^ 

^^^^^ 

'  '  -^'SLv^Pv^K 

ib) 


ic) 


ph(>to(;kaphs  taken  during  their  captivity 


EXILE   IN   SIBERIA  57 

'he  exiles  suffered  unconsciously  from  the  senseless  if  not 

torous  behaviour  of  a  man  in  whom  they  naturally  trusted — 

local  priest,  Father  Vasiliev.     Base  cupidity  may  have  been 

only  motive,  but  it  is  certain  that  he  caused  incalculable 

m  and  must  be  held  accountable  for  the  tales  of  alleged 

ts  to  escape  from  Tobolsk.     The  Reds  used  him  as  their 

1.     Perhaps  he  was  not  altogether  blind.     There  were  other 

iends  '  who,  proverbially,  proved  to  be  worse  than  enemies. 

the  other  hand,  many  instances  of  disinterested   loyalty 

i  devotion  consoled  the  captives  in  their  afflictions. 

From  Tsarskoe  to  Tobolsk,  the  journey  under  normal  con- 
ions  required  not  more  than  a  week.  The  Imperial  exiles 
iched  their  destination  on  August  19,  within  six  days  of 
parture.  They  travelled  in  comfort  in  sleeping  cars  with  a 
lole  retinue  of  servants.  The  list  of  the  passengers  as 
icially  approved  numbers  forty-five  all  told.  Two  trains 
nveyed  them  and  their  effects.  Stoppages  were  not  made 
the  large  stations  because  local  workmen  and  Soviets  were 
sposed  to  interfere.  They  had  done  so  at  Zvanka,  the  first 
iportant  station  on  the  Vologda- Viatka  route,  by  which  the 
irty  travelled.  The  deputy  Vershinin,  who  had  brought  the 
jar  a  prisoner  from  Moghilev,  acted  again  in  the  capacity  of 
presentative  of  the  Provisional  Government  during  this 
urney.  He  had  the  greatest  difficulty  in  overcoming  the 
sistance  at  Zvanka.  The  workers  did  not  wish  to  allow  the 
ains  to  pass. 

At  Tinmen  two  steamers  awaited  the  party  for  the  river 
ip  to  Tobolsk.  They  passed  by  the  village  of  Pokrovskoe. 
lexandra  called  the  children  to  look  at  the  birthplace  of  the 
;aint '  on  the  banks  of  the  stream  in  which  he  had  fished, 
le  was  fond  of  comparing  him  to  the  fishermen  of  Galilee, 
imble  men  like  him.  The  children  dutifully  complied  and 
ined  their  mother  in  prayer — not  because  they  liked  or 


58         THE   LAST  DAYS  OF  THE  ROMANOVS 

regretted  Grishka,  but  out  of  love  and  obedience  to  the 
mother.  To  her  diseased  imagination  this  coincidence  betwe( 
the  scene  of  their  exile  and  the  home  of  Rasputin  had  a  mystic 
meaning. 

The  voyage  had  been  as  pleasant  as  it  could  possibly  b 
The  tedium  of  the  long  days  in  the  train  had  been,  relieved  I 
frequent  stoppages  amidst  forest  or  field.  All  who  wish( 
could  alight  and  walk,  while  the  train  followed  slowly.  Su( 
comforts  are  possible  only  in  Russia.  Descending  the  ti 
butaries  of  the  mighty  Irtysh,  the  exiles  had  a  wonderf 
picture  of  the  Siberian  autumn,  with  its  splendour  of  colourii 
and  teeming  bird  life.  At  Tobolsk  they  had  to  remain  a  who 
week  in  the  steamers,  because  the  houses  intended  for  the 
were  not  ready.  They  were,  of  course,  under  constant  guan 
but  allowed  to  take  exercise  ashore, 

*  «  ♦  «  4: 

On  August  26  they  moved  into  their  new  prison.  Alexandi 
was  suffering  more  than  usual  from  her  trouble.  She  dro^ 
in  a  comfortable  carriage.  The  Tsar  and  the  family  ar 
household  walked.  With  the  exception  of  a  few  servant 
all  found  accommodation  in  two  houses  :  one  a  warm,  room 
stone  building,  formerly  the  residence  of  the  Governor  ;  tl 
other  adjoining  it  and  known  as  the  Kornilov  house.  The  e: 
sovereigns  and  their  children  took  up  their  quarters  in  tl 
upper  storey  of  the  Governor's  house.  Here  were  the  Tsar 
study  and  the  bed-chambers  of  the  imperial  couple,  of  Alex 
and  of  the  Grand  duchesses.  Here  also  was  the  drawing 
room.  Downstairs  were  the  school-room,  servants'  room: 
and  the  quarters  of  the  commandant  and  officers  on  guar 
duty.  The  suite  and  other  servants  lived  in  the  Kornilo 
house.  Later,  the  soldiers  expelled  many  of  these  occupani 
without  reason,  and,  as  some  of  them  had  to  be  accommc 
dated  in  the  Governor's  house,  there  was  no  small  discomfoi 
from  overcrowding. 


EXILE   IN   SIBERIA  59 

>oth  houses  faced  the  main  street,  which  had  been  re-named 
tza  Svobody  (Liberty  Street).  People  passing  by  could 
into  the  lower  rooms.  It  became  a  custom  to  bow  to  any 
mber  of  the  family  who  happened  to  be  visible,  and  some 
the  citizens  would  demonstratively  make  the  sign  of  the 
ss.  Behind  the  Governor's  house  was  an  immense  enclo- 
s,  surrounded  by  a  high  wooden  fence.  Here  the  family 
k  their  exercise  ;  here  the  ex-Tsar  chopped  and  sawed 
Dd,  and  with  his  own  unaided  efforts  built  a  sort  of  wooden 
I  race,  where  the  captives  loved  to  sit  whenever  the  weather 
mitted. 

larly  rising  was  the  rule.  All  except  the  ex-Empress  were 
dy  for  breakfast  by  8.30.  Alexandra's  health  was  so  bad 
ut  she  seldom  left  her  room  before  lunch- time.  Breakfast, 
usual  among  Russians,  was  a  slight  meal  of  tea  and  bread, 
e  ex-Tsar  had  it  in  his  study  with  his  eldest  daughter  Olga, 

0  of  all  the  children  most  resembled  him  in  character.  The 
ler  children  and  members  of  the  household  assembled  in 
i  dining-room,  situated  on  the  ground  floor  of  the  Governor's 
use.     The  Empress  had  coffee  in  bed. 

rill  eleven  o'clock  Nicholas  read  or  wrote  his  diary,  while 
i  children  had  lessons.  From  eleven  till  noon  father  and 
ildren  were  in  the  courtyard.  He  worked  with  axe  or  saw 
d  the  young  folks  played  games.  At  twelve  o'clock  all  went 
the  school-room  and  had  sandwiches,  after  which  the  Tsar 
t  his  children  to  continue  their  lessons.  The  family  and 
usehold  met  at  one  o'clock  at  lunch — a  simple  meal — after 
ich  they  were  in  the  open  air,  weather  permitting,  till  4 
n.  The  Empress  seldom  left  the  house,  Olga  and  Tatiana, 
3  two  elder  Grand  duchesses,  helped  their  father  in  his  man- 

1  work,  Alexis  generally  had  a  short  sleep  after  lunch,  and 
3n  followed  the  others  into  the  courtyard  with  his  tutors. 
Five  o'clock  tea  was  served  in  the  Tsar's  study.  Then 
lowed  an  interval  for  reading  or  games,  then  two  hours  for 


6o         THE   LAST  DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 


preparation  of  lessons.  Dinner  at  eight  consisted  of  sou 
fish,  meat,  sweet-dish  and  coffee.  It  was  prepared  by  tl 
Imperial  cook,  Haritonov,  and  during  the  earlier  peric 
differed  little  from  the  customary  repast  of  old  times.  Ever 
body  met  in  the  drawing-room  after  dinner.  There  we 
reading  and  conversation.  Court  etiquette  being  forgotte: 
Alexis  retired  to  rest  early.  At  eleven  o'clock  tea  was  serve 
and  soon  afterwards  all  lights  were  out. 

Despite  her  poor  health,  Alexandra  was  seldom  idle.  ] 
the  morning  she  gave  lessons  to  the  children  and  did  needl 
work.  When  she  remained  alone  in  the  house  she  would  pU 
the  piano.  Often,  when  the  heart  trouble  was  severe,  she  hi 
dinner  also  in  her  room,  and  then  Alexis  kept  her  compan 

The  company  at  table  included  besides  the  family  only  tl 
persons  already  mentioned  as  forming  the  household — name 
Countess  Hendrykova,  Mile.  Schneider,  Prince  Dolgoruk 
General  Tatishchev,  Mr.  Gibbes,  M.  Gillard,  and  Dr.  Botki 
On  Sundays  came  Dr.  Derevenko  and  his  son  Kolia. 

The  Tsar  gave  lessons  to  Alexis  in  history,  a  favourite  su' 
ject,  in  which  Nicholas  was  extremely  well  versed.  Alexand 
instructed  all  the  children  in  religion,  and  taught  her  favouri 
daughter  Anastasia  German — a  language  that  none  of  tl 
children  understood.  Anastasia  was  ambitious  to  knc 
everything.  She  studied  history  with  the  help  of  Counte 
Hendrikova.  Another  teacher,  Mme.  Bittner,  came  afte 
wards  to  help  in  the  school-room.  To  relieve  the  monotony 
their  lives,  the  children  were  encouraged  to  take  up  priva 
theatricals.  Several  plays,  English  and  French,  were  pr 
duced  with  great  success. 

To  the  Empress's  intense  joy,  they  were  permitted  to  attei 
church.  Her  greatest  sorrow  at  Tsarskoe  had  been  the  inte 
diet  on  church-going,  the  nearest  place  of  worship  beii 
outside  the  precincts  of  the  Palace  and  therefore  inaccessit 
to  the  prisoners.     Here  at  last  they  could  go  to  church,  aft 


EXILE   IN   SIBERIA  6i 

lapse  of  more  than  four  months.  But  the  sacred  edifice 
A3  closed  to  other  worshippers  when  the  exiles  attended  it. 
Jnhappily,  this  source  of  spiritual  comfort  was  not  un- 
i^yed  with  temporal  drawbacks.  Father  Vasiliev,  the  in- 
:  nbent,  did  a  very  rash  thing  one  day.  Without  consulting 
i^body,  he  suddenly  intoned  the  prayers  for  the  sovereigns 

I  if  they  were  still  on  the  Throne.  The  exiles  were  power- 
3  to  interfere.  Of  course,  the  incident  came  to  the  know- 
Lge  of  the  whole  garrison  immediately  afterwards,  and 
[  to  the  sort  of  reprisals  that  one  might  have  expected  : 
:  arch-going  was  stopped  for  ever,  and,  what  was  worse,  the 
!  diers  insisted  upon  having  a  representative  inside  the  house 
;  all  religious  services,  to  see  that  the  above-named  practice 
IS  not  repeated.  Thus  all  the  efforts  of  Colonel  Kobylinsky, 
e  good-hearted  commandant,  to  keep  the  soldiers  out  of  the 
'Use  were  defeated. 

Within  a  month  of  their  arrival  in  Tobolsk  the  exiles  were 
aced  under  the  observation  of  special  emissaries  of  the  Pro- 
sional  Government :  the  Komisar  Pankratov  and  his  assist- 
it,  Nikolsky.  The  former  enjoyed  high  confidence  and  re- 
)wn  in  revolutionary  circles,  having  spent  fifteen  years  in  the 
ortress  of  Schlusselburg  and  twenty-seven  years  in  exile  in 
iberia.  A  typical  theorist,  dangerous  in  his  teachings,  he 
as  personally  the  best-hearted  of  men.  He  adored  children, 
id  was  the  playmate  of  the  young  Romanovs,  whom  he  liter- 
[ly  enthralled  with  stories  of  his  prison  years.  His  particular 
Lvourite  was  Marie.  Nikolsky,  on  the  other  hand,  was  un- 
3uth,  uncultured,  brutal,  and  stupid,  and  took  an  apparent 
elight  in  bullying  the  young  folks,  especially  Alexis.  With 
ermission  from  the  Government,  some  medicinal  wine  had 
een  sent  to  Tobolsk  from  Tsarskoe.  Nikolsky  took  the 
ottles  and  smashed  them. 
As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  delightful  but  not  very  far-sighted 


62     THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  THE  ROMANOVS 

Pankratov  caused  much  more  harm  than  the  bestial  Nikolsk 
True  to  his  revolutionary  principles,  he  immediately  proceedi 
to  indoctrinate  the  soldiers.  Perhaps  he  feared  the  person 
influence  and  charm  of  the  ex-Tsar.  Pankratov  talked  wii 
them  by  the  hour  on  the  wonders  of  the  Socialist-Revolutioi 
ary  programme,  and,  as  so  often  happened  in  Russia,  tl 
ignorant  listeners  became  not  Socialist-Revolutionaries  bi 
Bolshevists.  Anyhow,  they  very  soon  lost  all  respect  i 
authority  in  the  persons  of  their  commandant  and  office 
and  began  to  ill-treat  the  prisoners.  They  sank  so  low  th; 
even  the  young  grand  duchesses  suffered  insult.  Lewd  dra^ 
ings  and  inscriptions  disfigured  the  posts  of  the  swing  that  w; 
their  only  outdoor  pastime.  Later,  these  hooligans  broke  up  tl 
ice-hill  that  the  girls  and  their  father  had  put  up  in  the  yar^ 

The  day  came  when  they  included  the  ex-Tsar  in  the 
devilries.  Nicholas  wore  the  simplest  garb — a  soldier's  kha 
shirt  and  overcoat,  retaining  only  his  colonel's  shoulder-stra] 
and  his  Cross  of  St.  George.  Suddenly  the  soldiers  decide 
that  he  must  take  off  his  badges  of  rank.  In  vain  Kobylinsl 
remonstrated  with  them.  They  threatened  violence  if  the 
'  orders  '  were  not  carried  out  at  once.  It  hurt  the  ex-Ts; 
to  the  quick  to  cut  off  his  shoulder-straps.  Thenceforth  tl 
cross  alone  remained  to  symbolize  his  fidelity  to  Russia  ar 
her  allies.     He  kept  it  ever  on  his  breast  to  his  dying  day. 

Some  of  the  old  soldiers  remained  immune  from  Pankr: 
tov's  influence,  and  when  the  time  came  for  them  to  be  relievei 
they  visited  the  ex-Tsar  by  stealth  to  bid  good-bye.  The: 
were  affecting  scenes.  The  men  fell  on  their  knees  and  praye( 
and  then  embraced  the  captive  and  blessed  him.  Of  cours 
Nicholas  related  all  this  to  Alexandra,  whereby  her  invincib! 
belief  in  the  peasants  gathered  new  strength. 

*  4s  4c  4:  * 

On  several  occasions  violent  disputes  arose  between  Alexai 
dra  and  one  of  the  ladies,  because  the  latter  spoke  of  th 


EXILE   IN   SIBERIA  63 

^rible  behaviour  of  the  soldiers.     Alexandra  lost  all  control 
herself,  and  cried  :     '  They  are  all  good  !     They  are  all 
They  are  led  astray  by  Jews.  .  .  .  The  people  will 
ic  to  their  senses,  and  there  will  be  order.  .  .  .  The  sol- 
js  are  all  right.     I  wish  the  officers  were  more    energetic' 
n  November,  while  Kerensky  was  still  at  the  head  of  the 
i/ernment,  no  money  had  as  yet  been  received,  in  spite  of 
I  his  promises.     The  funds  of  the  household  had  run  out,  and 
jlgoruky  and  Tatishchev,  having  expended  their  own  sub- 
I  nee,  had  to  borrow  from  charitable  souls  in  the  town,  giving 
vr  note  of  hand  in  return.     Two  months  later,  word  came 
m  the  Soviet  Government  that  it  had  no  money  to  spend 
the  prisoners.     They  would  be  allowed  to  occupy  their 
ises  free  of  charge,  would  receive  soldiers'  rations,  and  have 
work  if  they  wanted  anything  more.     Sorrowfully,  they 
ed  the  situation.     One-third  of  the  servants  were  at  once 
3ased,  each  receiving  a  certain  sum  out  of  the  scanty  rem- 
its.    Nicholas  and  Alexandra  never  knew  how  their  faith- 
followers  had  to  pinch  and  contrive  in  order  to  keep  the 
isehold  from  starvation. 


\lexis  astonished  the  household  by  his  precocious  under- 
nding.  '  I  begin  to  know  the  truth  here.  At  Tsarskoe 
irybody  told  lies,'  he  remarked  one  day.  '  If  I  become 
a,r,  no  one  will  dare  to  tell  me  lies.  I  shall  make  order  in 
;  land.'  He  combined  his  mother's  will  with  his  father's 
irm.  Those  who  came  to  know  the  boy  at  Tobolsk  are 
ifident  that  he  would  have  justified  his  words. 
Fo  a  visitor  at  his  bedside  when  he  was  ill,  he  spoke  his 
)ughts  about  Rasputin.  The  '  saint's  '  portrait  had  been 
,ced  by  Alexandra  near  her  sick  son's  pillow.  The  visitor 
ddentally  upset  it.  'Do  not  pick  it  up  !  !  cried  Alexis, 
he  floor  is  the  place  for  it,' 


64  THE  LAST  DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

ije  9|c  :|c  :(:  :4c 

Towards  the  end  of  their  exile,  some,  if  not  all,  of  the  a 
tives  realized  the  desperate  nature  of  their  position,  and  h 
scant  hope  of  surviving  Bolshevist  rule  for  any  length  of  tin 
Pathetic  evidences  of  their  attitude  were  found  among  t 
papers  that  remained  at  Tobolsk  and  came  into  the  hands 
the  investigating  magistrate.  Among  them  are  two  pray* 
written  in  verse — apparently  composed  by  Countess  Hendi 
kova  and  transcribed  by  the  Grand  Duchess  Olga.  Here  is 
approximate  rendering  of  some  of  the  verses  : — 

Grant  us  Thy  patience,  Lord, 
In  these  our  woeful  days, 
The  mob's  wrath  to  endure. 
The  torturers'  ire  ; 

Thine  unction  to  forgive 
Our  neighbours'  persecution. 
And  mild,  like  Thee,  to  bear 
A  blood-stained  Cross. 

And  when  the  mob  prevails. 
And  foes  come  to  despoil  us. 
To  suffer  humbly  shame, 
O  Saviour  aid  us  ! 

And  when  the  hour  comes 
To  pass  the  last  dread  gate. 
Breathe  strength  in  us  to  pray, 
'  Father,  forgive  them  !  ' 


CHAPTER  VII 

MOSCOW   AND   BERLIN 


r 


yielded  many  living  examples  among  the  visitors 
Tobolsk.  Many,  if  not  all,  of  the  spies,  emissaries,  and 
iier  agents  appearing  there  had  been  at  one  time  or  another  in 
e  German  capital.  Yakovlev,  the  special  commissary  sent  to 
move  the  prisoners  from  Tobolsk,  was  no  exception  to  the  rule 
His  appearance  was  preceded  by  certain  events  which 
ast  be  related  here.  The  soldiers  forming  the  guard  at 
)bolsk  grew  tired  of  Pankratov  and  his  everlasting  speeches. 
/  the  end  of  the  first  week  in  February  (191 8)  they  had  de- 
ied  to  get  rid  of  him  and  of  Nikolsky.  On  the  9th  they 
rned  them  out  of  the  Kornilov  house  and  drove  them  out 
the  town.  They  then  telegraphed  to  Moscow,  reporting 
hat  they  had  done,  and  asked  that  a  proper  commissary — • 
)t  an  appointee  of  Kerensky — should  be  sent.  But  Moscow 
mained  obstinately  silent.  The  time  for  action  had  not 
it  arrived.  Meanwhile,  the  Soviet  at  Omsk,  representing 
''estern  Siberia,  sent  a  representative  to  Tobolsk.  He 
•rived  on  March  24,  This  man  was  a  certain  Dutzman, 
Jew.  He  did  not  interfere  with  the  prison  ■regime  ;  indeed, 
2  never  came  near  the  governor's  house. 
At  the  end  of  March,  Alexis  had  a  severe  attack  of  his 
Iness — the  worst  ever  known.  Both  legs  were  paralysed, 
he  pain  was  excruciating  and  unremitting.  Day  and  night  he 
led  aloud  in  his  agony,  and  the  prematurely  aged  and  infirm 
LOther  had  to  sit  by  and  comfort  him.  After  a  whole  month 
[  suffering  the  patient  began  to  improve  and  the  pains  grew 

65  E 


66         THE   LAST  DAYS  OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

less,  but  he  was  still  a  cripple  and  could  not  be  moved  withou 
serious  danger.  At  this  juncture  appeared  the  Soviet  emis 
sary,  Yakovlev.  Neither  the  soldiers  nor  the  captives  were 
surprised.  Only  a  few  days  later  they  understood  what  ai 
important  part  he  had  come  to  play  in  their  lives. 

4c  4:  *  «  4o 

Yakovlev  reached  Tobolsk  with  an  escort  of  150  horsemer 
late  in  the  evening  of  April  22  and  unobtrusively  took  uj 
his  residence  in  the  Kornilov  house.  Colonel  Kobylinsk} 
saw  him  next  morning.  Yakovlev  handed  him  an  ordei 
from  the  Tsik,  signed  by  Sverdlov,  intimating  that  the  bearei 
was  entrusted  •with  a  mission  of  the  highest  importance  anc 
that  he  must  be  implicitly  obeyed,  but  no  hint  was  given  as 
to  the  nature  of  the  mission.  Yakovlev  then  had  the  mer 
of  the  guard  mustered  and  showed  them  a  similar  document 
by  which  they  were  informed  that  any  disobedience  to  hin 
would  be  punished  with  death.  To  sugar  the  pill,  Yakovle\ 
told  them  that  he  had  brought  them  a  lot  of  money,  the 
Soviet  having  decided  to  pay  at  the  rate  of  three  roubles  a 
day  instead  of  50  kopecks,  the  rate  fixed  by  the  Kerenskj 
Go\'ernment.  Altogether,  Yakovlev  showed  himself  to  be 
an  expert  in  the  art  of  handling  peasant  soldiers,  but  he  hac 
to  overcome  opposition  of  a  more  subtle  kind  from  a  Je\^ 
named  Zaslavsky,  who  had  insinuated  himself  among  the 
guards  as  the  representative  of  theUralian  Soviet.  This  mar 
had  previously  caused  no  end  of  trouble  by  '  discovering 
'  plots,'  and  had  almost  persuaded  the  soldiers  on  one  occasior 
to  insist  that  the  Imperial  captives  should  be  transferred  to  the 
town  lock-up.  In  fact,  here  once  more  it  was  only  the  cool- 
ness of  the  resourceful  Kobylinsky  that  had  saved  the  situation 

But  this  noxious  individual  did  not  have  things  all  hh 
own  way.  The  Omsk  Soviet  also  had  its  representative 
among  the  guard — a  Russian  named  Degtiarev.  Now  the 
two  Soviets — that  of  Omsk  and  the  one  at  Ekaterinburg— 


MOSCOW  AND  BERLIN  67 

leing  constantly  at  odds,  their  emissaries  were  naturally 
ealous  of  each  other.  Thus  it  was  enough  for  Zaslavsky 
0  take  one  view  in  order  that  Degtiarev  should  take  the  op- 
)0site  one.  Zaslavsky  had  ior  some  reason  immediately 
tirred  up  opposition  to  Yakovlev  and  tried  to  persuade  the 
oldiers  that  he  was  a  spy  come  to  deliver  the  prisoners. 
Vith  Zaslavsky  was  an  Ekaterinburg  workman  named  Avdeiev, 
vho  figured  prominently  in  subsequent  events.  It  is  note- 
vorthy  that  Yakovlev  came  to  Tobolsk  by  way  of  Ufa — a 
oundabout  journey  from  Moscow — apparently  in  order  to 
Lvoid  Ekaterinburg.  Yakovlev  had  friends  in  Ufa.  It  is 
)robable  that  he  had  met  Avdeiev  there.  He  appears  to 
lave  imagined  that  Avdeiev  might  help  him  to  prevent  or 
Jlay  suspicion  in  Ekaterinburg.  In  this  he  was  mistaken. 
At  a  meeting  of  the  soldiers  on  the  24th,  Degtiarev,  backed 
)y  Yakovlev,  attacked  Zaslavsky  with  such  vim  that  the 
nen  threw  him  out,  and  he  made  haste  to  escape  to  Ekater- 
nburg  to  relate  a  purely  imaginary  story  of  Yakovlev's  designs 
o  release  the  Romanovs.  But  there  is  evidence  to  show 
hat  he  first  communicated  by  wire  with  Sverdlov.  Zas- 
avsky's  poisonous  character  may  have  been  the  only  prompt- 
ng  necessary,  but  it  is  not  impossible  that  he  may  have 
)een  '  inspired  '  from  Moscow  to  play  a  part  in  the  intricate 
;onspiracy  that  was  to  exterminate  the  Romanovs.  Cer- 
ainly  Yakovlev  underrated  his  capacity  for  mischief,  as  will 
ippear  later.  Sverdlov  tried  to  make  the  world  believe  that 
sficholas  II  was  to  be  brought  to  Moscow  for  trial.  But 
his  may  have  only  been  an  after- thought.  In  any  case,  it 
vas  easy  to  have  him  intercepted  by  pla5ang  upon  local 
gnorance  and  suspicion  through  Zaslavsky. 

*  :^  *  *  * 

Meanwhile,  during  these  two  days  (the  23rd  and  24th), 
|fakovlev  had  been  repeatedly  inside  the  governor's  house, 
md  on  each  occasion  had  gone  to  the  boy's  room,  appearing 


68         THE   LAST  DAYS   OF  THE  ROMANOVS 

suddenly,  looking  fixedly  at  the  patient,  and  then  going  away 
Nobody  noticed  his  strange  behaviour  at  the  time.  The^ 
remembered  it  afterwards.  No  one  knew  as  yet  what  he  ha( 
come  for.  On  the  night  of  the  24th  Yakovlev  went  to  thi 
telegraph  office,  taking  with  him  an  expert  operator  who  hac 
come  with  him  from  Moscow,  and  had  a  long  conversatioi 
over  the  wire  with  Sverdlov,  the  substance  of  which — as  trans 
pired  later — dealt  with  the  boy's  sickness  and  the  impossibilit^ 
of  moving  him.  Sverdlov  gave  him  '  new  instructions  '  to  th( 
effect  that  he  was  to  bring  Nicholas  and  that  since  the  boj 
could  not  come  he  would  have  to  be  left  behind  for  the  present 

From  the  telegraph  office,  Yakovlev  went  straight  to  Colone 
Kobylinsky  and,  for  the  first  time,  disclosed  the  object  of  hij 
mission,  '  But  what  about  Alexis  ?  '  remonstrated  tht 
commandant.  '  That  is  the  trouble,'  was  the  reply.  '  I  have 
satisfied  myself  that  he  is  really  too  ill  to  travel,  so  my  orders 
now  are  to  take  the  ex-Tsar  alone  and  leave  the  family  here  foi 
the  present.  I  propose  to  start  to-morrow.  Arrange  for  me 
to  see  him  at  once.'  It  should  be  explained  that  as  the  roads 
would,  in  a  few  days,  become  impassable,  and  the  river-ice 
break  up  any  moment,  owing  to  the  advance  of  spring,  it  was 
necessary  to  leave  Tobolsk  at  once  or  wait  several  weeks  til 
the  rivers  were  clear  of  ice.  Hence  Yakovlev's  haste.  But  as 
he  was  apparently  well  acquainted  with  the  character  of  the 
Empress,  he  insisted  that  Nicholas  should  receive  him  alone 

The  ex-Tsar  appointed  two  o'clock  on  the  following  day  foi 
the  interview.  Alexandra  became  furious  on  learning  thai 
she  was  not  to  be  present.  When  Yakovlev  entered  the 
drawing-room,  she  met  him  with  flaming  eyes  and  asked  him 
how  he  dared  to  separate  husband  and  wife.  Yakovlev,  with 
a  shrug  of  the  shoulders,  addressed  himself  to  Nicholas  :  '  The 
Moscow  Central  Executive  Committee  have  sent  me  as  Com- 
missary Extraordinary  with  power  to  remove  the  whole 
family,  but  as  Alexis  Nikolaievich  is  ill  I  have  received  orders 


MOSCOW  AND  BERLIN  69 

3  leave  with  you  alone.'  The  Tsar  replied  :  '  I  shall  go  no- 
where.' Yakovlev  remonstrated  :  '  You  must  not  say  that, 
have  to  carry  out  orders.  If  you  refuse  to  go,  I  must  either 
.86  force  or  send  in  my  resignation,  and  then  some  one  else  will 
ome  who  will  be  less  humane.  Have  no  anxiety  ;  I  answer 
or  your  life  with  my  head.  If  you  do  not  wish  to  go  alone, 
ake  anybody  you  like.  Be  ready  to  leave  to-morrow  at  four.' 
iTakovlev  thereupon  left  without  addressing  the  Empress. 

^  •!«  ^  «f*  #lC 

Kobylinsky  remained  in  compliance  with  a  request  from  the 
;x-Tsar.  Alexandra  and  Tatishchev  and  Dolgoruky  stood  by. 
Where  do  they  want  to  take  me  ?  '  asked  Nicholas.  '  To 
Moscow,'  was  the  reply.  '  Yakovlev  let  it  slip  out  when  I 
nquired  how  long  he  would  be  away  before  returning  to  fetch 
;he  family.'  The  ex-Tsar  nodded,  as  if  the  news  confirmed 
lis  own  knowledge.  Turning  to  his  followers  he  declared  : 
You  see  they  want  me  to  sign  the  Treaty  of  Brest-Litovsk. 
3ut  I  would  rather  cut  off  my  hand  than  do  so.' 

Alexandra,  much  agitated,  interposed  :  '  I  am  also  going. 
Without  me  they  will  persuade  him  into  doing  something,  as 
:hey  did  once  before.  .  .  .'  And  she  fired  a  volley  of  abuse  at 
Rodzianko  for  his  part  in  the  abdication.  But  in  the  stress  of 
:he  moment  she  had  forgotten  her  sick  boy.  The  hours  that 
"ollowed  will  ever  be  recalled  by  all  who  survive  as  the  most 
painful  of  their  memories.  This  distracted  mother,  too  feeble 
:o  stand  for  more  than  five  minutes,  paced  her  room  like  a 
:aged  tigress.  She  summoned  her  favourite  daughter  Tatiana 
md  burst  into  a  storm  of  weeping.  For  the  first  time  her 
attendants  saw  her  lose  all  self-control.  In  broken  sentences 
she  disburdened  herself  of  her  sorrow,  revealing  in  her  distress 
the  innermost  thoughts  of  her  mind  :  '  The  Germans  know 
that  their  treaty  is  valueless  without  the  Tsar's  signature.  .  .  . 
They  want  to  separate  him  from  his  family  in  order  to  frighten 
hiim  into  some  disgraceful  act.  .  .  .  He  will  be  afraid  to  refuse 
on  our  account.  ...    It  will  be  a  repetition  of  Pskov.  .  .  .' 


70    THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  THE  ROMANOVS 

She  wrestled  with  herself,  praying  that  she  might  not  have  tc 
choose  between  her  husband  and  her  son,  hoping  that  the  rivei 
might  suddenly  open  and  prevent  any  travelling.  At  lasl 
she  came  to  a  decision,  and,  jumping  up,  cried  :  '  It  is  enough 
I  go  with  the  Emperor.'  Nicholas  entered  the  room.  Sh( 
greeted  him  with  the  words  :  '  I  shall  not  let  you  go  alone. 
'  As  you  will,'  was  his  reply. 

Volkov,  the  Empress's  confidential  man-servant,  deposes 
that  he  saw  her  in  the  Tsarevitch's  room,  and  as  she  was  going 
out  inquired  what  was  the  matter.  Alexandra  replied : 
'  Gosudar  (the  Tsar)  is  to  be  taken  away  to  Moscow.  They 
want  him  to  conclude  peace.  But  I  am  going  with  him.  I 
shall  never  permit  such  a  thing.     What  would  our  Allies  say  ?  ' 

Madame  Bittner  spoke  to  the  Tsar  at  this  same  juncture.  She 
suggested  that '  they,'  meaning  the  Germans,  would  take  him 
'  out  of  the  country.'  He  replied  :  '  God  grant  that  it  be  not 
so.  Only  not  abroad  !  '  This  witness  deposes  that  the  whole 
family  dreaded  the  idea  of  being  sent  abroad,  i.e.,  to  Germany. 

In  this  connexion  I  recall  a  remarkable  passage  in  one  of  the 
depositions.  Some  member  of  the  household  at  Tobolsk  was 
reading  out  of  a  newspaper  the  statement  that  the  Brest- 
Litovsk  Treaty  contained  a  clause  assuring  the  safety  of  the 
Imperial  family.  The  Empress  broke  in  with  an  angry  ex- 
clamation in  French  :  '  I  had  rather  die  in  Russia  than  be 
saved  by  the  Germans.'  {Je  preferc  mourir  en  Russie  que 
d'etre  sauvee  pour  les  allemands.) 

It  was  then  settled  that  the  party  with  the  Tsar  should 
include  :  Alexandra,  the  Grand  Duchess  Marie,  Prince  Dol- 
goruky.  Dr.  Botkin,  and  the  servants  Chemodurov,  Demidova, 
and  Ivan  Sednev.  On  receiving  the  list,  Yakovlev  said  :  '  It 
is  all  the  same  to  me.'  The  soldiers  were  again  assembled  on 
the  evening  of  the  25th  to  be  informed  of  the  Tsar's  removal. 
To  forestall  any  objections,  a  number  of  them  were  selected 
to  accompany  the  party. 


MOSCOW  AND  BERLIN  71 

The  vehicles  that  were  to  convey  the  travellers  to  Tiumen, 
here  they  would  find  a  train,  did  not  differ  from  the  ordinary 
iberian  tarantass — a  large  basket  swung  upon  long  flexible 
oles  uniting  two  springless  axles,  the  baskets  being  filled  with 
:raw.  Into  these  vehicles  the  travellers  tumbled  and  disposed 
lemselves  as  best  they  could.  Alexandra  had  a  troika,  the 
thers  a  pair  of  horses.  She  beckoned  to  the  Tsar  to  mount 
/ith  her,  but  Yakovlev  sent  Marie  to  join  her  mother,  and 
hared  his  tarantass  with  Nicholas. 

The  roads  were  terrible.  No  traveller  who  has  not  experi- 
;nced  springtime  travel  in  Russia  can  have  any  idea  of  them. 
U  some  places  the  party  had  to  alight  and  walk  through  deep 
lush.  The  Empress  was  better  off  than  the  others  as  she  had 
L  stronger  team.  Yakovlev  was  hurrying  as  fast  as  horseflesh 
;ould  go.  Relays  waited  at  stated  intervals.  The  travellers 
)assed  from  one  tarantass  into  another.  It  was  better  to  lose 
10  time  as  every  day  the  roads  became  worse,  but  there  was 
mother  reason :  Yakovlev  was  evidently  afraid  of  being 
topped  by  the  local  Soviets  and  wished  to  rush  past  before 
they  had  had  time  to  oppose  him. 

Throughout  the  trip  he  conversed  with  the  ex-Tsar  on 
)oHtics,  endeavouring  to  talk  him  over  to  a  certain  point  of 
dew — but  the  Tsar  would  not  give  way.  This  much  the 
;oachman  who  drove  them  could  swear  to,  although  he  could 
lot  catch  all  the  details  of  the  conversation.  He  noticed  that 
"Nicholas  did  not  '  scold  the  Bolsheviks,'  but  somebody  else. 

They  reached  Tiumen  on  the  28th  at  9  p.m.  A  special  train 
vas  in  waiting.  They  started  westward,  but  had  not  travelled 
ar  when  at  a  wayside  station  Yakovlev  heard  that  Ekaterin- 
)urg  would  intercept  him.  What  he  feared  had  happened. 
rhe  only  hope  lay  in  circumventing  Ekaterinburg.  For  this 
mrpose  it  was  necessary  to  return,  go  east  as  far  as  Omsk- 
^ulomzino,  and  thence  switch  on  to  the  Cheliabinsk-Ufa 
ailway.     But  he  was  too  late.     The  Soviet  at  Ekaterinburg 


72  THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

had  wired  to  Omsk  that  the  ex-Tsar  was  escaping  eastward,  i 
and  a  cordon  of  Red  guards  stopped  the  train  at  Kulomzino. 
Yakovlev  detached  the  engine  and  went  across  the  Irtysh  to 
Omsk,  and  there,  with  the  help  of  his  private  telegraphist, 
spoke  with  Moscow.  He  was  ordered  by  Sverdlov  to  proceed 
via  Ekaterinburg.  As  might  be  expected,  they  were  met  by 
a  strong  force  of  fanaticized  Red  guards  at  the  station  at  Ekat- 
erinburg (April  30).  Yakovlev's  authority  was  flouted  and 
the  escort  and  guards  that  were  with  him  imprisoned  till  he  had 
departed  empty-handed  on  his  way  to  Moscow.  The  unfor- 
tunate Romanovs  thus  came  into  the  hands  that  were  to 
massacre  them  and  their  belongings. 

«lC  SfC  ^  9|C  9|C 

Yakovlev  had  no  hand  in  this  foul  conspiracy.  He  had  been 
quite  sincere  and  consistent  in  his  efforts  to  bring  the  whole 
family  safely  to  Moscow.  There  is  no  indication  whatever,  in 
all  he  said,  that  the  object  of  this  removal  was  to  bring  the 
Tsar  to  trial.  On  the  contrary,  the  conversations  with  the 
Tsar,  continued  in  the  railway  carriage,  where,  again,  he  was 
separated  from  Alexandra,  gave  additional  colour  to  the  ver- 
sion already  given  by  Nicholas  himself — that  it  was  intended 
to  restore  the  monarchy  under  certain  conditions.^  Speaking 
of  Yakovlev,  the  ex-Tsar  afterwards  said  :  *  Not  a  bad  sort 
— evidently  sincere.'  Alexandra  did  not  cease  to  bewail 
her  misfortunes,  weeping  over  her  son  and  her  husband. 

On  reaching  Moscow,  Yakovlev  must  have  had  some  doubts 

1  It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  virtual  ruler  in  Moscow  was 
Count  Mirbach  (see  Chapter  II),  the  Bolshevist  leaders  being  appointees 
and  vassals  of  Germany,  though,  perhaps  even  then,  secretly  conspiring 
against  their  masters.  Further,  it  is  known  that  many  influential 
Russians  were  intriguing  with  Mirbach  (May,  1918)  to  restore  the 
Monarchy.  This  movement  collapsed  because  the  two  '  orientations  ' 
— German  and  Entente — could  not  agree.  The  '  Germans  '  wanted 
Alexis  ;  the  '  Ententes  '  favoured  Michael.  The  original  Act  of  Abdi- 
cation was  stolen  from  the  Senate  House  in  Petrograd  by  German 
agents  in  the  early  summer  of  1917  to  remove  this  trace  of  Alexis 
being  out  of  the  succession.     Cf.  also  f.n.  to  Ch.  I. 


MOSCOW  AND  BERLIN  73 

{ out  the  sincerity  of  the  Tsik.  Anyhow,  he  resigned  his 
i  mmissaryship  and  eventually  joined  the  White  forces,  and 

en  mysteriously  disappeared.  An  interview  with  him,  pub- 
'  ,hed  in  a  Red  organ  at  the  time  of  his  journey  in  charge  of 

e  Imperial  captives,  contains  some  very  instructive  features. 

passes  over  in  silence  the  attempt  to  evade  Ekaterinburg  and 

Isifies  the  dates  of  arrival  and  departure  at  Tiumen  so  that 
16  glaring  discrepancy  between  this  and  the  arrival  at  Ekater- 
iburg  (two  days  instead  of  half  a  day)  should  not  be  noticed  ; 
nores,  in  fact,  all  the  local  Soviet  intrigues  and  protests,  quite 
eedlessly,  that  he  did  not  mention  politics  in  his  conversation 
ith  Nicholas.  Vasily  Vasilievich  Yakovlev  had  been  a  naval 
fficer  and  was  therefore  of  Russian  noble  blood.  He  had  com- 
litted  some  pohtical  offence,  had  spent  many  years  abroad — in 
ierUn.     Who  were  his  real  chiefs  ?     It  is  not  difficult  to  guess. 

Two  other  Commissaries  went  to  Tobolsk  to  remove  the 
emainder  of  the  family — Tatiana  had  been  left  in  charge  of 
he  invaUd  and  household.  Olga,  the  eldest  daughter,  did  not 
njoy  her  mother's  confidence  in  the  same  degree.  She  took 
ar  more  interest  in  literature  than  in  the  practical  affairs  of 
[fe,  and  would  hide  herself  in  a  corner  with  a  book  or  tell 
tories  to  the  soldiers,  utterly  forgetting  domestic  trifles, 
^nastasia,  still  a  child,  and  rather  backward,  could  be  left  in 
?atiana's  care.  Marie  went  with  the  Imperial  couple  because 
he  was  too  grown-up  to  remain  under  her  sister's  care.  She 
vas  a  very  attractive  girl,  and  it  used  to  be  rather  a  joke  among 
he  grand  duchesses  to  twit  her  on  her  '  conquests  '  among 
he  Commissars. 

The  two  successors  of  Yakovlev  were  :  A  sailor  named 
iohriakov  and  a  certain  Rodionov.  The  latter  was  afterwards 
dentified  as  a  former  gendarme  officer.  He  used  to  inspect 
he  passports  at  the  German  frontier,  and  served  some  time  in 
he  Russian  Embassy  at  Berlin  as  a  spy  on  Russian  revolu- 
ionaries.     When  taxed  with  it,  he  admitted  the  impeachment. 


74         THE   LAST   DAYS   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

The  sailor,  a  typical  good-natured  peasant,  soon  made  iriem 

with  all  the  children.     Rodionov,  on  the  contrary,  went  o\ 

of  his  way  to  torment  and  ill-treat  them.     He  forbade  tl 

grand  duchesses  to  lock  their  doors  at  night,  informing  the: 

with  a  leer  that  he  had  a  perfect  right  to  come  into  their  roon 

whenever  he  liked.     With  every  appearance  of  enjoyment,  h 

announced  that  in  Ekaterinburg  they  would  have  to  observ 

stricter  rules,  which  he  himself  had  devised.     Hohriakov  wa 

nominally  senior  to  Rodionov,  but  the  latter  did  what  he  pleasec 
***** 

Here  must  be  recorded  a  circumstance  which  was  destine< 
to  play  an  important  part  in  the  detection  of  the  murders  c 
Ekaterinburg.  Before  separating,  it  had  been  understooc 
between  mother  and  daughters  that  they  would  take  measure 
for  safeguarding  the  jewels  that  had  been  brought  with  then 
from  Tsarskoe,  worth  not  less  than  a  million  gold  rouble 
(£100,000).  A  letter  from  the  maid  Demidova  from  Ekaterin 
burg  gave  the  necessary  indications.  The  grand  duchesse 
were  '  to  dispose  of  the  medicines  as  had  been  agreed.'  Thi 
meant  that  the  jewels  had  to  be  secreted  in  the  clothing  ii 
such  a  way  as  to  escape  search  (Nicholas,  Alexandra,  an( 
Marie  had  been  '  searched  '  very  thoroughly  and  brutally] 
For  some  days  the  grand  duchesses  and  their  trusty  servant 
worked  at  the  task,  sewing  up  the  valuables  in  their  bodices 
in  their  hats,  and  even  inside  their  buttons.  The  Empres 
had  few  if  any  valuables  with  her — possibly  because  there  hai 
been  no  time  to  secrete  them ;  but  thanks  to  the  precaution 
now  taken,  the  grand  duchesses  managed  to  smuggle  all  tha 
was  of  greatest  value  into  their  last  prison-house.  Womanlike 
they  clung  to  these  relics  of  former  happiness,  and  perhap 
deep  down  in  their  hearts  slumbered  some  hope  that  the  gem 
might  help  them  to  escape. 

Leaving  Tobolsk  by  steamer  on  May  20,  the  family  and  house 
hold  reached  Ekaterinburg  on  the  22nd  without  incident. 


CHAPTER  VI 11 

VIA   CRUCIS 

wTOTHING  had  been  done  at  Ekaterinburg  to  prepare  for 
-^  the  arrival  of  such  prisoners  as  the  ex-Tsar  and  his 
imily  till  April  27  (i.e.,  two  days  after  the  spy  Zaslavsky  had 
enounced  Yakovlev).  The  arrangements  then  taken  con- 
isted  in  requisitioning  Ipatiev's  house  and  putting  a  rough 
carding  around  it.  Zaslavsky  reached  Ekaterinburg  in  com- 
any  with  a  Russian  workman  named  Alexander  Avdeiev, 
^ho  had  been  with  him  at  Tobolsk  and  become  imbued  with 
he  Jew's  tale  of  Yakovlev's  alleged  treachery.  In  return  for 
is  support  and  blind  subserviency,  this  man  received  the 
•ost  of  commandant  of  the  new  imperial  prison  and  promises 
f  further  promotion. 

Isai  Goloshchekin,  the  intimate  friend  of  Yankel  Sverdlov, 
00k  charge  of  the  prisoners  on  their  arrival.  Isai  played  the 
lart  of  a  Bolshevist  Pooh-ba,  being  a  Komisar  many  times  over, 
»ut  above  all  he  loomed  largely  in  the  local  chrezvychaika.  He 
upervised  the  removal  of  the  prisoners  from  their  railway 
arriage,  completely  ignoring  Avdeiev,  and  took  them  away 
n  his  motor-car.  On  reaching  the  Ipatiev  house,  Goloshche- 
:in  told  the  imperial  trio  to  descend,  then  pointing  to  the 
loor,  said :  '  Citizen  Romanov,  you  may  enter.'  In  the 
ame  manner  he  let  the  ex-Empress  and  Marie  pass  the 
hreshold.  .  .  . 

Prince  Dolgoruky,  who  was  of  the  party,  did  not  meet  with 
ioloshchekin's  approval.     '  You  go  to   another  prison,'   said 

75 


76    THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  THE  ROMANOVS 

he,  and  straightway  Dolgoruky  was  removed,  never  to  be  se( 
again. 

When,  three  weeks  later,  the  other  children  and  remaind 
of  the  household  arrived,  the  same  procedure  was  adopte  ; 
Once  more  Avdeiev  was  ignored,  the  person  in  charge  beiij 
Rodionov.  His  brutalities  at  Tobolsk  had  earned  him  dii 
tinction.  Here  he  excelled  himself.  It  was  raining  heavi 
and  the  platforms  were  slimy  with  mud.  He  would  not  pe 
mit  any  one  to  help  the  Grand  Duchesses  to  carry  their  ow 
luggage.  Nagorny,  one  of  the  imperial  servants,  was  knocke 
over  for  daring  to  extend  a  hand  to  Anastasia,  dragging 
heavy  bag. 

Nobody  had  permission  to  share  the  new  prison  with  th 
Romanovs  except  the  physically  weak  or  mentally  undev( 
loped.  The  only  exception  was  Dr.  Botkin.  Those  who  di 
not  enter  the  house  went  to  other  prisons,  the  two  foreignei 
excepted. 

4c  :|e  *  4:  ♦ 

The  family,  once  more  reunited,  had  need  of  all  their  lov 
and  faith  to  endure  the  sufferings  that  marked  this  last  stag 
of  their  earthly  pilgrimage.  Besides  them  and  their  physicia 
only  four  servants  were  permitted  to  remain — the  chamber-mai 
Demidova,  the  footman  Trupp,  the  chef  Haritonov,  and  tl 
boy  Leonid  Sednev,  attendant  and  playmate  of  the  sick  Alexi 
Chemodurov,  the  Tsar's  valet,  was  transferred  to  the  tow 
prison  from  the  Ipatiev  house  three  weeks  after  his  arriva 
He  survived,  but  his  mind  was  affected. 

This  building  stands  at  the  corner  of  Vosnesensky  Prospel 
and  Vosnesensky  Pereulok  (lane)  facing  a  large  square  in  whic 
stands  the  church  of  the  Ascension  (Vosnesenia),  aprominei 
landmark  in  the  city  and  suburbs.  It  is  a  two-storey  stoi 
building  with  a  garden  and  outhouses  behind,  to  which  acce 
is  obtained  through  a  gateway  into  the  square.  As  the  lai 
descends  steeply  from  the  square,  the  lower  storey  is  a  sem 


VIA  CRUCIS  'jy 

tsement  in  front,  gradually  clearing  the  surface  of  the  street 
:  the  lane  side.  The  lower  floor  was  occupied  by  the  guard  ; 
1 8  prisoners  lived  upstairs  in  the  corner  rooms  away  from  the 
;drs  and  entrance,  which  were  on  the  gate  side.  Nicholas, 
exandra  and  Alexis  shared  one  room  facing  the  square  ; 
e  adjoining  chamber,  overlooking  the  lane,  was  occupied 
'  the  Grand  Duchesses.  The  family  could  not  leave  these 
'0  rooms  except  for  meals,  which  were  taken  in  the  adjoining 
ning-room.  Another  room,  divided  into  two  halves  by  an 
ch,  accommodated  Dr.  Botkin  and  Chemodurov  on  one  side 
id  the  servants  on  the  other.  From  the  dining-room  a 
)or  led  to  a  terrace  overlooking  the  garden. 
Around  the  house,  a  wooden  hoarding  reached  up  to  the 
indows  of  the  upper  floor.  Soon  after  the  prisoners  arrived, 
lother  hoarding  was  put  up,  completely  screening  the  whole 
)use  up  to  the  eaves,  and  enclosing  also  the  front  entrance 
id  gateway.  There  were  double  windows,  as  usual  in  Russian 
mses.  Both  panes  were  covered  with  whitewash,  rendering 
utterly  impossible  for  the  prisoners  to  see  anything  outside 
-even  a  crow  flying. 


Sentries  paced  between  the  hoardings,  inside  the  garden, 
id  were  stationed  at  the  stairs,  beside  the  lavatory  and  on 
le  terrace.  Here,  and  at  other  convenient  points,  machine- 
ms  were  posted.  The  prisoners  were  in  a  trap  from  which 
lere  was  no  escape.  The  awful  thing  about  it  was  the  con- 
ant  surveillance,  by  day  and  night.  There  was  no  privacy, 
)t  even  for  the  girls — no  consideration  for  decency  or  modesty, 
tie  Ekaterinburg  period  was  one  long  martyrdom  for  the 
omanovs,  growing  worse — with  one  short  interval — as  the 
mr  of  their  death  approached.  Their  guards,  at  first,  were 
ussians,  who,  brutal  as  they  were,  never  attained  the  fiendish 
genuity  in  tormenting  their  helpless  captives  that  came  to 


78    THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  THE  ROMANOVS 

be  displayed  by  the  alien  guards  and  executioners  of  the  fii 
week.  I 

There  had  been  no  provision  for  guarding  the  house — anotl: 
proof  that  the  prisoners  had  not  been  intended  for  Ekateri 
burg.  After  the  first  few  days,  a  regular  guard  was  organic 
from  workmen  employed  at  the  local  mills  and  iron  worl 
Alexander  Avdeiev  received  the  style  of  '  Commandant 
the  Special  Purpose  House  ' — such  was  the  name  of  t] 
imperial  prison.  His  assistants  were  Alexander  Moshkin  ai 
Pavel  Medvedev,  both  workmen  and  Russians.  Avdeiev  ar 
his  particular  friends  among  the  guards  lived  upstairs  in  tl 
ante-room  and  another  chamber  facing  the  square.  The 
were,  consequently,  in  immediate  proximity  to  the  prisoner 
No  pen  can  describe  what  this  meant. 

The  men  were  coarse,  drunken,  criminal  types,  such  as 
revolution  brings  to  the  surface.  They  entered  the  prisonei 
rooms  whenever  they  thought  fit,  at  all  hours,  prying  wi1 
drunken,  leering  eyes  into  everything  that  they  might  be  doin 
Their  mere  presence  was  an  offence  ;  but  picture  the  tormen 
of  the  captives  to  have  to  put  up  with  their  loathsome  familial 
ties  !  They  would  sit  down  at  the  table  when  the  prisone 
ate,  put  their  dirty  hands  into  the  plates,  spit,  jostle  ar 
reach  in  front  of  the  prisoners.  Their  greasy  elbows  wou 
be  thrust,  by  accident  or  design,  into  the  ex-Tsar's  face.  Ale: 
andra  was,  of  course,  a  special  object  of  attention.  The 
would  crowd  round  her  chair,  lolling  in  such  a  manner  th: 
any  movement  on  her  part  brought  her  in  contact  with  the 
evil-smelling  bodies. 

*  «  «  4E  * 

Prison  fare  of  the  poorest  kind  was  provided.  Breakfa 
comprised  stale  black  bread  from  the  day  before,  with  tea- 
no  sugar.  For  dinner  they  had  thin  soup  and  meat,  the  latt' 
of  doubtful  quality.  The  ex-Empress  could  eat  nothing  exce] 
macaroni. 


VIA  CRUCIS  79 

The  table-cover  was  a  greasy  oilcloth.  There  were  not 
.ves  or  forks  or  even  plates  enough  to  go  round.  All  ate 
h  wooden  spoons  out  of  one  common  dish.  By  the 
iperor's  wish  the  servants  sat  at  table  with  the  family. 
The  guards  sang  revolutionary  songs  devised  to  hurt  and 
)ck  the  feelings  of  the  prisoners,  containing  foul  words  such 
no  man  should  dare  to  utter  in  the  presence  of  innocent 
Is  ;  but  the  revolutionary  warriors  delighted  in  wounding  the 
)desty  of  the  Grand  Duchesses  in  this  and  in  other  still  more 
Dulsive  ways,  by  filthy  scribbling  and  drawings  on  the  walls 
d  by  crowding  round  the  lavatory — there  was  only  one  for 
e  prisoners  and  the  warders.  They  went  reeling  about  the 
use,  smoking  cigarettes,  unkempt,  dishevelled,  shameless, 
jpiring  terror  and  loathing.  They  did  not  scruple  to  help 
emselves  liberally  to  the  clothes  and  other  property  of  the 
isoners  whenever  anything  came  within  their  reach. 
Only  a  quarter  of  an  hour  was  allowed  to  the  prisoners  in 
e  open  air.  No  physical  work  was  permitted.  The  ex-Tsar 
t  this  privation  very  much.  Alexandra  suffered  terribly. 
IT  son  remained  an  invalid,  unable  to  walk.  The  family 
smed  to  be  overwhelmed  by  grief.  But  their  faith  in  God 
d  their  love  for  each  other  illuminated  the  gloom  of  this 
^ful  prison.  Above  the  ribald  songs  of  their  tormentors 
ght  be  heard  the  chanting  of  the  Song  of  Cherubim,  the 
issian  hymn  of  praise. 


Now  we  come  to  the  final  phase  that  preceded  the  murder. 

is  full  of  significance.  Every  step  taken  by  the  occult 
wers  of  the  Ekaterinburg  chrezvychaika,  which,  it  must  ^be 
tnembered,  did  nothing  without  orders  from  the  central 
stitutions  in  Moscow — Sverdlov  being  in  direct  communica- 
)n  with  Goloshchekin — falls  into  its  natural  appointed  place 

part  of  the  cruel  fate  reserved  for  the  Romanov   family. 


8o         THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

The  monsters  who  had  been  placed  in  charge  of  the  prisor 
— as  if  on  purpose  to  torment  them  through  the  agency 
Russians — did  not  fulfil  their  mission  to  the  end.  Even  tl 
became  humanized  by  the  spectacle  of  the  sufferings  and 
patience  and  humility  of  their  former  sovereigns — not  all 
them,  of  course,  but  certainly  a  majority,  including  tl: 
commandant,  Avdeiev. 

One  of  these  men  afterwards  related  how  the  change  ca 
over  him.  He  had  begun  with  hatred  in  his  heart.  The  T 
was  the  head  of  the  capitalistic  system,  the  greatest  capita 
of  them  all.  To  destroy  him  was  to  destroy  capitalism  itsel 
the  Social-Democratic  programme  had  made  it  all  so  pi 
to  him.  He  watched  the  crowned  enemy  of  mankind,  1 
'  drinker  of  the  people's  blood,'  as  he  walked  about  the  gard 
and  listened  to  him  exchanging  simple,  homely  words  w 
the  other  warders.  His  notions  began  to  waver.  This  v 
not  a  bad  man  :  he  was  so  human,  so  kindly,  just  a  man  1 
other  men,  and  even  better.  Then  the  idea  occurred  to  h 
that  it  was  wrong  to  desire  his  death.  What  harm  could 
do  ?  Why  not  let  him  escape  !  Yes,  it  would  be  much  bet 
if  he  went  away,  and  the  children,  too ;  they  had  done 
harm,  and  the  Tsaritsa  also.  She  was  proud.  Not  sim 
and  homely,  like  the  Tsar  ;  but  let  her  also  go.  If  she  I. 
done  harm,  she  had  also  suffered. 

This  man  repented  of  the  evil  he  and  his  fellows  were  doi: 
He  would  sing  no  more  lewd  songs,  and  tried  to  dissuade  i 
others.  Rapidly  the  whole  of  the  guard — ^workmen  from  1 
Lokalov  and  Syssert  companies'  plants — were  becoming  c 
affected. 

Hf  ilf  ^  ^  ^ 

Towards  the  end  of  June  a  secret  emissary  of  one  of  t 
Monarchist  organizations  called  upon  the  Bishop  of  Ekater 
burg  and  tried  to  get  into  communication  with  the  Impei 
prisoners  through  the  clergy  ;    but  this  proved  to  be    i 


PLATK   IV 


IPATIEV'S    HOUSE    IN 
EKATERINBURG 

This  photograph  was  taken  in  May,  1918,  directly 
after  the  arrival  of  Nicholas,  Alexandra  and  Marie. 
Their  gaolers  had  had  time  to  put  up  the  inner  hoard- 
ing only.  The  nulcr  hoarding,  erected  later,  enclosed 
the  gateway  and  approaches  to  the  house.  Machine- 
guns  were  mounted  at  diffei^ent  points  within  the  enclo- 
sure and  in  the  garret.     Note  the  ghrine  on  the  left. 


THE    CHAMBER   OF   DEATH 

A  vaulted,  semi-basement,  18  feet  by  16  feet.  Photo- 
graphed from  the  spot  where  the  German,  so-called 
'  Lett,'  soldiers  stood  while  tiring  their  revolvers.  The 
Tsar  and  his  son  sat  in  the  centre  of  the  room,  and 
behind  them  was  the  Empress,  also  seated.  The  other 
victims  stood  at  the  further  wail. 


Plate  IV 


IPATIHV  S    HOUSE 


THE    CHAMBER    OF    DEATH 


VIA  CRUCIS  81 

isible.  He  then  proposed  that,  at  all  events,  some  food  and 
nforts  should  be  sent  to  the  prison-house.  Dr.  Derevenko, 
o  had  been  permitted  to  remain  in  the  city,  gave  his  assist- 
ze  at  this  juncture.  By  some  means  he  was  in  touch  with 
;  warders.  Avdeiev  agreed  to  take  in  milk  and  other  pro- 
ions  if  they  reached  the  house  without  attracting  notice, 
e  nuns  of  the  monastery  thereupon  sent  two  novices,  dressed 
lay  garments,  to  the  house,  with  all  manner  of  dairy  pro- 
ce.  Avdeiev  received  them  himself.  These  journeys  became 
■quent.  The  poor  captives  felt  comforted,  morally  and 
ysically.  They  had  not  been  forgotten,  and  the  men  who 
d  been  so  terrible  were  so  much  kinder.  Hope  once  more 
issomed.  The  Grand  Duchesses  looked  bright  and  cheer- 
:,  '  as  if  ready  to  smile/  says  a  person  who  saw  them  at 
is  time.  The  nuns,  emboldened  by  Avdeiev's  attitude, 
Dught  even  some  tobacco  for  the  ex-Tsar.  Avdeiev  referred 
him  as  '  the  Emperor.' 

3|c  :(:  :):  4:  * 

In  the  beginning  of  July  some  suspicions  must  have  arisen 
long  the  Jewish  camarilla,  or  perhaps  Moscow  had  received 
iformation.'     As  the  time  was  getting  ripe   for   'action,' 

doubt  steps  had  been  taken  to  verify  the  arrangements, 
d  the  discovery  of  disaffection  among  the  Russian  guards 
lowed.  Avdeiev  was  at  once  dismissed,  the  Russian  guards 
Dved  out  of  the  house  into  premises  on  the  opposite  side  of 
e  lane,  and,  with  one  exception,  forbidden  to  come  into  the 
use.  This  exception  was  Pavel  Medvedev.  He  retained 
5  post  as  chief  warder.  The  Russian  guard  continued  to 
ovide  sentries  for  the  outside  posts  only.     They  could  do 

harm  there,  and  served  to  throw  dust  in  the  eyes  of  the 
iblic. 

All  these  changes  were  carried  out  by  the  new  commandant, 
person  with  whom  the  reader  is  already  acquainted,  namely, 
ankel  Yurovsky,  the  son  of  a  Jew  convict,  himself  a  mystery 


82    THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  THE  ROMANOVS 

man,  having  obtained  money  in  Germany  for  unexplaini 
'  services,'  and  presently  one  of  the  chiefs  of  the  local  chrezi 
chaika.  Yankel  brought  with  him  a  squad  of  ten  '  Lett 
— as  the  Russians  called  them — to  mount  guard  inside  t 
prison-house  and  take  charge  of  the  machine-gun  posi 
These  men  were  the  hired  assassins  of  the  red  okhrax 
They  were  not  Letts  but  Magyars,  some  of  them  real 
Magyarized  Germans.  It  must  be  remembered  that  Sibei 
was  Sovietized  from  the  east,  not  by  Russians  in  the  fii 
place,  but  by  the  soldiers  of  Wilhelm  and  his  Austrian  henc 
men,  who  acted  under  the  orders  from  the  two  Kaisers.  The 
so-called  Letts  had  entered  the  service  of  the  chrezvychai 
after  helping  to  carry  out  the  German  design  to  undermi 
Russia. 

Innumerable  evidences  prove  that  the  new-comers  are  c( 
rectly  classified.  The  Russian  guards  could  tell  by  th 
speech  that  they  were  foreigners.  To  designate  them  as  Lei 
was  quite  natural  because  the  Letts  formed  the  backbo 
and  bulk  of  the  foreign  mercenaries  of  Sovietdom  and  thei 
fore  any  non-Russian  Red-guard  became  a  '  Lett.'  Bi 
as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  Magyars  resemble  Letts  in  their  a 
pearance  and  accent.  Yurovsky  spoke  to  them  in  a  forei 
language.  Besides  Russian  and  Yiddish  he  knew  only  Germ? 
Among  the  papers  found  afterwards  in  the  prison-house  ^ 
an  unfinished  letter  to  his  '  Tereschen  '  from  one  of  t 
'  Letts.'  It  was  in  Magyar,  but,  according  to  the  findir 
of  experts,  the  writer  was  evidently  a  German.  He  us 
capital  letters  for  substantives,  often  employed  Gothic  ch; 
acters  and  made  glaring  blunders  in  grammar,  such  as 
Magyar  would  make. 

Another  of  the  '  Letts  '  left  a  still  more  eloquent  evidei 
of  his  nationality."  This  man  had  stood  on  guard  on  t 
terrace  communicating  with  the  dining-room  and  overlook! 
the   garden — a   very   important   post    with    a   machine-g 


VIA  CRUCIS  83 

pable  of  sweeping   the  interior  of  the  house  and  all  the 
tproaches  from  the  garden  side.     On  the  very  day  before 
e  murder,  this  man  wrote  in  pencil  on  the  wall  of  the  house 
record  of  his  service  as  follows  : — 
Verhas  Andras 

Orsegen  1918  VII/15 

ongside  this  inscription  he  had  tried  to  write  the  Russian 
uivalent,  but  could  not  spell  out  the  word  '  karaul '  (guard 
ity),  in  Magyar  orsegen.  Scraps  of  paper  on  which  other 
.etts  '  had  practised  writing  Russian  words  were  also  found. 
We  are  able  to  fix  the  date  approximately  when  the  German- 
agyar  guard  and  Yurovsky  took  possession.  The  lay  sisters 
inging  their  usual  offerings  met  with  a  strange  reception  on 
about  July  10 — about  a  week  before  the  murder.  Avdeiev 
d  not  come  out  to  them.  Some  of  the  Russian  guards,  whom 
ey  knew,  were  standing  near  the  door,  looking  very  much 
nfused,  and  at  first  not  disposed  to  take  charge  of  the  gifts, 
nally,  however,  they  did  so.  The  sisters  then  walked  away, 
esently  the  soldiers  came  running  after  them.  '  Please, 
11  you  come  back,'  they  said.  The  nuns  returned.  An 
dividual  whom  they  afterwards  identified  as  Yurovsky, 
quired  by  whose  authority  they  had  brought  the  provisions. 
Wdeiev  and  Derevenko,'  was  the  truthful  reply.  '  Oh, 
ey  are  both  in  it,  are  they,'  he  remarked  ominously.  He 
vertheless  permitted  them  to  come  again,  '  but  with  milk 

***** 

This  last  week  of  their  lives  must  have  been  the  most  dreadful 
.e  of  all  for  the  Romanovs.  Brutal  and  bestial  as  the  Russians 
id  been  in  the  early  part  of  their  wardenship,  they  were  pre- 
rable,  even  at  their  worst,  to  the  silent  relentless  torture 
)plied  by  Yurovsky,  who  also  was  a  drunkard.  He  and  his 
,nd  watched  them  literally  like  a  cat  watches  a  mouse.  He 
Ls  polite  to  the  Tsar  and  spoke  softly  to  Alexis ;   he  even 


84  THE   LAST  DAYS  OF  THE   ROMANOVS 


1 


permitted  a  priest  to  come  and  say  prayers,  which  comforte 
Alexandra  and  the  poor  captives  unspeakably  ;  yet  there 
evidence  that  never  had  they  looked  so  utterly,  hopeless] 
wretched  as  under  the  tutelage  of  the  Jew.  This  man's  brothe; 
and  sisters  describe  him  as  a  '  cruel  tyrant  who  would  n( 
hesitate  at  anything  to  attain  his  ends.' 

***** 
The  man  and  his  executioners  only  waited  for  the  sign 
that  was  to  come  from  Yankel  Sverdlov.     Everything  w; 
ready  for  the  murder.     The  victims  had  been  adequate 
tortured.     Goloshchekin,  the  Jew  Sadist,  licked  his  lips 
pleasurable  anticipation. 


CHAPTER  IX 

'  CALVARY 

^ANKEL  YUROVSKY  left  the  prison-house  on  several 
*■  occasions.  Each  absence  lasted  many  hours.  He  was 
irveying  the  environs  of  the  city  for  a  convenient  place  to 
ispose  of  the  bodies  of  his  victims.  His  escort  consisted  of 
ne  or  two  of  the  '  Letts  '  mounted  on  horseback.  Several 
itnesses  deposed  to  meeting  him  and  his  bodyguard  in  the 
.'oods  during  the  week  that  preceded  the  murder.  They  were 
een  near  the  very  spot  where  the  remains  were  afterwards 
estroyed. 

Whenever  he  had  to  absent  himself,  Yurovsky  placed 
ledvedev  in  charge.  Besides  the  latter,  there  was  another 
ion-'  Lett  '  in  the  house,  a  certain  Nikulin,  respecting  whom 
t  is  known  that  he  came  with  Yurovsky  from  the  chrezvychaika. 
le  enjoyed  Yurovsky 's  entire  confidence,  and  was  probably 
here  to  keep  an  eye  on  Medvedev. 

On  Monday,  July  15,  the  lay  sisters  came  as  usual  in  the 
norning  with  milk  for  the  Imperial  Family.  Yankel  took  it 
limself,  and  graciously  informed  them  that  on  the  morrow 
hey  might  bring  half  a  hundred  eggs.  This  they  did  gladly, 
hinking  that  the  poor  captives  would  enjoy  a  hearty  meal, 
11  unsuspicious  of  the  cynical  intention  that  had  prompted 
furovsky's  generosity.  (These  eggs  were  boiled  by  Haritonov, 
)ut  they  were  eaten,  not  in  Ipatiev's  house,  but  in  the  woods.) 

Hi  Hf  ^  ^  ^ 

On  the  Tuesday  morning,  a  whole  nine  days  before  the 

85 


86         THE   LAST  DAYS  OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

arrival  of  the  Czechs,  Yurovsky  made  his  final  arrangement; 
for  the  murder  of  the  family.  The  boy  Leonid  Sednev  wa< 
removed  early  in  the  day  to  Popov's  house  across  the  lane 
whither  the  Russian  guards  had  been  transferred.  There  h( 
was  seen  sitting  on  the  window-sill  and  crying  bitterly ;  whethei 
because  he  was  dull  without  his  play-fellow  or  had  som( 
inkling  of  his  fate  is  not  known.  The  boy  disappeared,  nevei 
to  be  seen  again.  Later  this  gave  rise  to  rumours  that  Yurovskj 
had  been  told  to  reserve  him  for  future  use,  perhaps  to  im- 
personate his  little  friend  the  Tsarevich — in  short,  to  ad 
the  part  of  a  False  Dmitri. 

Two  important  visitors  came  to  the  prison-house  during 
the  day — namely,  the  arch-inquisitor,  Isai  Goloshchekin,  anc 
his  humble  servant,  the  Russian  workman  Beloborodov, 
president  of  the  regional  Soviet.  They  took  Yurovsky  awaj 
in  their  automobile  to  some  place  unspecified,  presumably 
to  a  meeting  of  the  Soviet  Presidium  (Board).  Yurovskj 
returned  some  hours  later,  towards  evening. 

At  7  p.m.  Yurovsky  gave  orders  to  Medvedev  to  collect 
all  the  revolvers  of  the  outer  guard.  Medvedev  complied. 
He  brought  twelve  Nagans  (the  Nagan  is  the  Russian  service 
revolver)  to  the  commandant's  room  and  handed  them  to 
Yurovsky.  The  latter  then  confided  to  him  the  plan  to  shoot 
the  whole  '  Tsarian  family  '  that  night.  He  (Medvedev) 
would  have  to  warn  the  Russian  guards  '  later,'  when  he  got 
word  to  do  so.  Meanwhile  he  must  be  silent.  At  nightfall 
(about  10.30  p.m.  in  these  latitudes  in  summer  time)  Medvedev 
'  told  the  Russians.'    The  murderers  were  to  be  the  '  Letts.' 

There  is  no  record  of  any  open  protests  on  the  part  of  these 
men,  who  had  been  '  disgraced  '  only  a  few  days  ago  for 
their  '  friendliness  '  to  the  '  arch-capitalist  '  and  '  drinker 
of  blood.'  There  is  nothing  to  be  surprised  at.  Beloborodov 
had  been  rendered  '  amenable,'  because  he  had  '  stolen  '  ; 
here  the  crimes  laid  to  these  men's  charge  were  not  only  pilfering. 


CALVARY  87 

)  '  counter-revolution.'  They  knew — and  we  may  be  sure 
:.]y  were  made  to  feel — that  the  chrezvychaika  would  know 
hA^  to  deal  with  them  if  they  showed  truculence.     Having 

arned '  the  Russians,  Medvedev  returned  to  the  com- 
a.ndant. 

Two  other  strangers  now  made  their  appearance.  One  of 
„  ni  was  Peter  Ermakov,  '  military  komisar  '  of  the  Verkh- 
I  itsk  Ironworks ;  the  other,  his  assistant,  a  sailor  named 
Iganov.    Both  these  men  had  distinguished  themselves  by 

1  iiv  ferocity.  They  were  professional  assassins,  '  working  ' 
r  the  Red  inquisition  out  of  sheer  blood-lust.  But  there 
.s  another  reason  for  inviting  these  butchers  to  the  approach- 
^  feast  of  blood.  They  were  both  to  play  a  leading  part  in 
e  '  disposal  '  of  the  bodies.  Both  were  friends  of  Yurovsky . 
ith  him  they  had  already,  some  days  earlier,  studied  and 
ranged  the  whole  grisly  performance. 

When  midnight  by  solar  time  had  gone  some  minutes, 
iirovsky  went  to  the  Imperial  chambers.  The  family  slept. 
e  woke  them  up,  and  told  them  that  there  were  urgent 
asons  why  they  should  be  at  once  removed  ;  that  there  was 
3uble  in  the  city  which  might  endanger  their  lives,  and  that 
ey  must  dress  quickly  and  come  downstairs.  All  rose, 
Lshed  and  dressed  themselves,  the  Grand  Duchesses  donning 
eir  jewel-stuffed  garments.  Each  member  of  the  family 
d  their  followers  put  on  his  or  her  going-out  clothes  and 
adgear.  The  Empress  wore  her  overcoat.  Some  of  the 
isoners  even  took  their  pillows — for  comfort's  sake  or  be- 
use  they  had  precious  possessions  secreted  within. 
Yurovsky  led  the  way  downstairs  ;  the  family  and  suite 
lowed.  Alexis  could  not  walk.  His  father  carried  him  in 
>  arms.  Dr.  Eugene  Sergeievich  Botkin  came  directly  after 
B  family,  and  after  him  came  the  chamber-maid  Demidova, 

2  cook  Haritonov,  and  the  footman  Trupp. 


88  THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  THE  ROMANOVS 

The  procession  descended  by  the  back  stairs  leading  fr 

the  upper  to  the  ground  floor.     The  door   from   the   ]o^ 

landing  (by  the  kitchen)  to  the  rooms  of  the  ground  floor  I 

been  boarded  up  to  prevent  direct  communication  betwe 

their  former  occupants-the  Russian  guards-and  the  prisone 

One  had  to  go  into  the  yard  and  then  enter  the  lower  floor 

a  separate  doorway.  This  was  the  route  followed  by  Yurovs 

and  his  victims.     The  motor-lorry  that  had  come  for  t 

bodies  waited  outside  the  gate  of  this  very  courtyard  and 

the  dim  light  of  the  northern  midnight  the   prisoners   co. 

probably  see  the  vehicle  and  must  have  felt  reassured    ev 

If  any  suspicion  of  their  imminent  end  had  assailed  th, 

minds. 

Stm  following  Yurovsky,  they  traversed  aU  the  rooms 

the  lower  floor,  now  tenanted  only  by  '  Letts,'  and  came 

last  to  the  small  lobby  adjoining  the  front  entrance  on  the  la 

(pereulok)  side.     This  lobby  was  lighted  by  a  small  windo^ 

heavily  grated,  looking  into  the  garden.     Outside    stood 

sentry  with  a  machine-gun.     He  could  see  everything  th 

went  on  inside,  especially  when  the  interior  was  Ht  up  for  tl 

execution.      This    man's  account  played  an  important  pa 

in    assembling    and    corroborating    the    various    depositioi 

deahng  with  the  murder.    Opposite  the  window,  a  door  leac 

into  a  smaU  chamber  (i8ft.  by  i6ft.)  with  a  heavily  grille 

double  ^^^ndow  facing  the  lane.     Here  also  stood  sentrie 

outside,  able  to  see  what  was  going  on  within.    This  chambe 

IS  partly  basement.    The  guards  had  used  it  as  a  dormitory 

A  locked  door  led  into  a  basement  chamber  situated  immedi 

ately  under  the  Tsar's  prison-room.     This  corner  basemen, 

was  a  store-room  where  some  of  the  imperial  belongings  ha< 

been  deposited-and  pilfered.     There  was  no  escape  in  tha, 

direction.     Besides,  there  were  double  barriers  outside,  inter' 

cepting  sight  and  sound. 

The  family  and  their  followers  were  ushered  iiito  the  semi- 


Platil  V 


w 

■> 

X 

H 

in 

H 

> 

cU 

^ 

cd 

^ 

tn 

w 

^53 

> 

Pi 

C 

O 

w 

rt 

oi 

Q 

rrt 

D 

Cci 

5-:3 

>^ 

P 

^5 

S 

a,  XI 

i^ 

o  ° 

;z: 

< 

D 

>^ 

ffi^ 

> 

o 

Q 

w 
> 

C/2 


H 


o    0^ 
W 


>    ^-  4J   3i  i5  -4;  'S  •£  '^   k"  cu 


^  >.ii  ? 


p    (fl   un 

3  -   ^  <-.   pH  -^  ^     ,, 


y  o  y 

;-   o    ■-; 


^.    in   r-   c   aj 

o  ^'^•-  a. .-  .5    . 

•-'  f)     X     Tt     1-'     C 


1:3  ui  b 


I 


Plate  V 


CALVARY  89 

basement  chamber  and  told  to  wait.  They  were  not  suspicious. 
It  did  not  occur  to  them  that  they  were  in  a  trap.  As  the 
room  was  bare  of  furniture,  the  Tsar  asked  to  have  some  chairs 
brought.  He  wished  the  suffering  Empress  to  rest  and  the 
sick  boy  to  sit  down.  Three  chairs  were  brought  in.  One 
was  passed  to  Alexandra,  who  had  been  leaning  against  the 
wall  facing  the  lobby.  Nicholas  seated  Alexis  where  he  had 
been  standing,  in  the  middle  of  the  room,  and  sat  down  beside 
him.  A  pillow  was  placed  behind  Alexandra.  Two  other 
pillows  remained  in  Demidova's  arms.  The  Tsar  and  the 
Tsarevich  kept  their  caps  on,  as  if  expecting  any  moment 
to  go  out.  They  thought  the  vehicles  that  were  to  convey 
them  away  had  not  arrived,  the  lorry  being  there  to  take  the 
luggage.  On  the  Empress's  right  stood  three  of  her  daughters, 
on  her  left  the  other  daughter  and  Demidova. 

Almost  immediately  the  door  into  the  lobby  was  obstructed 
by  Yurovsky,  his  friends  and  the  '  Letts.'  There  were 
Nikulin,  Ermakov,  Vaganov,  Medvedev  and  seven  '  Letts  ' 
— the  remaining  three  being  on  guard  duty.  There  were 
twelve  murderers.  Each  carried  a  revolver.  The  rifles  of 
the  '  Lett  '  guard  were  stacked  in  the  adjoining  room  (where 
they  lived). 


Yurovsky  advanced  into  the  death-chamber  and  addressed 
the  Tsar.  There  are  many  versions  of  this  utterance.  According 
to  the  most  trustworthy  one,  he  said  :  '  Your  relatives  have 
tried  to  save  you.  But  it  could  not  be  managed  by  them,  and 
so  we  ourselves  are  compelled  to  shoot  you.' 

The  twelve  revolvers  volleyed  instantly,  and  all  the  prisoners 
fell  to  the  ground.  Death  had  been  instantaneous  in  the  case 
of  the  parents  and  three  of  the  children,  and  of  Dr.  Botkin 
and  two  servants.  Alexis  remained  alive  in  spite  of  his  wounds, 
and  moaned  and  struggled  in  his  agony.    Yurovsky  finished 


go         THE   LAST  DAYS  OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

him  with  his  Colt.  One  of  the  girls — presumably  the  younges 
Grand  Duchess,  Anastasia — rolled  about  and  screamed,  am 
when  one  of  the  murderers  approached,  fought  desperatel 
with  him  till  he  kiUed  her.  It  seems  as  if  the  murderers  ha 
not  been  able  to  aim  straight  at  the  boy  and  girl.  Even  the: 
callous  hearts  had  wavered.  The  maid-servant  lived  th 
longest.  Perhaps  the  pillows  were  in  the  way.  She  was  nc 
touched  by  the  first  volley,  and  ran  about  screaming  till  sora 
of  the  '  Letts,'  seizing  their  rifles,  bayoneted  her  to  deatl 
She  was  covered  with  stabs.  Poor  Demidova  died  the  victir 
of  a  misunderstanding  ;  the  Reds  thought  that  she  was 
maid-of-honour  and  therefore  a  bourgeoise,  whereas  she  was 
simple  peasant  girl. 

Within  a  few  minutes  of  their  entering  the  room,  all  was  ovei 
No  time  was  to  be  lost  in  removing  traces  of  the  crime.  Th 
floors  and  walls  had  to  be  washed  quickly  and  the  bodies  sen 
away.  Daylight  would  soon  appear.  There  was  a  long  wa 
to  go  through  the  city.  Hardened  and  ruthless,  secure  in  th 
impunity  of  murder  under  the  Soviet  system,  Yurovsky  au' 
his  associates  were  none  the  less  hurrying  desperately.  The 
knew  that  the  arrangements  for  '  executing  '  the  Romanov 
could  not  be  regarded  as  a  trial,  nor  would  the  people  appro v 
the  deed.  And  so  like  common  murderers,  they  were  desper 
ately  anxious  to  get  rid  of  the  corpses.  Here  Ermakov  an* 
Vaganov  became  invaluable. 

***** 

The  evidence  of  three  eye-witnesses  is  given  below,  nameh 
of  Medvedev,  one  of  the  actual  murderers,  of  Yakimov,  wh< 
was  present  at  the  shooting,  and  of  a  Red  Guard  name( 
Proskuriakov,  who  helped  to  remove  traces  of  the  murder 
The  necessary  comments  of  the  investigating  magistrat< 
accompany  the  depositions  so  that  the  reader  is  able  t( 
study  them  in  their  true  perspective. 

Medvedev  told  his  wife  all  about  it  directly  after  the  murder 


CALVARY  91 

e  did  not  conceal  the  fact  that  he  himself  had  fired  his  revolver 
the  Romanovs.  He  even  emphasized  his  active  complicity, 
)asting  that  he  was  the  only  Russian  '  workman  '  who  had 
ken  part  in  the  shooting,  and  that  all  the  others,  besides 
urovsky  and  his  assistants,  were  '  not  ours  ' — i.e.,  foreigners, 
edvedev  was  caught  at  Perm  while  trying  to  blow  up  the 
idge  over  the  Kama  to  cover  the  retreat  of  the  Red  Army, 
e  confirmed  all  the  statements  that  he  had  made  to  his  wife, 
cept  in  one  particular  :  he  denied  having  stated  that  he 
id  himself  done  the  shooting.  It  is  a  customary  reservation 
.  the  case  of  all  who  take  part  in  a  joint  and  prearranged 
urder.  The  witness  testifies  to  the  fact  of  the  murder  and 
imes  the  actual  murderers,  but  persists  in  declaring  that  he 
mself  did  not  do  the  killing,  although  he  admits  to  holding 
revolver  in  his  hand  at  the  time  of  the  shooting.  To  divert 
le  evidence  from  himself  he  had  to  invent  an  alibi.  Hear 
tiat  he  says  in  his  signed  deposition  : — 
'  Yurovsky  sent  me  out,  saying,  "  Go  into  the  street  ;  see 
there  is  any  one  about  and  if  the  shots  can  be  heard. "  I  went 
it  into  the  yard  surrounded  by  the  big  fence  '  (he  means  the 
lace  between  the  outside  wall  and  the  hoardings),  'and, 
if  ore  I  had  time  to  reach  the  street,  heard  the  sound  of  the 
ing.  I  returned  at  once  inside  the  house — only  two  or 
ree  minutes  had  passed — and,  entering  the  room  where  the 
ooting  had  been  carried  out,  I  saw  that  all  the  members 
the  Tsar's  family — the  Tsar,  the  Tsaritsa,  the  four  daughters, 
id  the  Naslednik  (heir),  were  already  lying  on  the  floor  with 
imerous  wounds  on  their  bodies,  and  the  blood  was  flowing 
torrents.  The  doctor,  maid,  and  two  men-servants  had  also 
en  killed.  When  I  appeared  the  Naslednik  was  still  alive, 
oaning.  Yurovsky  went  up  to  him  and  fired  two  or  three 
nes  point-blank  into  him.  The  Naslednik  was  still.  The 
:ture  of  the  murder,  the  smell  and  sight  of  the  blood,  caused 
2  to  feel  sick.   .   ,    .   ' 


92         THE    LAST  DAYS  OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

*  4c  *  *  4s 

Anatoly  Yakimov,  the  second  witness,  is  the  man  who  ha 
become  '  converted  '  after  remaining  a  few  weeks  with  th 
Tsar.  He  had  been  a  sergeant  of  the  Russian  Guard,  an 
remained  so  after  the  Russians  had  been  relegated  to  the  out( 
posts.  It  was  his  business  to  place  the  sentries  and  see  tha 
they  remained  at  their  posts.  As  the  Russian  sentries  coul 
see  into  the  room  where  the  murdering  was  to  be  done,  i 
had  not  been  possible  to  keep  them  in  ignorance  to  the  enc 
as  explained  above.  Yakimov  '  sympathized '  with  th 
prisoners,  but  he  did  not  dare  to  give  effect  to  these  feeling: 
There  is  good  reason  to  believe  that  he  was  present  at  th 
murder.  Possibly  Yurovsky  had  insisted  upon  his  bein 
inside  the  house  at  the  time,  in  order  to  imphcate  him  in  th 
deed.  His  alibi  bears  a  family  Hkeness  to  Medvedev's.  Lik 
him,  he  had  a  full,  circumstantial  knowledge  of  the  killin 
that  corroborates  Medvedev  in  every  essential  point,  and  tha 
could  not  have  come  to  him  unless  he  had  been  actuall; 
present .  He  explains  that  it  was  all  told  to  him  by  the  sentrie 
— two  men  who  stood  outside  the  death-chamber  window  am 
two  others  who  were  in  the  courtyard  when  the  bodies  wer 
removed. 

He  also  unburdened  himself  to  his  family.  According  t 
his  own  account,  he  heard  of  the  murder  at  four  o'clock  i] 
the  morning,  after  which  he  could  not  sleep,  but  '  just  sa 
and  shivered,'  as  he  says.  At  eight  o'clock  he  went  to  his  sistei 
a  woman  of  some  education,  who  was  married  to  Agafono\ 
an  official  of  the  Commissariat  of  Justice.  Here  is  what  hi 
sister  deposes  :  '  He  came  in  without  saying  a  word,  lookin, 
dreadfully  upset  and  exhausted.  I  noticed  it  at  once  and  aske( 
him  :  "  What  is  the  matter  with  you  ?  "  He  requested  me  t 
close  the  door,  sat  down  and  kept  silent,  his  face  convulsei 
with  terror  and  his  body  trembHng  violently.  I  again  aske( 
him  :  "  What  ails  you  ?  "  I  thought  that  some  great  misfortun 


CALVARY  93 

ad  overtaken  him.  He  still  maintained  an  obstinate  silence, 
Ithough  it  evidently  caused  him  suffering.  The  thought 
ccurred  to  me  :  "  Maybe  they  have  killed  Nicholas."  I  asked 
im  if  it  was  so.  My  brother  answered  something  like  :  "It 
5  aUover,"  and  in  reply  to  my  further  questions  he  said  that 
U  had  been  killed — i.e.,  the  Tsar  himself  and  all  his  family, 
nd  all  who  had  been  with  them  excepting  their  little  scullion, 
do  not  recall  my  asking  him  if  he  had  taken  part  in  the  murder, 
lut  I  remember  his  saying  that  he  had  seen  the  spectacle  of 
he  murder  with  his  own  eyes.  He  related  how  this  sight  had 
0  shaken  him  that  he  could  not  hold  out,  and  every  now 
,nd  then  had  gone  out  of  the  house  into  the  open  air,  adding 
hat  his  comrades  in  the  guard  had  upbraided  him  for  it, 
uspecting  him  of  feeling  repentance  or  pity.  ...  I  then 
mderstood  him  to  mean  that  he  had  been  himself  in  the  room, 
Dr  so  near  that  he  could  see  the  actual  murder  with  his  own 
iyes.' 


Here  are  two  corroborative  depositions  of  interest.  When 
Yakimov  had  left  his  sister,  she  immediately  ran  out  to  her 
husband's  office.  An  investigating  magistrate  named  Tom- 
ashevsky  was  in  the  next  room,  and  saw  her  standing,  weeping, 
and  whispering  to  her  husband.  When  she  had  gone,  Agafonov 
came  and  told  this  same  story  in  confidence  to  Tomashevsky. 
Agafonov  saw  Yakimov  later  in  the  day,  and  relates  what 
transpired  :  '  Yakimov  came  to  take  leave.  [He  was  going 
to  the  front.]  I  was  struck  by  his  appearance  :  the  face 
pinched,  the  pupils  distended,  the  lower  lip  quivering  when  he 
spoke.  The  mere  sight  of  him  convinced  me  that  aU  that  my 
wife  had  said  was  true.  Clearly,  Anatoly  had  passed  through 
some  terrible  experience  during  the  night.  ...  I  only  asked 
him  :  "  How  are  things  ?  "  He  replied,  "It  is  all  over  "  ' 
{vse  koncheno). 


94  THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

Philip  Proskuriakov — a  youngster,  the  type  of  the  good 
natured  peasant — deposed  that  he  had  entered  the  guard  a1 
Ipatiev's  house  principally  because  he  was  curious  to  have  c 
look  at  the  Tsar  ;  not  because  he  felt  hostile  to  him  ;  indeed, 
if  he  disliked  anybody  it  was  the  Jews.  His  narrative  impressec 
the  investigating  magistrate  by  its  evident  sincerity.  He  die 
not  see  the  actual  murder,  having  spent  the  evening  with  som€ 
friends  and  taken  copious  draughts  of  '  denaturat  '  (methy- 
lated spirits,  which  were  in  vogue  since  the  prohibition  oi 
vodka),  and  as  a  result  of  these  libations,  Medvedev  had  placed 
him  under  arrest.  He  was  locked  up  in  the  bath-house  and 
sleeping  off  his  '  spree  '  when  Medvedev  came  to  wake  him 
and  order  him  to  go  into  the  house. 

The  bodies  had  been  taken  out  just  before  he  reached  the 
death-chamber.  Everything  that  happened  in  the  house 
immediately  afterwards  came  under  his  personal  observation. 
He  washed  the  blood  off  the  floor  and  the  walls.  That  he 
positively  admits.  He  discussed  the  details  of  the  murder 
with  Andrei  Strekotin,  one  of  the  guards,  who  enjoyed 
Medvedev's  friendship  and  had  been  selected  by  him  to  stand 
at  the  lower-floor  machine-gun  post  during  the  '  execution.' 
This  same  Strekotin  also  related  his  observations  to  one  of 
his  brother-guards  named  Letemin,  arrested  later  and  found 
to  be  in  possession  of  a  whole  collection  of  valuables  belonging 
to  the  family  and  Alexis'  spaniel  Joy  (afterwards  brought  to 
England).  Letemin's  version  agreed  with  Proskuriakov's 
rendering  of  the  Strekotin  eye-^vitness  account.  What  is  still 
more  important,  Proskuriakov  heard  also  Medvedev  relate 
the  story  of  the  killing. 

Medvedev  told  it  to  all  the  guards  who,  with  Proskuriakov, 
were  washing  the  floor  :  '  Pashka  (Paval — i.e.,  Medvedev) 
himself  related  that  he  had  loosed  off  two  or  three  bullets  at 
the  gosukar  (the  lord — i.e.,  the  Tsar)  and  at  other  persons. 
...   I  am  telling  the  honest  truth.    He  did  not  say  anything 


CALVARY  95 

t  all  about  his  not  having  fired  himself  on  account  of  being 
3nt  outside  to  listen  to  the  shots.    .    .    .   That  is  a  lie  !  ' 


One  pathetic  incident  escaped  the  notice  of  all  these  witnesses, 
he  Grand  Duchess  Anastasia  took  with  her  a  King  Charles 
paniel,  carrying  it  in  her  arms  into  the  death-room.  The 
orpse  of  little  Jemmy  was  found  above  a  heap  of  cinders — 
11  that  remained  of  the  family  that  had  loved  her  and  shared 
dth  her  their  meagre  fare.  The  murderers  had  knocked  the 
lithful  friend  on  the  head  and  thrown  the  body  down  the 
-on-pit  without  troubling  to  burn  it.  Even  in  her  death  the 
ttle  dog  watched  over  them,  and  her  mangled  remains,  still 
ecognizable,  brought  final  unmistakable  proof  of  the  end  of 
he  family. 


CHAPTER  X 

'  WITHOUT  TRACE ' 

THERE  has  probably  not  been  another  instance  in  the 
whole  history  of  crime  of  precautions  to  escape  de- 
tection half  so  elaborate  as  in  the  Romanov  murder  case. 
All  sorts  of  subterfuges  have  been  tried  by  lesser  criminals 
with  more  or  less  success.     Here  every  ruse  was  combined. 

The  murderers  carried  out  the  following  comprehensive 
programme :  (i)  They  gave  out  a  false  announcement  of 
the  '  execution  '  ;  (2)  they  destroyed  the  bodies  ;  (3)  they 
invented  a  mock  funeral  ;  and  (4)  they  staged  a  mock  trial. 

The  thoroughness  of  the  methods  reminds  one  of  their 
masters,  the  Germans.  It  is  a  case  of  '  spuria s.'  However, 
in  this,  as  in  the  other  instance,  detection  followed.  The 
criminal  always  gives  himself  away.  The  very  complexity 
of  the  Soviet  '  precautions  '  proved  their  undoing. 

In  vain  they  drew  innumerable  herrings  of  their  own  colour 
over  the  trail,  suborning  false  witnesses  to  give  misleadinj^ 
information  about  the  whereabouts  of  the  bodies,  announcing 
officially  that  the  family  had  been  removed  to  '  a  safe  place  ' 
etc.     Sokolov  has  run  them  into  the  open. 

i|c  :)c  :(c  %  4: 

The  murder  accomplished,  all  the  bodies  were  carried 
into  the  courtyard  and  placed  on  the  waiting  lorry.  The 
corpses  were  not  subjected  to  a  thorough  search — as  we 
shall  see — because  Yurovsky  was  anxious  to  get  away  from 
the  city  before  daybreak.     They  were  rolled  up  in  old  coats 

96 


'WITHOUT  TRACE'  97 

ind  covered  with  mats  to  conceal  the '  cargo  '  from  prying  eyes. 
^ankel  Yurovsky,  Ermakov  and  Vaganov  went  with  them. 

As  soon  as  they  had  gone,  Medvedev  summoned  the  Russians 
o  '  wash  up.'  They  had  not  been  trusted  to  do  the  other 
vork,  and  Yankel  had  even  deprived  them  of  their  revolvers — ■ 
he  '  Letts  '  had  their  own — perhaps  because  he  did  not 
eel  quite  sure  how  they  might  behave  during  the  murder, 
i^ven  now,  Medvedev,  his  henchman,  called  up  the  Sysert 
vorkmen — his  own  particular  friends— to  remove  the  tell- 
ale  traces  of  the  crime.  They  washed  and  swabbed  the 
loor  and  the  walls  in  the  death-chamber  and  in  the  other 
00ms  through  which  the  bodies  had  been  borne.  (So  much 
)lood  had  flowed  that  the  marks  of  the  red-stained  swab  were 
listinctly  visible  a  year  later  when  I  visited  Ipatiev's  house, 
.nd  experts  found  unmistakable  evidence  of  its  being  human 
)lood.)     The  stones  in  the  courtyard  were  also  scoured. 

Meanwhile  the  lorry,  with  its  tragic  burden,  was  making 
ts  way  to  the  appointed  place  in  the  woods,  a  remote  corner 
)f  some  disused  iron-mines,  once  the  property  of  Countess 
^adezhda  Alexeievna  Stenbok-Fermor  and  now  of  the  Verkh- 
'setsky  Works.  This  place  is  situated  north-east  of  the  Perm 
ind  Ural  railway  lines,  about  eleven  miles  out  of  the  city,  near 
he  forest  road  leading  to  the  village  of  Koptiaki. 

Ermakov  (military  komisar  for  the  district)  placed  a  cordon 
)f  Red  Guards  all  round  the  wood.  During  that  and  the 
wo  following  days  and  nights  all  passage  through  it  was 
topped.  As  will  be  seen  later,  this  '  precaution  '  defeated 
ts  purpose. 

H<  :H  >|(  ^  H( 

Let  us  return  for  a  few  days  to  Ekaterinburg.  Yankel 
ifurovsky  had  reappeared  in  the  death-house  in  the  morning 
)f  July  17.  None  of  the  Russian  guards  knew  where  he 
lad  been.     Medvedev  had  heard  vaguely  that  he  had  '  gone 

G 


98    THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  THE  ROMANOVS 

to  the  woods.'  At  the  same  time  there  appeared  the  reprieved 
thief  Beloborodov  and  his  master,  Isai  Goloshchekin. 

The  movables  belonging  to  the  murdered  family  went  to 
satisfy  their  rapacious  instincts.  Some  of  the  witnesses  des- 
cribe tables  laden  with  precious  stones,  jewellery,  and  all  sorts 
of  other  articles  scattered  about  the  Commandant's  room. 
Everything  had  been  ransacked,  and  what  was  not  found  to 
be  worth  keeping  was  thrown  away  or  destroyed  in  the  fire- 
places, which  were  blazing  despite  the  summer  heat. 

Yurovsky  and  Goloshchekin  travelled  by  motor-car  to  the 

woods  on  the  17th,  i8th  and  19th,  remaining  for  many  hours 

— in  fact  whole  days — at  the  iron-pits.      But  all  this  time  the 

sentries  were  on  duty  outside  the  death-house  as  if  nothing 

had  happened,  so  that  the   people  should  suspect  nothing. 

They  were  removed  only  on  the  fourth  day,  when  the  cordon 

around  the  wood  was  also  raised. 

***** 

Only  then  (on  July  20)  was  the  announcement  made  at 
Red  meetings  and  in  official  proclamations  that  '  Nicholas 
the  Sanguinary  '  had  been  executed.  The  news  was  simul- 
taneously transmitted  by  the  wireless  stations  of  the  Bolshevist 
Government,  and  appeared  in  The  Times  of  July  22  (1918) 
in  the  following  form  : — 

At  the  first  session  of  the  Central  Executive  Committee  elected  by 
the  Fifth  Congress  of  the  Councils  a  message  was  made  public,  received 
by  direct  wire  from  the  Ural  Regional  Council,  concerning  the  shooting 
of  the  ex-Tsar,  Nicholas  Romanov. 

Recently  Ekaterinburg,  the  capital  of  the  Red  Ural,  was  seriously 
threatened  by  the  approach  of  the  Czecho-Slovak  bands.  At  the  same 
time  a  counter-revolutionary  conspiracy  was  discovered,  having  for 
its  object  the  wresting  of  the  tyrant  from  the  hands  of  the  Council's 
authority  by  armed  force.  In  view  of  this  fact,  the  President  of  the 
Ural  Regional  Council  decided  to  shoot  the  ex-Tsar,  Nicholas  Romanov. 
This  decision  was  carried  out  on  July  16. 

The  wife  and  son  of  Romanov  have  been  sent  to  a  place  of  security. 
Documents  concerning  the  conspiracy  which  were  discovered  have 
been  forwarded  to  Moscow  by  a  special  messenger. 

It  had  been  recently  decided  to  bring  the  ex-Tsar  before  a  tribunal, 
to  be  tried  for  his  crimes  against  the  people,  and  only  later  occurrences 


'WITHOUT  TRACE'  99 

ed  to  delay  in  adopting  this  course.  The  Presidency  of  the  Central 
executive  Committee,  after  having  discussed  the  circumstances  which 
;ompelled  the  Ural  Regional  Council  to  take  the  decision  to  shoot 
■Nicholas  Romanov,  decided  as  follows  :  The  Russian  Central  Execu- 
ive  Committee,  in  the  persons  of  the  Presidium,  accept  the  decision 
)f  the  Ural  Regional  Council  as  being  regular. 

The  Central  Executive  Committee  has  now  at  its  disposal  extremely 
mportant  material  concerning  the  Nicholas  Romanov  affair  :  his  own 
liaries,  which  he  kept  almost  to  the  last  days  ;  the  diaries  of  his  wife 
ind  children  ;  his  correspondence,  amongst  which  are  letters  by  Gre- 
gory Rasputin  to  Romanov  and  his  family.  All  these  materials  will 
DC  examined  and  published  in  the  near  future. 

Every  word  of  this  official  statement  is  important,  for 
^very  phrase  contains  a  lie,  and  every  lie  shows  up  in  more 
glaring  colours  the  diabolical  nature  of  the  plot  hatched  and 
:arried  out  by  Yankel  Sverdlov  and  his  tools  and  accomplices. 
[  take  the  falsehoods  seriatim  :  (i)  The  message  made  public 
it  the  Tsik  as  coming  from  the  Ural  sovdep  was  in  reality 
:oncocted  by  Sverdlov  ;  (2)  the  Czechs  entered  Ekaterinburg 
3n  the  25th,  nine  days  after  the  '  execution,'  and  there  was 
no  armed  plot  ;  (3)  the  Presidium  of  the  Ural  sovdep  did 
not  '  decide '  to  shoot  the  ex-Tsar,  for  that  '  decision ' 
was  dictated  from  Moscow ;  (4)  the  '  wife  and  son  '  were 
not  sent  to  '  a  place  of  security,'  but  were  basely  murdered  ; 
(5)  no  '  later  occurrences  '  supervened  that  could  by  any 
stress  of  the  imagination  be  construed  into  a  justification 
for  not  bringing  the  ex-Tsar  before  a  tribunal,  even  supposing 
there  had  ever  been  any  real  intention  to  do  so  (as  a  matter 
of  fact,  this  story  of  a  '  tribunal '  was  invented)  ;  (6)  the 
Imperial  correspondence  taken  with  other  '  loot  '  ^  from  the 
murdered  Family  has  not  been  pubUshed  to  this  day. 

1  Up  to  date  (August,  1920),  the  only  information  that  has  reached 
the  world  respecting  the  Imperial  Family 's  private  papers,  removed  to 
Moscow  after  their  death,  is  contained  in  three  short  telegrams  pub- 
lished in  The  Times  of  August  16,  August  28  and  September  28,  1918. 

The  first  gives  an  extract  of  the  Tsar's  diary  for  March  2-15,  the  day 
of  his  abdication  at  Pskov  : — 

'  General  Ruzsky  came  this  morning  and  read  to  me  a  long  conversa- 
tion which  he  had  had  on  the  telephone  with   Rodzianko,  according 


100       THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  THE  ROMANOVS 

Here  is  a  translation  of  the  official  announcement  as  it 
was  made  to  the  people  of  Ekaterinburg  : — 

Decision 
of  the  Presidium  of  the  Regional  Soviet  of  Workmen's,  Peasants'  and 
Redguards'  Deputies  of  the  Ural. 

In  view  of  the  fact  that  Czecho-Slovak  bands  are  threatening  the 
Red  capital  of  the  Urals,  Ekaterinburg  ;  in  view  also  that  the  fact 
that  the  crowned  hangman  {paldch)  may  escape  the  people's  assizes  (a 
Whiteguard  plot  to  capture  the  whole  Romanov  family  has  been  dis- 
covered), the  Presidium  of  the  Regional  Soviet  in  fulfilment  of  the  will 
of  the  revolution  has  decided  {postanovil)  that  the  former  Tsar,  Nicholas 
Romanov,  guilty  before  the  people  of  innumerable  sanguinary  crimes, 
shall  be  shot. 

On  the  night  of  the  i6th  to  the  17th  of  July,  the  decision  (postanov- 
lenie)  of  the  Regional  Soviet  was  carried  into  execution. 

to  which  the  situation  at  Petrograd  is  such  that  a  Cabinet  of  members 
of  the  Duma  will  be  unable  to  do  anything  because  against  it  are  fight- 
ing the  Socialist  Parties  in  the  shape  of  workmen's  committees.  My 
abdication  is  necessary.  Ruzsky  has  transmitted  this  conversation  to 
General  Headquarters,  and  Alexeiev  passed  it  on  to  all  the  Comman- 
ders-in-Chief. At  12.30  came  answers  from  all,  the  sense  of  which  is 
that,  to  save  Russia  and  keep  the  Army  at  the  front  quiet,  I  must  make 
up  my  mind  to  this  step.  I  have  consented.  From  G.H.Q.  they 
have  sent  a  draft  of  a  manifesto.  In  the  evening  arrived  from  Petro- 
grad Guchkov  and  Shulgin,with  whom  I  had  a  long  talk,  and  handed 
them  the  signed  manifesto,  as  altered  (i.e.,  renouncing  the  Tsarevich's 
rights  as  well — the  Tsar's  own  decision).  At  i  o'clock  in  the  morning 
left  Pskov  with  a  heavy  feeling,  due  to  all  I  have  lived  through.  Am 
surrounded  by  treachery,  cowardice  and  deceit.' 

The  second  reproduces  a  letter  dated  January  14,  1916,  from  the 
Empress  Marie  to  '  Niki,'  complaining  of  Witte's  delay  in  summon- 
ing the  Duma,  bids  the  Tsar  be  strong,  congratulating  him  on  his  '  new 
spirit.'  On  April  5  (at  Tsarskoe)  the  Tsar  in  his  diary  speaks  of  pre- 
parations to  go  to  England,  and  says  that  news  of  this  proposal  was 
communicated  to  him  by  Prince  Lvov  and  Kerensky. 

The  third  merely  enumerates  the  other  documents  seized  by  the 
Soviet  :  '  The  diaries  of  the  Empress  and  her  daughters,  notes  by 
the  Tsarevich,  over  5,000  letters  of  the  correspondence  of  the  Tsar 
with  his  wife,  with  the  Kaiser  and  other  sovereigns,  with  Rasputin 
and  divers  official  personages,  also  with  his  father  Alexander  III 
between  1877  and  1894.' 

Lastly,  the  Manchester  Guardian  (of  July  i,  1920)  published  from  its 
Moscow  correspondent  a  summary  of  Alexandra's  letters  to  Nicholas 
II,  copies  of  which  (the  originals  having  disappeared)  had  been  secretly 
lent  to  him  by  a  member  of  the  Soviet  Government.  The  extracts 
quoted  by  him  do  not  shed  any  new  light  on  her  life  and  character. 


'WITHOUT  TRACE'  loi 

The  family  of  Romanov  has  been  transferred  from  Ekaterinburg 
;o  another  and  safer  place. 
The  Presidium  of  the  Reg.  Soviet  of  W.,  P.,  and  R.  Dep.  of  the  Ural. 

Decision 

jf  the  Presidium  of  the  All-Russian  Centr.  Ex.  Com.  of  i8th  July,  A.C. 
The  All-Russian  Centr.  Ex.  Com.  of  Soviets  of  W.,  P.,  R.  and  Cossack 
Deputies  in  the  person  of  its  Presidium  approves  the  action  of  the 
Presidium  of  the  Reg.  Sov.  of  the  Ural. 

The  President  of  the  Tsik,  Y.  Sverdlov. 

The  discrepancies  between  the  Moscow  and  the  Ekaterin- 
burg announcements  are  interesting.  The  date  of  the  Tsik's 
'  decision  '  was  kept  secret  for  two  days  after  its  ostensible 
issue.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  whole  murder  had  been  directed 
from  Moscow,  and  even  the  text  of  the  '  announcement  '  had 
been  previously  approved  by  Sverdlov,  so  it  is  not  surprising 
that  Beloborodov  disregarded  dates.  But  the  real  reason  was 
that  the  Red  chieftains  feared  the  people  and,  above  all,  sought 
to  obscure  the  facts. 

I  now  return  to  the  woods.  On  the  17th,  i8th  and  19th 
large  quantities  of  petrol  and  sulphuric  acid  were  taken  from 
the  city  to  the  iron-pits  ;  at  least  150  gallons  of  the  former 
and  II  pouds  (400  lb.)  of  the  latter.  Ekaterinburg  being 
the  centre  of  the  platinum  industry  required  large  stocks 
of  sulphuric  acid  to  generate  the  intense  [heat  necessary  for 
melting  this  hardest  of  metals.  The  Komisar  of  Supplies  was 
Volkov,  ex-passenger  in  Lenin's  German  train.  He  it  was 
who  furnished  the  acid  to  Yurovsky  as  his  friend  Sverdlov's 
agent.  (I  remember  I  wanted  to  order  a  platinum  ring  at 
a  local  jeweller's  during  my  stay  in  the  city.  He  could  not 
carry  out  the  order  because  there  was  no  sulphuric  acid  '  since 
the  previous  year.') 

There  is  not  the  shadow  of  a  doubt  as  to  what  happened 
around  the  iron-pit,  as  the  reader  will  convince  himself  after 
reading  the  next  chapter.     Yurovsky's  acolytes   cut  up  the 


102       THE   LAST   DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

bodJ.es,  steeped  them  in  petrol,  and  burned  them.      The  sul- 
phuric acid  was  used  to  dissolve  the  larger  bones. 

I  have  spoken  of  the  mock  funeral  invented  by  the  murderers 
to  deceive  public  opinion  in  Russia  and  abroad.  Here  is  the 
telegram  that  appeared  in  the  Press  on  September  23, 1918  : — 

Amsterdam,  Sept.  22. — According  to  a  telegram  from  Moscow,  the 
Izvestua  gives  the  following  description  of  the  obsequies  of  the  ex-Tsar, 
which,  according  to  newspaper  reports,  were  solemnly  carried  out  by 
troops  of  the  People's  Army  {sic)  at  Ekaterinburg. 

'  The  body  of  the  ex-Tsar,  which  had  been  buried  in  a  wood  at  the 
place  of  execution,  was  exhumed,  the  grave  having  been  found  through 
information  supplied  by  persons  who  were  acquainted  with  the  cir- 
cumstances of  the  execution.  The  exhumation,  says  the  Soviet  jour- 
nal, took  place  in  the  presence  of  many  representatives  of  the  supreme 
ecclesiastical  authorities  in  Western  Siberia,  the  local  clergy,  and  dele- 
gates from  the  People's  Army,  Cossacks,  and  Czecho-Slovaks.  The 
body  was  placed  in  a  zinc  coffin,  encased  in  a  costly  covering  of  Siberian 
cedar  and  the  coffin  was  exposed  in  the  Cathedral  at  Ekaterinburg 
under  a  guard  of  honour  composed  of  the  chief  commanders  of  the 
People's  Army.  The  body  will  be  temporarily  buried  in  a  special 
sarcophagus  at  Omsk.' 

Comment  is  superfluous.  The  fourth  and  last  of  the  '  pre- 
cautions '  against  conviction  followed  a  year  later,  perhaps 
under  stress  of  circumstances,  but  certainly  without  any  regard 
for  the  Soviet's  own  previous  announcements. 

Here  it  is  : — 

On  September  17,  1919,  in  the  House  of  the  Executive  Committeeof 
the  Soviet  at  Perm,  the  Bolshevists  brought  to  trial  twenty-eight  persons 
arrested  on  the  accusation  of  having  murdered  the  Tsar  and  his  family. 
The  following  report  of  the  proceedings  is  taken  from  the  Bolshevist 
paper  Pravda  : — 

'  The  Revolutionary  Tribunal  has  considered  the  case  of  the  murder 
of  the  late  Tsar,  Nicholas  Romanov,  his  wife,  the  Princess  of  Hesse, 
their  daughters  Olga  (Tatiana),  Marie  and  Anastasia,  and  their  suite. 
In  all  eleven  persons  were  assassinated.  Of  the  twenty-eight  persons 
accused  three  were  members  of  the  Ekaterinburg  So\det — Grusinov, 
Yakhontov  and  Malutin  ;  among  the  accused  were  also  two  women, 
Maria  Apraksina  and  Elizaveta  Mironova.  The  account  of  the  mur- 
der as  gathered  from  the  material  under  the  consideration  of  the  Revolu- 
tionary Tribunal  is  as  follows  : — 

'  The  Tsar  and  all  the  members  of  his  entourage  were  shot: — no  mock- 
ery and  no  cruelties  took  place.  Yakhontov  admitted  that  he  had 
organized  the  murder  in  order  to  throw  the  discredit  of  the  crime  on 


'WITHOUT  TRACE'  103 

he  Soviet  authorities,  whose  adversary  he  became  after  having  joined 
he  Socialist  revolutionaries  of  the  Left  Wing.     The  plan  of  murdering 
he  Tsar  was  conceived  during  the  latter's  stay  at  Tobolsk,  but  the 
Tsar  was  too  strictly  watched.     In  Ekaterinburg,  when  the  Czecho- 
slovak troops   were   approaching  the  town,   the   Soviet    authorities 
vere  panic-stricken  to  such  a  degree  that  it  was  easy  for  him  to  avail 
limself  of  his  position  as  chairman  of  the  Extraordinary  Commission 
;  for  combating  counter-revolution)  and  to  give  the  order  to  murder 
he  Tsar  and  his  family.     Yakhontov  admitted  that  he  personally 
participated  in  the  murder,  and  that  he  took  upon  himself  the  respon- 
iibility  for  it.     He,  however,  said  that  he  was  not  responsible  for  the 
obbery  of  the  belongings  of  the  Tsar's  family.     According  to  his  de- 
position. Tsar  Nicholas  said  before  he  died,  "  For  the  murder  of  the 
Tsar  Russia  will  curse  the  Bolshevists."     Grusinov  and  Malutin  stated 
;hat  they  did  not  know  anything  about  Yakhontov's  plans,  and  only 
;arried  out  his  orders.     Yakhontov  was  found  guilty  of  the  murder 
md  sentenced  to  death.     Grusinov,   Malutin,  Apraksina    and    Miro- 
lova  were  found  guilty  of  robbery  committed  on  the  murdered  mem- 
Ders  of  the  Tsar's  family.     They  were  sentenced  to  death  too.     The 
leath  sentence  was  carried  out  the  following  day. 

'  Several  objects  belonging  to  the  household  of  the  Tsar  were  dis- 
:overed  with  a  thief  named  Kiritshevsky,  who  stated  that  these  things 
had  been  given  to  him  by  a  man  named  Sorin,  who  was  the  chairman 
oi  the  Local  Extraordinary  Commission.  At  the  time  of  the  murder 
Sorin  was  the  commander  of  a  revolutionary  battalion.  Sorin  was  a 
personal  friend  of  Beloborodov,  who  also  participated  in  the  assassina- 
tion of  the  Emperor.' — Rossia  (Paris),  No.  i,  December  17,  1919.^ 

I  have  carefully  compared  the  names  given  above  with 
the  list  of  164  persons  mentioned  in  the  dossier  as  being  impli- 
cated or  even  suspected  of  having  acted  any  part  whatsoever 
in  the  tragedy  ;  I  have  perused  the  cognomens  of  the  twenty- 
four  members  of  the  Ekaterinburg  Sovdep  presidium.  There 
Ls  not  one  name  in  the  mock  trial  that  even  resembles  any 
3f  them  (one  cannot  possibly  identify  Yakhontov  with  Yurov- 
sky)  ;   the  very  charge  is  farcical  if  one  compares  this  report 

1  This  document  has  been  widely  quoted  by  Jewish  organizations 
:o  prove  that  the  murder  of  the  Tsar  was  not  carried  out  by  the  Bolshe- 
v^ists,  and  to  dispel  the  nation  of  a  '  racial  vendetta.'  Apropos  of 
•  his  document  a  London  daily  stated  (August  18,  1920)  :  '  In 
;he  interest  of  truth  it  must  be  here  said  that  the  Moscow  Central  Soviet 
Government  has  always  disclaimed  all  participation  [sic)  in  the  murder, 
explaining  that  its  intention  was  to  judge  Nicholas  II  publicly,  but 
aot  to  do  away  with  him  secretly  in  a  cellar.' 


104        THE   LAST  DAYS  OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

with  the  text  of  the  official  announcement  of  the  '  execution.' 
Alone  Beloborodov's  name  is  familiar.  He  was  nominally 
president  of  the  Ural  sovdep  at  the  time  of  the  murders. 
I  explained  his  real  position — that  of  a  mere  helot,  a  thieving 
workman,  kept  in  office  to  serve  as  a  screen  for  the  rulers 
of  Sovietdom.  After  the  murders  he  was  '  promoted  '  to 
the  Tsik,  the  highest  honour  of  Sovdepia.  But  they  do  not 
stand  on  ceremony  with  Russian  komisars  in  the  land  where 
Sverdlov  rules,  and  we  read  of  him  in  the  Pravda  as  being 
stigmatized  as  (i)  a  thief's  friend,  and  (2)  a  party  to  the  very 
murder  for  which  he  was  promoted — the  very  same  appalling 
crime  that  Sverdlov  had  ordained — the  stain  whereof  haunts 
the  chieftains  of  the  Soviet  like  a  Nemesis,  so  that  they  utter 
tilings  without  sense. 

Besides,  the  Soviet  of  Moscow  received  a  lion's  share  of  the 
loot  !  Between  July  20  and  22  it  was  taken  from  Ipatiev's 
house  and  removed  to  the  Red  metropolis.  The  Bolshevists 
were  fleeing  before  the  advance  of  the  Siberian  troops.  Yankel 
Yurovsky,  evidently  in  a  hurry  to  leave  Ekaterinburg,  took 
farewell  of  the  death-house  on  the  night  of  the  19th.  His 
driver  thus  describes  the  exodus.  That  night  he  had  by 
Yurovsky 's  orders  called  at  the  chrezvychaika,  and  thence 
conveyed  two  young  men,  one  of  them  a  Jew,  to  Ipatiev's 
house,  where  Yankel  was  waiting.  These  youths  went  into 
the  house  and  brought  out  seven  pieces  of  baggage,  among 
them  being  a  black  leather  trunk  covered  with  seals.  When 
he  had  taken  his  seat  in  the  vehicle,  Yurovsky  gave  his  orders 
to  the  young  men  :  '  Set  everything  to  rights.  Leave  twelve 
men  on  sentry  duty  and  send  the  remainder  to  the  station.' 

The  guard  at  Ipatiev's  house  remained  till  the  23rd,  but 
even  after  that,  on  the  24th  and  25th  some  of  the  Russian 
ex-warders  still  visited  the  house.  The  Whites  entered 
Ekaterinburg  on  the  25th,  and  occupied  the  house  on  the 
following  day. 


I'J.ATK   VI 


AT  THE   GANINA   MINE 

On  the  left,  Mr.  Sydney  Gibbes,  the  Tsaicvich's 
tutor  ;  on  the  rii^ht,  looking  down  the  shaft,  Mr. 
Robert  Wilton,  The  Times  Correspondent  (author 
of  this  narrative). 


THE   PYRE  AT  THE   BIRCH  TREE 

N.  A.  Sokolov,  General  Domontovnch  and  his 
A.D.C.  pose  at  the  limits  of  tlie  larger  pyre,  where 
most  of  the  bodies  and  clothing  were  cremated. 
Alongside  stands  the  tree  with  the  tell  -  tale 
inscription, 


''M-IbJ    e, 


Plate  VI 


fr w.i  fJd 

I^^^A    ■ry-.^M 

rw : 

::  ^ "  -^-^if  V*^ 

W  ^ 

^ 

i  ^  f^lH 

;^^k| 

llj..-3»ll^^l 

<ll1p 

fc  T'£L  P    I' 

/    ■  1     ■ 

'1 

^f 

li'^  i 

tM 

f  *).. 

^ 

v*a^t^^^     -A 

y!^^/\ '  -"^i 

AT  THE  GANINA  MINE 


THE  PYRE  AT  THE  BIRCH  TREE 


CHAPTER  XI 

'  MURDER   WILL  OUT  ' 

_TAVING  established,  with  the  evidence  of  accompHces 
•  -i-  and  of  the  death-house,  the  fact  that  a  murder  had 
;en  committed,  the  investigating  magistrate  had  to  find  the 
)dies  or  to  show  conclusively  what  had  become  of  them  ; 
herwise  the  whole  case  remained  in  doubt.  This  proved  to 
J  a  task  of  immense  difficulty. 

Suspicions  of  the  truth  were  rife  from  the  outset.  It  was 
lown  that  five  motor-lorries  had  been  requisitioned  ;  that  all 
id  been  absent  several  days  ;  that  two  had  carried  petrol, 
id  that  one  had  returned  covered  with  mud  and  gore.  Too 
any  persons  were  involved  to  conceal  the  truth  for  long  ; 
le  peasants  who  had  to  come  by  the  forest  road  from  Koptiaki 
Uage  at  once  detected  something  amiss,  and  quickly  drew 
leir  conclusions,  which  turned  out  to  be  correct.  But 
suspicions '  are  not  proof.   .    .    . 

4:  4s  H:  4:  4: 

Somewhere  within  the  purview  of  the  disused  iron-mine 
proof  '  was  obtainable — on  that  point  there  seemed  to  be 
0  doubt.  We  took  up  our  residence  in  the  wood — Sokolov, 
iterichs,  myself  and  others — and  remained  there  throughout 
le  late  spring  and  early  summer  of  1919.  We  descended  the 
line,  found  water  and  ice  and  a  floor.  We  searched  the 
•ound  and  scoured  the  woods,  living  from  day  to  day  in  alter- 
ite  hope  or  despair  of  settling  the  gruesome  mystery.  The 
oods  were  full  of  disused  workings,  each  easily  capable  of 
mcealing  what  we  sought. 

105 


io6       THE   LAST  DAYS  OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

Day  by  day  we  discovered  fresh  relics  around  the  pit  when 
the  bodies  had,  we  knew,  been  destroyed.  Sokolov  tirelessly 
passed  through  his  searching  examination  every  likely  witness 
not  a  peasant,  or  dachnik  (summer  resident),  or  railway  ser 
vant  that  had  been  anywhere  near  the  place  escaped  him. 

Slowly,  but  surely,  the  scope  of  possible  error    lessened 
We  had  got  weU  away  from  the  versions  carefully  sown  bj 
agents  of  Yurovsky,  who  remained  in  the  city,  that  the  bodie; 
had  been  buried  in  one  place,  then  re-buried  in  another. 
*  *  *  *  * 

One  of  the  witnesses  cited  in  the  preliminary  inquiry  (be 
fore  Sokolov  took  charge)  had  described  overhearing  a  conver 
sation  between  several  Bolshevists  about  the  bodies.  Th( 
speakers  were  said  to  be  :  Ermakov  (whom  we  know),  Mlysh 
kin,  Kostuzov,  Partin,  Krivtsov,  and  Levatnykh.  The\ 
spoke  cynically  of  feeling  the  corpses  while  they  were  stil 
warm.  Levatnykh  boasted  that  he  had  felt  the  Tsaritsa  anc 
that  he  '  could  now  die  in  peace.'  They  also  spoke  o 
'  valuables  sewn  in  their  clothes.' 

The  presumable  genuineness  of  these  confidences  misled  thi 
earlier  investigator  into  believing  their  other  statements  o 
perhaps  the  additions  made  to  them  by  the  spy,  who  may  hav( 
been  a  Red  agent — to  wit,  that  the  bodies  had  been  buriec 
in  various  places  round  the  city.  This  was  a  '  red  '  herrin/ 
that  unfortunately  drew  the  investigator  off  a  hot  trail.  Hi 
did  not  even  go  near  the  wood.  Had  he  done  so,  he  could  no 
have  helped  discovering  easily  then  what  we  had  such  diffi 
culty  in  finding  a  year  later.  His  excuse  had  been  that  th( 
wood  was  '  dangerous  '  on  account  of  Red  bands  ;  but  evei 
if  this  were  so,  he  could  have  deputed  a  less  timorous  person 
A  number  of  self-appointed  '  investigators  '  took  this  oppor 
tunity  of  '  gleaning  '  rehcs — perhaps  invaluable  clues. 
***** 

Extreme  measures  had  to  be  taken,  nothing  less  than  the 


m  ENVIRONS  OF  EKATERINBURG 

Showing  the  Road    by   which    the    bodies    were 
carried  and  pit  where  the  ashes  were   buried. 


[STANCES-    EKATERINBURG  to  PIT  =  il  MILES 
PIT  to  KOPTIAKI  =  3  MILES 


io8         THE   LAST   DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

complete  sifting  of  the  ground  within  the  area  of  destruction 
and  emptying  of  the  shafts  down  which  any  remains  could  hav 
been  thrown.  This  was  a  task  outside  the  province  of  an  in 
vestigating  magistrate.  Here  we  wanted  miners  with  pumpin; 
machinery,  woodsmen  and  surveyors  ;  above  ail  we  wante^ 
money. 

Thanks  to  Admiral  Koltchak  the  wherewithal  was  forth 
coming.  Indeed,  I  render  him  bare  justice  in  saying  tha 
without  his  stanch  personal  support  the  investigation  woul 
have  been  overwhelmed  long  ago  by  the  constant  intrigue 
of  the  Omsk  Government.  He  gave  the  money  out  of  hisow: 
funds,  because  the  grant  legally  authorized  by  him  was  '  hel< 
up  '  by  his  Ministers. 

Under  the  orders  and  supervision  of  General  Diterichs,  ; 
commando  of  White  Guards  was  formed  to  carry  out  th 
necessary  operations.  The  men  were  all  from  the  Urals — i.e. 
miners  and  peasants  versed  in  woodcraft.  Several  hundred 
of  them  camped  around  the  Ganina  Yama  (ditch),  situate< 
near  a  bend  in  the  road  to  Koptiaki,  not  a  hundred  paces  fron 
the  mine.  These  men  knew  what  they  were  working  for  an( 
put  their  shoulder  to  the  wheel  in  all  earnestness. 

But  we  had  to  leave  before  complete  success  had  crownei 
their  efforts.  Diterichs  received  the  summons  to  save  th 
armies.  I  went  with  him.  General  Domontovich,  a  ver 
gallant  soldier,  took  command  in  his  place.  (He  died  of  typhu 
during  the  retreat  and  was  buried  in  Chita  early  this  year 
'  Tsarstvie  nebesnoie.') 

Success  came  before  we  had  to  evacuate  Ekaterinburg.  Th< 
contents  of  the  shaft,  extracted  with  infinite  trouble,  set  a 
rest  for  ever  any  lingering  doubt  as  to  the  destruction  of  th' 
bodies.     Sokolov  had  his  '  proof.' 

***** 

Here  is  the  narrative  of  the  investigation.  It  is  a  good  com 
mentary  on  the  homely  saying,  '  Murder  will  out.' 


'MURDER  WILL  OUT'  109 

It  will  be  remembered  that  Ermakov  went  with  the  bodies 
Dm  the  death-house.  Now  Ermakov  lived  at  the  Verkh- 
etsk  Ironworks,  adjoining  the  city  and  situated  along  the 
ute  to  Koptiaki — i.e.,  north-east  of  Ekaterinburg.  The 
enbok-Fermor  Wood  lies  a  few  miles  beyond.  At  the  works 
"makov  found  a  detachment  of  his  Red  Guards  (he  was  mili- 
ry  komisar)  and  a  number  of  conveyances  ready  harnessed, 
le  whole  procession  moved  off  along  the  Koptiaki  road, 
lere  is,  indeed,  no  other  road  in  the  vicinity  practicable  for 
motor-lorry.  Vaganov,  the  other  regicide,  mounted  his 
)rse  and  acted  as  armed  escort  for  the  lorry. 
Shortly  after  three  o'clock  in  the  morning  (solar  time)  they 
ached  that  place  where  several  paths,  long  disused  and  grass- 
own,  turn  off  to  the  left  towards  Ganina  Yama.  Here  they 
■reed  a  way  through  the  undergrowth,  and  at  one  place 
sarly  upset  the  lorry  into  a  ditch.  The  mark  of  the  wheels 
as  still  visible  a  year  later,  and  alongside  lay  the  beam  which 
id  been  brought  from  the  disused  mine  to  jack  up  the  canted 
rry. 

Around  the  shafts  in  this  particular  place  the  grass  then 
lowed  no  trace  of  human  passage.  Koptiaki  villagers  did 
)t  come  that  way  as  a  rule.  The  place  had  been  well  selected, 
ut  the  murderers  forgot  the  habits  of  the  peasant,  especially 
'  the  ha3miakers  and  fisherfolk. 

Nastasia  Z.  left  the  village  at  dawn  with  her  son  and  daugh- 
T-in-law.  They  approached  the  gruesome  procession  just  as 
was  turning  off  the  road.  Two  horsemen  rode  up  to  them, 
ne  wore  a  sailor's  uniform.  Nastia  knew  him.  He  was  a 
erkh-Isetsk  resident — Vaganov.  The  latter  yelled  out : 
Furn  back  !  '  and  coming  abreast  of  the  peasant  cart  bran- 
.shed  a  revolver  at  Nastia 's  head.  Frightened,  the  peasant 
oman  pulled  her  horse  round  so  sliarply  that  the  cart  almost 
pset.     Vaganov  rode  alongside,  still  pointing  his  weapon  and 


no   THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  THE  ROMANOVS 

shouting, '  Don't  look  round,  or  I  shoot.  .  .  .  '     After  chasin, 
them  about  a  mile  towards  the  village,  Vaganov  rode  back. 

The  peasants  had  not  been  able  in  the  faint  light  to  make  ou 
clearly  what  was  behind  Vaganov.  '  Something  long  and  grej 
like  a  heap,'  was  all  that  they  could  distinguish.  The  bab 
(peasant  woman)  concluded  that  it  was  the  Red  Guard  arm 
marching  to  Koptiaki.  Urging  her  horse  onward,  she  immedi 
ately  roused  the  whole  village,  informing  the  muzhiks  that  th 
'army'  was  coming  'with  transport  and  artillery.'  The 
listened  in  consternation,  alarmed  chiefly  for  their  hay  cro|: 
An  army  coming  meant  fighting  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  her 
it  was  just  the  time  for  mowing.     The  hay  might  all  be  losi 

They  discussed  the  matter  long  and  passionately  :  then  som 
of  the  boldest  among  them,  headed  by  an  old  soldier,  set  o1 
to  investigate.  On  the  road  they  encountered  some  Austria; 
war  prisoners  who  were  haymaking,  and  asked  if  they  ha^ 
seen  the  army.  They  replied  that  quite  early,  while  the 
were  working  on  the  road,  some  Russian  Cossacks  had  ridde 
up  and  driven  them  away.  The  \allagers  became  all  the  mor 
curious  to  know  what  it  all  meant. 

Presently,  as  they  came  abreast  of  the  mine,  they  hear 
horses  neighing.  Coming  to  one  of  the  turnings  they  saw  tha 
the  grass  had  all  been  crushed  and  the  saplings  bent.  The 
were  on  the  point  of  following  this  strange  trail  when  out  ( 
the  wood  appeared  a  horseman  armed  with  sword,  revolve 
rifle  and  hand  grenades,  and  asked  them  what  they  wei 
doing.  The  muzhiks  put  on  a  bold  face,  although  badl 
frightened,  and  asked  if  the  tovarishch  (comrade)  would  kindl 
reassure  them,  because  the  whole  village  was  in  a  state  ( 
excitement. 

They  were  graciously  informed  that  there  was  no  cause  fc 
alarm.     *  Our  front  has  been  entered  at  several  points.    V^ 
are    merely   scouting  and   practising.      Do  not.  be   afraid 
you  hear  firing  !  '     They  had  a  friendly  smoke  together  an 


'MURDER  WILL  OUT'  iii 

en  the  muzhiks  departed.  They  had  scarcely  gone  when  a 
port  Hke  the  explosion  of  a  hand  grenade  was  heard,  and 
en  a  short  while  afterwards  another  explosion.  Soon  after 
eir  return  to  the  village  the  same  horseman  appeared,  '  to 
inquillize  them  all,'  as  he  explained. 

They  were  reassured  about  the  haymaking,  but  now  arose 
lother  matter.  Many  of  the  villagers  fished  in  the  large 
stsk  lake,  which  spreads  its  lovely  waters  in  front  of 
optiaki.  They  had  obtained  a  good  haul  that  night  and 
ust  take  it  into  the  city — it  was  market  day  (Wednesday) — 
id  in  the  hot  weather  fish  does  not  keep.  But  the  '  Russian 
)ssacks  '  were  inexorable. 

On  the  city  side  there  was  a  crowd  at  the  level  crossing 
'er  the  Ural  line  striving  to  get  to  Koptiaki,  which  being  a 
etty  place  attracted  many  summer  residents.  These  unfor- 
nates,  thus  '  stranded, '  waited  for  hours  and  hours  in  vain . 
)me  of  the  railway  servants  were  accommodated  with  '  ben- 
tie  '  from  the  casks  of  petrol  waiting  in  reserve.  The  stream 
fisher-folk  and  the  procession  of  dachniks  coming  and  going 
tabled  the  investigation  to  define  very  precisely  the  exact 
nits  of  the  cordon  placed  round  the  wood.  It  pointed  in 
le  direction — Ganina  Yama.  That  was  the  locality  that 
id  to  be  kept  from  prying  eyes. 

The  peasants  were  also  the  first  to  discover  the  place  where 
e  bodies  were  destroyed.  Their  evidence  afforded  immense, 
valuable  service  to  the  investigation ;  in  fact,  without 
icm  the  truth  might  never  have  been  established  owing  to 
e  earlier  mistakes  of  the  inquiry. 

***** 

As  soon  as  the  cordon  was  raised,  some  of  the  Koptiaki  men 
istened  to  the  spot  where  the  horses  had  neighed  and  the 
;tonations  had  been  heard.  They  had  thought  that  the  Red 
iiards  were  burying  arms.     The  ashes  around  the  pit  sug- 


112       THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

gested  something  else.  They  started  to  scrape  ;  soon  the 
found  a  cross  belonging  to  the  Empress  and  the  brass  buckle  c 
the  Tsarevich's  belt.  Some  instinct  prompted  them  to  jum 
to  the  conclusion  that  it  was  '  the  Tsar's/  although  they  kne\ 
nothing  of  the  murder. 

There  were  eight  of  the  muzhiks  standing  round  the  pi 
examining  with  awe  the  finds  that  they  had  made.  '  Boys 
said  one,  and  he  voiced  the  secret  thought  of  all,  '  it  is  jus 
this,  they  have  been  burning  Nicholas  here.  That  cross  ca 
belong  only  to  him.  And  that  buckle,  I  tell  you,  is  the  Tsan 
vich's.'  They  crossed  themselves  in  prayer  and  silently  cam 
away.  Needless  to  say,  these  honest  souls  promptly  handci 
over  the  relics  to  the  White  authorities. 

On  my  first  visit  to  the  burning-mound,  I  was  attracted  b^ 
an  inscription  carved  on  the  giant  birch  that  overhangs  on 
pyre.  It  read  :  '  T.  A.  Fesenko,'  and  the  date  '  July  ii 
1918,'  i.e.,  six  days  before  the  murder.  A  young  man  sa 
beside  the  tree.  He  was  a  stranger  to  me.  I  took  him  to  b 
one  of  Sokolov's  agents,  especially  as  outsiders  were  not  encour 
aged  to  hover  round  the  iron-pits.  I  was  looking  closely  a 
the  ground  to  note  where  the  bodies  had  been  burned  and  pic 
up  any  remaining  clues. 

The  stranger  exclaimed  :  '  You  will  have  to  look  ver; 
hard  !  '  I  thought  this  was  a  strange  remark ;  the  singed  an( 
scorched  appearance  of  the  ground  was,  indeed,  very  notice 
able  still,  although  nearly  a  year  had  passed.  But  I  encour 
aged  the  conversation,  suspecting  a  surprise.  The  strange 
proceeded  to  give  in  rather  excited  tones  his  conviction  tha 
the  story  of  the  bonfires  and  the  burning  of  the  bodies  was  al 
a  myth.  '  See  for  yourself  !  How  could  they  have  destroyec 
all  those  bodies  and  left  so  few  cinders  !  '  he  insisted. 

Of  course  I  did  not  enlighten  him  as  to  the  petrol  an< 
sulphuric  acid — which  so  powerfully  aided  the  work  of  ere 


'MURDER  WILL  OUT'  113 

lation — or  the  probable  scattering  of  the  ashes  around  and 
[own  the  pit.  I  went  straight  to  Sokolov,  who  was  not  far 
way,  and  told  him  what  the  young  man  had  said.  '  That 
nust  be  Fesenko,'  was  his  remark.  We  walked  up  to  the 
ilace.  The  stranger  had  resumed  his  seat  beside  the  birch 
nd  appeared  to  be  suffering.  Sokolov  continued  :  '  Yes, 
hat's  the  man.'  He  brought  Yurovsky  to  this  place.  He  is 
list  a  young  fool  of  a  Bolshevist.  Yurovsky  took  him  because 
e  was  in  charge  of  this  wood,  and  he  was  so  proud  of  escorting 
L  komisar  that  he  recorded  the  visit  by  carving  his  name  and 
[ate  on  the  tree. 

'  Why  then  is  he  at  large  ?  '  I  queried. 

'  Well,  the  fact  is,  we  hope  he  may  give  himself  or  some  of 
he  murderers  away.  We  arrested  him  and  let  him  go.  He 
aunts  this  place,  and  is  ever  trying  to  prove  that  nothing 
ould  have  happened  here  ! '  I  felt  rather  sorry  for  the  poor 
/retch.  Perhaps  he  had  not  suspected  Yurovsky's  purpose. 
.^urovsky  did  not  confide  such  secrets.  At  all  events  I  gave 
im  the  benefit  of  the  doubt,  feeling  sure  that  there  would  be 
o  peace  for  his  tortured  mind  in  this  life. 

But  Sokolov  dispelled  my  sympathy  :  '  The  fact  is,  he 
ouches  a  sore  point.  Where  are  the  cinders  ?  That  is  the 
uestion.  We  have  found  too  few.  They  must  be  hidden 
omewhere.  Now  Fesenko  could  not  possibly  have  discovered 
his  weak  point  in  our  armour  himself.  He  has  probably  been 
•ut  up  to  it  by  the  murderers  or  their  spies.  That  is  why  we 
2t  him  wander  about.'  However,  Fesenko  did  not  give  away 
imself  or  his  associates. 

%  :|:  :{;  H<  H( 

Not  a  hundred  paces  away  from  the  pyres  I  noticed  a  little 
learing  with  a  comfortable  tree-stump.  Here  one  could  sit 
[uietly,  unseen  by  the  people  at  the  pit's  mouth.  A  pleasant 
irch  and  pine  grove  stretched  its  fragrant,  sonorous  maze 
•etween  this  natural  arbour  and  the  scene  of  grisly  horror. 

H 


114         THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

Here  on  this  stump  Yurovsky  had  sat  while  his  henchmen 
performed  the  last  act  in  the  tragedy.  Beside  this  seat  we 
found  (a  year  later)  egg-shells — the  remains  of  the  fifty  eggs 
ordered  by  Yurovsky  from  the  nuns,  ostensibly  for  the  Roman- 
ovs. But  this  fare  had  not  sufficed  for  the  dainty  komisar. 
There  were  also  chicken-bones.  There  were  also  torn  pages 
from  a  treatise  on  anatomy  in  German  (Yurovsky  was  only  a 
felcher ;  he  knew  little  about  anatomy).  And  in  order  that 
there  should  be  no  doubt  as  to  the  origin  of  these  various  clues, 
it  so  happened  that  Yurovsky  left  behind  a  newspaper  pub- 
lished in  German  at  the  very  period  under  discussion,  full 
of  abuse  of  the  Czechs,  accusing  them  of  servile  subserviency 
to  the  Entente  High  Command,  and  treating  the  war  as  a 
slaughter  arranged  in  the  interest  of  capital. 

4c  :ic  rf:  :{(  4( 

Reference  has  been  made  in  preceding  chapters  to  the  man- 
ner in  which  the  Grand  Duchesses  had  concealed  their  jewels. 
Two  of  their  confidential  servitors.  Miles.  Tutelberg  and  Erz- 
berg,  came  to  our  camp  in  the  woods  to  identify  the  relics. 
They  had  sewn  up  the  bodices,  buttons,  hats,  and  other  recep- 
tacles, and  knew  precisely  what  jewels  were  on  the  persons  of 
the  victims  when  the  murder  took  place,  it  being  obvious  that 
during  their  residence  in  Ipatiev's  house  none  of  the  prisoners 
would  venture  to  undo  or  change  these  receptacles,  as  they  were 
under  constant  observation.  The  Grand  Duchesses  Olga, 
Tatiana  and  Anastasia  each  wore  double -quilted  bodices 
stuffed  with  jewels  weighing  several  pounds.  Olga  carried  a 
satchel  round  her  neck  with  some  special  gems  and  wore  several 
ropes  of  pearls  concealed  across  her  shoulders.  The  manner 
in  which  the  concealment  had  been  effected  misled  the  first 

superficial  search  of  the  bodies  in  the  house. 

***** 

We  now  trace  the  gruesome  picture  of  the  cutting  up  and 

destruction  of  the  bodies.     First  of  all  the  clothes  were  partly 


'MURDER  WILL  OUT'  115 

removed.  The  bodices  at  once  aroused  attention  owing  to 
their  weight.  The  '  ghouls  '  began  to  tear  them  apart, 
rheir  contents  were  spilled  on  to  the  ground,  and  some  of 
the  things  rolled  into  the  grass  or  were  trodden  into  the  soil 
3f  the  mound. 

But  they  did  not  trouble  to  denude  the  corpses  completely, 
md  began  hacking  them  in  pieces  on  the  clay  mound  that 
surrounded  the  pit's  mouth,  smiting  and  severing  at  the  same 
;ime  some  of  the  valuables  that  still  remained.  The  large 
diamonds,  which  had  been  camouflaged  as  buttons,  have  dis- 
ippeared  with  the  exception  of  one.  They  may  have  been 
Durned  with  the  clothes  of  the  Grand  Duchesses  or  have  been 
.ooted.  One  was  found  trampled  into  the  clay  beside  the 
pyre.  Here  also  was  found  the  Empress's  emerald  pectoral 
:ross.  Some  of  the  bullets  dropped  out  of  the  bodies  during 
[he  chopping,  others  while  the  limbs  were  in  the  flames. 

Two  pyres  were  used — one  near  the  shaft,  the  other  near  the 
birch  tree.  After  the  cremation  had  been  completed  the  cin- 
ders of  both  pyres  were  collected  and  thrown  down  the  shaft 
oi  the  mine,  which  had  been  previously  prepared.  Ice  remains 
throughout  the  summer  in  deep  workings  like  this  one.  It 
tiad  been  tested  by  means  of  hand  grenades,  and  had  then 
been  smashed  in  order  that  the  cinders,  etc.,  should  sink  to 
the  bottom  of  the  water.  Over  them  a  flooring  had  been 
adjusted  and  anchored. 

Innumerable  witnesses  saw  the  coming  and  the  going  of  the 
lorries.  The  '  ghouls  '  remained  in  the  wood  till  their  task 
was  done.  Their  shelters  and  camps  were  discovered.  They 
were  seen  leaving — rolling  about  in  the  lorry,  like  men  tired 
to  death. 

The  flooring  had  deceived  all  search  in  the  mine.  Only  when 
the  operations  that  I  have  described  above  had  brought  all 
the  core  of  the  shaft  to  the  surface  everything  was  explained. 
The  corpse  of  little  Jemmy  lay  just  under  the  false  floor.     It 


ii6       THE   LAST  DAYS  OF  THE  ROMANOVS 

had  been  preserved  by  the  ice.     When  good  Domontovich 

made  this  discovery  he  immediately  telegraphed  to  us.     We 

all  realized  that  the  mystery  of  the  bodies  had  been  solved. 

***** 

There  were  literally  hundreds  of  clues  now  available.  Sokolov 
busied  himself  classifying  and  identifying  them.  It  would  be 
quite  impossible  to  enumerate  them  all.  Several  volumes  of 
the  dossier  are  devoted  to  it.  There  are  the  proces-verbaux 
of  each  *  find '  and  each  identification.  I  give  here  a  brief 
but  accurate  summary  of  the  clues  : — 

(i)  A  large  diamond  of  the  finest  water,  identified  as  forming  a 
pendant  to  a  necklace  belonging  to  the  Empress,  valued  at  20,000 
gold  roubles  ;   slightly  touched  by  fire. 

(2)  An  emerald  cross  belonging  to  Alexandra,  identified  as  a  present 
from  the  Empress  Marie,  found  bj?^  experts  to  be  of  high  workmanship, 
valued  at  2,000  gold  roubles  ;    broken  and  singed. 

(3)  A  pearl  earring  untouched,  having  been  thrown  with  some  earth 
down  the  shaft,  recognized  as  one  of  a  pair  always  worn  bj;-  the  Empress, 
declared  to  be  extremely  fine  workmanship,  valued  at  3,000  gold 
roubles. 

(4)  Four  fragments  of  a  large  pearl  and  settings,  declared  to  be  a  pair 
to  (3). 

(5)  Two  fragments  of  emerald  declared  by  experts  to  have  formed 
part  of  a  large  and  very  fine  stone,  severed  by  some  hard  and  heavy 
object  and  trampled. 

(6)  Eleven  fragments  of  emerald. 

(7)  Thirteen  round  pearls,  all  of  high  quality,  as  belonging  to 
one  rope. 

(8)  Five  fragments  of  pearl,  as  belonging  to  one  large  gem  of  finest 
orient,  severed  by  a  heavy  weight  or  trampling. 

(9)  Another  broken  pearl  of  high  quality. 

(10)  Two  fine  brilliants,  declared  to  have  formed  part  of  an  orna- 
ment of  large  size. 

(11)  Portion  of  a  large  diamond  silver-mounted  ornament,  bearing 
traces  of  heavy  blows. 

(12  to  21)  Precious  stones — diamonds,  sapphires,  rubies,  almandine 
and  topazes — and  settings,  all  bearing  marks,  as  experts  show,  of 
having  been  crushed  or  severed  by  heavy  or  cutting  objects. 

(22  to  28)  Articles  and  appurtenances  of  apparel,  including  pieces 
of  cloth  identified  as  parts  of  the  Empress's  skirt,  the  Tsarevich's 
military  overcoat  and  Botkin's  overcoat  ;  six  sets  of  corset  steels 
(the  Empress  would  not  permit  her  daughters  or  the  servants  to   go 


'  MURDER  WILL  OUT  '  117 

wdthout  corsets,  neither  would  she  herself  ;  Demidova  wore  them  also — 
chat  would  make  exactly  six)  ;  metallic  parts  of  corset  suspenders  and 
[ragments  of  silk  and  elastic  ;  the  Tsarevich's  belt  buckle  ;  the  Tsar's 
belt  buckle,  both  identified  ;  three  paste  shoe  buckles  of  first-class 
workmanship,  one  identified  as  the  Empress's,  two  as  belonging  to  the 
3rand  Duchesses  ;  a  large  number  of  buttons,  hooks  and  eyes,  etc., 
some  identified  as  belonging  to  the  Empress's  dress,  also  military  but- 
tons corresponding  with  the  uniforms  and  caps  of  the  Tsar  and  Tsare- 
vich,  as  made  for  them  by  the  court  tailor  in  Petrograd.  The  appur- 
tenances of  female  costume  were  such  as  the  court  dressmaker  used  for 
the  family.  There  were  also  parts  of  apparel  such  as  were  used  by 
che  tailor  who  dressed  the  court  servants.  The  footgear  remnants 
showed  strong  action  by  fire.  Experts  were  able,  however,  to  note 
that  they  included  cork  and  fine  brass  screws,  both  evidences  of  high- 
:lass  articles.  In  their  opinion  the  remnants  might  well  represent 
seven  pairs  of  boots. 

(29  to  41)  Exhibits  of  equal  if  not  greater  interest.  Among  them 
may  be  cited  :  A  pocket-case  in  which  the  Tsar  always  carried  his 
wife's  portrait  ;  three  small  ikons  worn  by  the  Grand  Duchesses,  having 
m  each  case  the  face  of  the  saint  destroyed  as  if  blows  had  been  aimed 
it  them ;  the  Empress's  jubilee  badge  of  her  Lancer  regiment ;  the 
gold  frame  of  Botkin's  eye-glasses  ;  a  large  spectacle  glass  such  as  the 
Empress  wore  at  Tobolsk  ;  remnants  of  the  Tsarevich's  haversack,  in 
which  he  was  accustomed  to  keep  his  treasures  ;  several  bottles  as 
used  for  smelling  salts,  always  carried  by  the  Grand  Duchesses,  and 
finally  a  varied  assortment  of  nails,  tinfoil,  copper  coins,  etc.,  which 
vastly  puzzled  Sokolov  till  somebody,  I  think  Mr.  Gibbes,  reminded 
liim  that  Alexis  was  fond  of  collecting  odds  and  ends,  being  of  a  very 
saving  disposition,  like  his  father. 

Then  came  a  number  of  specially  important  relics.  First,  a  series 
Df  Nagan  bullets,  some  entire  but  bearing  the  marks  of  the  rifling, 
5ome  without  the  lead  core,  some  in  the  shape  of  blobs  of  molten  lead, 
still  unmistakable.  Secondly,  in  the  shaft  itself,  a  human  finger, 
;wo  pieces  of  human  skin,  and  in  the  clay  of  the  mound  many  frag- 
ments of  chopped  and  sawed  human  bones,  which  could  still  be  certi- 
ied  although  they  had  been  subjected  to  the  action  of  fire  and  perhaps 
)f  acid.  Experts  found  that  the  skin  was  from  a  human  hand.  The 
inger  is  described  as  belonging  to  a  woman  of  middle  age.  It  is  long, 
>lender,  and  well-shaped,  like  the  Empress's  hand. 

Near  the  shaft  was  found  a  set  of  artificial  teeth  (upper  jaw  with 
Jlate),  identified  as  Dr.  Botkin's.  The  front  teeth  were  deeply  en- 
:rusted  with  mire,  as  if  the  body  had  been  dragged  face  downwards 
md  thereby  the  teeth,  catching  in  the  hard  clay  soU,  had  dragged  the 
)late  out  of  the  dead  man's  mouth. 

When  the  first  inspection  of  the  death-house  was  made — 
:en  days  after  the  murder — it  bore  all  the  traces  of  having  been 


ii8        THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  THE  ROMANOVS 

plundered  by  people  who  had  first  slaughtered  the  owners. 
The  reader  will  be  able  to  picture  it,  but  his  imagination  will 
not  come  up  to  the  reality.  Amidst  this  scene  of  pillage  and 
confusion  one  felt  that  a  careful  hand  had  destroyed  every- 
thing that  could  help  the  investigation ;  nevertheless,  highly- 
important  clues  came  to  hght,  among  them  a  full  list  of  the 
Red  Guards  who  had  acted  as  gaolers,  the  Tsar's  private 
cypher  which  he  had  hidden  away — as  if  expecting  to  be  able 
to  reclaim  it  some  day. 

***** 

In  the  death-chamber  there  was  a  curious  inscription  in 
German,  written  by  a  man  of  some  culture — not  Yurovsky, 
therefore,  but  perhaps  one  of  the  two  men  from  the  Chrczvy- 
chaika  whom  he  had  left  in  charge  of  the  house  on  his  depar- 
ture. It  was  an  adaptation  of  Heine's  lines  on  the  fate  of 
Belshazzar  : — 

Belsatzar  ward  in  selbigcr  Nacht 
Von  seincn  Knechtcn  umgebracht. 

He  had  omitted  the  conjunctive  '  aber  '  which  comes  in 
the  poet's  line  after  '  ward,'  and  then,  having  first  written 
'  selbigen,'  had  changed  it  to  '  seinen,'  feeling  perhaps  that 
these  modifications  were  necessary  to  fit  the  occasion.  Per- 
haps unconsciously  he  also  converted  Belsazar  (as  Heine 
spells  the  name)  to  Belsatzar.  The  wTiter  was  quoting  a  Jew 
whose  poem  expatiates  on  the  overthrow  of  a  Gentile  sove- 
reign who  had  offended  Israel.  The  Book  of  Daniel  is  not  so 
explicit.  It  says  :  '  In  that  night  was  Belshazzar  the  King  of 
the  Chaldeans  slain  '  (Dan.  vi.  30).  But  the  author  of  the 
inscription  wished  to  make  it  '  clear  '  that  '  Belsatzar  '  was 
slain  by  his  own  people. 


CHAPTER  XII 

ALL  THE   ROMANOVS 

THE  death  of  Nicholas  II  and  his  family  did  not  suffice 
for  the  Soviet  plan  of  '  government  '  with,  or  without, 
Germany.  Nothing  short  of  extermination  of  all  the  Romanovs 
:ould  satisfy  the  enemies  of  '  Belsatzar.'  Whenever  the  Tsik 
(Central  Executive  Committee)  and  the  Chrezvychaika  (Inquisi- 
tion) laid  hands  on  any  of  the  ex-Tsar's  relatives  their  fate  was 
sealed.  It  did  not  matter  where  the  unfortunate  princes  might 
be,  or  what  local  authority  happened  to  be  ostensibly  involved 
— the  Tsik  and  Yankel  Sverdlov,  Red  Jewish  Autocrat  of  All 
the  Russias,  directed  the  disposal  of  them. 

It  is  quite  useless  for  the  apologists  of  Soviet  rule  to  insinuate 
that  local  bodies  may  have  committed  excesses  without  the 
knowledge  and  approval  of  the  Centre  :  in  these  murders  of 
Grand  Dukes  and  a  Grand  Duchess — in  all  eleven  persons 
of  the  blood  Royal — the  hand  of  the  Central  Government  is 
clearly  apparent.  Moreover,  they  were  all  slain  in  cold  blood, 
of  deliberate  purpose  ;  not  like  the  victims  of  the  holocaust 
at  Perm,  because  a  reign  of  stark  terror  had  been  ordained 
from  Moscow. 

It  is  with  mind  and  hand  still  a-tremble  after  reciting  the 
horrors  of  the  cellar  and  the  woods  of  Ekaterinburg  that  I 
take  up  this  tale  of  woe,  all  the  more  pitiful  on  account  of  the 
utter  absence  of  any  pretext  for  the  crimes — just  sordid  murder 

119 


120       THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

unrelieved  by  any  shadow  of  political  expediency  or  provocation. 

First,  I  take  the  case  of  the  Grand  Duke  Michael  Alexandro- 
vich  ;  he  '  disappeared  '  before  the  others — about  a  month 
before  the  Tsar — and  he  was  the  ostensible  Heir,  although  he 
had  formally  resigned  his  rights  to  the  people.  I  have  collected 
all  the  materials  concerning  his  last  days  in  Perm. 

The  Tsar's  brother  had  remained  at  Gachina,  his  usual  resi- 
dence, during  the  early  months  of  Bolshevist  rule.  There  he 
was  arrested  in  March,  1918,  and  sent  into  exile.  His  secre- 
tary, Nicholas  Nikolaievich  Johnson,  and  the  former  Chief  of 
the  Gendarmerie  at  Gachina,  Colonel  Znamerovsky,  were  ar- 
rested at  the  same  time  and  transported  together  with  him, 
guarded  by  Letts.  Perm  was  their  destination,  and  in  that 
city  they  resided  for  the  next  two  months. 

Apart  from  being  under  surveillance,  the  exiles  enjoyed 
comparative  freedom.  The  Grand  Duke  took  his  walks  with 
his  secretary.  Although  suffering  from  a  chronic  malady 
(gastral  ulcers)  which  required  constant  exercise  and  a 
special  diet,  he  had  no  cause  to  complain  of  his  health 
while  in  Perm.  The  fact  was  many  people  sent  him  dainties, 
such  as  sterlets  freshly  caught  out  of  the  Kama,  so  that  his 
rooms  at  the  Korolevskie  Nomera  (King's  Inn)  were  always  full 
of  provisions.  He  felt  so  well  that  he  seldom  had  recourse 
to  the  medicine  for  stilling  the  terrible  pains  that  he  suffered 
during  acute  attacks  of  the  malady. 

Popularity  has  its  drawbacks.  The  people  of  Perm  did  not 
realize  that  their  attentions  to  the  exile  might  arouse  suspicion 
among  his  Red  enemies.  When  things  came  to  such  a  pass 
that  the  Tsar's  brother  found  himself  running  the  gauntlet 
of  popular  ovations,  it  became  necessary  to  avoid  too  frequent 
appearances  in  the  streets.  Znamerovsky  warned  the  Grand 
Duke  that  the  Reds  at  the  suburban  Motoviliha  arsenal  were 
beginning  to  grow  restive  and  openly  agitating  against  the 
liberty  allowed  to  the  exiles.     So  thereafter  the  familiar  figure 


ALL  THE   ROMANOVS  I2i 

Michael  Alexandrovich  in  his  shabby  grey  suit  and  top-boots 
as  seen  no  more,  and  he  took  his  exercise  under  the  cover  of 
irkness. 

The  Grand  Duke  had  left  his  wife  and  children  at  Gachina. 
ountess  Brasova  (his  morganatic  spouse)  came  to  visit  her 
usband  in  the  middle  of  May.  Madame  Znamerovskaia  had 
so  arrived  in  Perm.  It  was  a  rash  step.  Countess  Brasova 
ad  much  difficulty  in  getting  away ;  in  fact  it  was  only  managed 
y  a  stratagem.  The  komisars  were  told  that  if  they  interfered 
le  matter  would  be  referred  to  Moscow.  This  frightened 
lem. 

Reaching  Moscow  on  May  22  or  23,  Countess  Brasova 
ecided  to  take  a  still  bolder  step  to  save  her  husband, 
onscious  of  his  complete  aloofness  from  politics,  she  imagined 
hat  personal  intercession  with  the  Red  chieftains  would  move 
hem  to  let  him  go.  Of  course  it  was  an  illusion  excusable 
nly  in  a  distracted  wife.  I  mention  it  because  Lenin  himself 
itervened  in  the  matter.  It  was  the  lofty  idealist  of  Soviet- 
om,  that  absolutely  refused  to  permit  the  departure  of 
lichael  and  thereby  assumed  the  responsibility  of  what 
;appened. 

Madame  Znamerovskaia  did  not  leave  Perm.  She  was  there 
^hen  her  husband  was  shot  and  later  shared  his  fate.  But  I 
m  anticipating. 

Unbeknown  to  any  member  of  the  family  or  even  to  N.  N. 
ohnson,  Colonel  Znamerovsky  had  conceived  a  plan  of  escape 
/hich  he  intended  to  put  into  practice,  fearing  that  the 
lotoviliha  workmen  might  be  goaded  into  violence.  I  am  in 
jossession  of  the  details  of  this  plan,  and  I  can  state  most 
)ositively — in  the  light  of  subsequent  events — that  it  was  not 
arried  out,  nor  even  attempted. 

On  June  13  a  telegram  reached  Gachina  from  Perm, 
mnouncing  that  '  our  general  favourite  and  Johnny  has  been 
emoved  by  whom  and  whither  unknown.'     This  message  was 


122       THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  THE  ROMANOVS 

supposed  to  have  come  from  Znamerovsky — ^it  could  have  conK 

only  from  him.     The  first  feeling  was  one  of  unmixed  joy 

then  doubts  began  to  arise,  and  no  small  anxiety  as  to  th( 

probable  repression  that  would  at  once  fall  upon  the  householc 

at  Gachina,      Surely  enough,  soon  afterwards  Countess  BrasovE 

was  arrested  by  Uritsky,  the  blood-stained  Komisar  of  Petro 

grad,  who  himself  was  assassinated  two  months  later  by  anothei 

Jew.     After  innumerable  tribulations,  she  managed  to  escape 

with  her  children  out  of  Russia. 

***** 

What  had  happened  in  Perm  ?  A  dispatch  from  Mr.  Alston, 
the  British  Acting  High  Commissioner,  reported  from  Vladivos- 
tok, February  13,  1919  :  '  Mr.  T.  has  just  arrived  here.  .  .  . 
When  at  Perm  he  says  he  lived  in  the  same  hotel  with  Grand 
Duke  Michael  and  Mr.  Johnson,  his  secretary,  who  was  a 
Russian.  At  2  a.m.  on  or  about  June  16  he  saw  four  of 
the  Perm  militzia  or  police  take  them  off,  and  he  is  convinced 
that  they  were  killed.' 

Later,  it  became  possible  to  obtain  the  evidence  of  eye-wit- 
nesses, which  corroborated  and  amplified  Mr.  Alston's  dispatch. 
The  Grand  Duke  had  two  servants  with  him  in  Perm,  Borunov 
and  Chelyshev.  They  lived  in  an  adjoining  room.  Mr.  John- 
son lived  upstairs.  Chelyshev  escaped  and  gave  the  following 
version  : — 

At  about  the  date  above  mentioned  (June  12  to  16 — 
he  was  hazy  on  this  point)  he  was  asleep  one  night  when  three 
men  in  soldiers'  dress,  fully  armed,  entered  his  room,  woke  him 
up  and  roughly  ordered  him  to  lead  them  to  Michael  Romanov. 
In  vain  he  protested  that  the  Grand  Duke  was  asleep.  They 
threatened  him  with  the  Chrezvychaika.  He  had  to  comply. 
He  first  woke  Mr.  Johnson.  Then  he  led  the  way  to  the  Grand 
Duke's  room.  He  was  asleep.  Chelyshev  roused  him  and  ex- 
plained the  reason.     The  Grand  Duke  looked  at  the  armed  men. 

One  of  them  said  :    '  We  have  orders  to  take  you — orders 


ALL  THE  ROMANOVS  123 

»m  the  Sovdep.'  ^  The  Grand  Duke  replied  :  *  I  shall  not 
me  unless  you  show  me  a  paper.'  One  of  the  men  then 
jpped  forward  and,  laying  his  hand  roughly  on  the  Grand 
ike's  shoulder,  exclaimed  :  '  Oh  !  these  Romanovs  !  We 
i  fed  up  with  you  all ! ' 

Realizing  that  resistance  was  futile,  the  Grand  Duke  rose 
d  dressed  himself.  Mr.  Johnson  had  also  meanwhile  made 
nself  ready,  and  insisted  that  the  men  should  take  him 
^ay  as  well.  After  some  argument,  they  agreed.  Chelyshev 
clares  that  he  also  asked  to  be  taken,  but  that  the  men 
'used. 

As  the  soldiers  and  their  two  prisoners  were  going  out  of  the 
om,  Chelyshev  remembered  about  the  medicine,  and,  grasping 
e  bottle,  followed,  calling  out  :  '  Please,  your  Highness, 
ke  it  with  you.'  He  knew  that  without  his  medicine  the 
•and  Duke  might  be  subjected  to  great  and  needless  suffering, 
le  soldiers  roughly  pushed  him  aside  and,  making  some  brutal 
mark  about  the  Imperial  Family,  led  the  prisoners  away. 
:om  that  moment  they  were  lost  to  view.  Many  stories  of 
ichael's  escape  and  of  his  having  been  seen  at  Omsk,  at  Semi- 
ilatinsk,  at  Chita,  at  Harbin,  etc.,  have  been  successively 
sproved. 

Against  the  version  of  an  escape  there  are  the  strongest 
ddences.  The  Grand  Duke  would  never  have  been  a  party 
I  any  attempt  to  evade  his  gaolers,  knowing  full  well  that  both 
e  Tsar — for  whom  his  loyalty  and  affection  were  proverbial 
-and  his  own  family  would  suffer  for  him.  It  may  be  objected 
lat  he  was  removed  against  his  will  by  friends  in  disguise  ; 
it  this  theory  cannot  explain  away  their  refusal  to  allow  him 
•  take  with  him  a  remedy  necessary  to  his  health  and  perhaps 
I  his  life.  There  had  been  plots  to  procure  his  escape — so  I 
ive  reason  to  believe  ;  but  in  every  case  the  plans  had  been 
itrayed.  Colonel  Znamerovsky  knew  this.  He  would  trust 
1  Abbreviation  of  Soviet  deputatov  (Council  of  Deputies). 


124       THE  LAST  DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

nobody  with  his  plan,  but  obviously  it  miscarried,  for  he  wa 
himself  to  go  with  Michael,  and  we  know  that  instead  of  tha 
he  was  murdered.  The  shooting  of  Znamerovsky  followed  clos 
upon  the  Grand  Duke's  disappearance. 

Chelyshev  afterwards  professed  confidence  in  his  master' 
escape,  but  at  the  time  he  had  no  such  illusion.  In  fact,  h 
was  convinced  then  that  the  Grand  Duke  had  been  trapped 
for  when  he  had  had  time  to  recover  from  his  surprise 
he  went  to  the  local  Soviet  and  complained  that  the  Gram 
Duke  had  been  kidnapped.  He  relates  that  no  attention  wa; 
paid  to  him  at  first,  but  that  later  some  semblance  of  i 
search  was  made  and  quickly  dropped. 

Regarding  the  ultimate  disposal  of  the  two  prisoners,  stories 
circulate  just  as  numerous  and  varied  as  the  stories  of  theii 
escape.  I  need  not  cite  them.  It  suffices  that  the  Grand  Duk( 
Michael,  gentlest  of  men,  to  whom  all  thought  of  power  and  ever 
of  ambition  was  repugnant,  disappeared  to  be  seen  no  more, 

Perm  and  its  vicinity  was  destined  to  witness  other  tragedies 
full  of  horror.  Many  other  members  of  the  Romanov  famil} 
had  been  interned  there,  including  (i)  the  Grand  Duchess 
Elizabeth,  sainted  sister  of  the  Empress,  venerated  by  gratefu] 
Muscovites  while  Alexandra  was  disliked ;  (2)  the  Grand 
Duke  Sergius  Mikhailovich,  former  Master  of  the  Ordnance, 
and  quite  remote  from  politics ;  (3)  Prince  Igor  ;  (4)  Prince 
loan  ;  (5)  Prince  Constantine,  all  three  brilliant  young  men, 
the  sons  of  the  late  Grand  Duke  Constantine  Const antinovich, 
none  of  them  concerned  with  political  matters  ;  and  (6)  Prince 
Vladimir  Pavlovich  Palei,  son  of  the  Grand  Duke  Paul  and 
stepbrother  of  the  Grand  Duke  Dmitri  Pavlovich.  This 
youth  of  seventeen  had  given  promise  of  being  one  of  the 
world's  greatest  poets. 

Prince  loan  was  married  to  Princess  Elena  of  Serbia,  who 
had  come  to  the  Urals  to  share  her  husband's  exile.     She  had 


ALL  THE  ROMANOVS  125 

I  en  persuaded  to  go  to  her  country,  the  Bolshevists  hesitating 
i  incarcerate  her,  and  she  was  at  Ekaterinburg  when,  towards 
1e  end  of  June,  she  heard  that  Prince  loan  and  the  other 
[ptives  had  been  put  on  starvation  rations.  She  decided, 
:me  what  might,  not  to  leave  him  behind.  Thereupon  the 
hlshevists  arrested  her.  She  was  in  the  prison  at  Ekaterin- 
Irg  when  the  Tsar  and  his  family  were  murdered.  In  the 
me  prison  were  some  people  who  had  followed  the  Imperial 
'Usehold  into  captivity  :  young  Countess  Anastasia  Henri- 
va.  Mile.  Schneider,  the  Eniperor's  valet  Volkov.  (Prince 
)lgoruky  and  General  Tatishchev  had  '  disappeared  '  earlier.) 

course,  none  of  them  knew  anything  about  the  awful  hap- 
nings  in  Ipatiev's  house. 

When  the  Jewish  murderers  and  their  accomplices,   the 
;rman-Magyar  '  Letts, '  had  taken  wing  before  the  advance 

the  Whites,  these  prisoners  were  sent  to  Perm  for  future 
sposal,  while  they  themselves  had  hurried  westward,  having 
Iped  to  accomplish  the  hellish  design  of  the  Jew  fiend, 
mkel  Sverdlov — to  exterminate  '  all  the  Romanovs.' 
"ders  had  already  preceded  them  to  Perm,  and  the  design 
d  been  fully  accomplished  there.  The  murder  of  the 
Dmanovs  of  Perm  took  place  exactly  twenty-four  hours 
ter  the  murder  of  the  family  in  Ekaterinburg. 

Here  are  the  bare  facts  of  this  new  butchery.  The  six 
)manov  prisoners  above  mentioned,  with  the  Grand 
ichess's  companion,  the  nun  Varvara,  and  S.  M.  Remes, 
mager  for  the  princes,  were  interned  in  the  village  school 
Alapaevsk,  a  place  in  the  environs  of  Perm. 
On  the  night  of  July  17  (1918)  their  warders  came  to  tell 
em  the  story  that  Yurovsky  had  retailed  to  the  Tsar  :  that 
ere  was  danger  for  them,  that  the  enemy  (i.e.,  the  Czecho- 
Dvaks)  were  approaching,  and  that  in  the  interest  of  their 
rsonal  safety  they  would  be  removed.     It  was  even  confided 


126       THE   LAST  DAYS   OF  THE  ROMANOVS 

to  them  whither  they  were  going,  namely,  to  the  Siniachik 
Works.     All  unsuspicious,  they  (also)  at  once  complied.     ' 
programme  of  the  murder  was  here  somewhat  different, 
was  not  convenient  to  carry  it  out  on  the  premises.     The  pa 
took  their  seats  in  the  native  korobs  (a  small  tarantass)  a 
were  driven  north. 

When  twelve  versts  (eight  miles)  out  the  caravan  halv 
in  a  wood  which  contained  a  number  of  disused  iron  ore  mil 
— one  sees  the  similarity  of  detail  in  the  murderers'  plar 
and  here  the  unfortunates  were  slain  and  their  bodies  thro' 
down  the  shafts. 

It  was  a  much  cruder  performance  than  that  of  Ekaterinbu 
The  actual  murderers  here  were  simply  Russian  crimina 
escaped  convicts  who  '  worked  '  for  the  Chrezvychaika,  t 
Red  Inquisition.  They  just  slaughtered  the  victims  and  g 
rid  of  the  bodies  without  so  much  as  rifling  their  pockets. 

Meanwhile  at  the  school  certain  '  precautions  '  were, 
usual,  taken.  A  pretended  '  escape  '  was  staged.  The  sch( 
building  and  its  approaches  were  '  faked  '  to  show  evider 
of  combat  between  the  Red  Guards  and  pretended  Wh 
Guards,  and  to  give  verisimilitude  to  the  performance  th 
took  a  peasant  who  happened  to  be  locked  up  in  the  lo( 
gaol,  murdered  him  and  placed  his  dead  body  in  the  school 
represent  the  White  '  bandits.' 

Mr.  Preston,  the  Consul,  telegraphed  from  Ekaterinbu 
October  28, 1918,  that  on  the  retaking  of  Alapaevsk  by  the  Wh 
troops  on  September  28,  the  corpses  of  the  Romanov  Princ 
the  Grand  Duchess  and  their  attendants  were  found  sufficiem 
preserved  to  be  recognized,  and  that  they  were  buried  in  i 
presence  of  a  great  concourse  of  people. 

The  discovery  had  been  made  thanks  to  the  resource  o' 
local  police  agent,  whose  name  I  do  not  give  for  special  reaso: 
Post-mortem  examination  showed  that  the  victims  had  be 
bludgeoned  to  death  but  must  have  undergone  a  prolong 


ALL  THE  ROMANOVS  127 

•ny  before  they  died.  The  Grand  Duke  Sergius  was  shot 
ough  the  head,  perhaps  to  put  him  out  of  his  misery ;  for  the 
rderers  were  just  butchers  who  did  not  seek  to  torture  their 
tims.  There  was  no  refinement  of  cruelty  about  them. 
sy  were  only  Russians.  It  is  not  true  that  they  threw  their 
tims  down  the  shaft  before  life  was  extinct.  The  autopsy 
;  dispelled  that  legend.  The  murderers  even  exploded  hand 
nades  down  the  shaft,  probably  to  make  assurance  doubly 
e. 

fhe  investigation  has  clearly  established  the  authorship  of 
se  murders.  The  orders  came  from  Moscow  through  the 
le  channels  that  had  been  used  in  the  murder  of  the  Tsar 
lamely,  from  the  Jew  Sverdlov  to  the  Jew  Goloshchekin, 
1,  as  usual,  the  Russian  workman  Beloborodov  acted  as 
:  dummy  president  of  the  Ekaterinburg  Soviet  board — 
channel  through  which  Moscow  acted  in  the  Urals.  These 
lers  were  carried  out  by  the  leading  komisars  of  Perm, 
ong  them  being  the  Komisar  of  Justice  Soloviev. 
Vs  in  the  case  of  the  murder  at  Ekaterinburg,  the  Bolshevists 
Perm  followed  up  their  traitorous  crime  by  announcing  that 
;re  had  been  a  conspiracy.  The  world  was  told  that  the 
nces  had  been  kidnapped  by  bands  of  White  Guards.  (When 
;  Whites  had  to  evacuate  Perm,  General  Diterichs  arranged 
lave  the  bodies  of  the  martyred  Princes  removed  eastward, 
ey  rest  in  a  place  of  safety — at  the  Russian  Cathedral  in 
king.) 

H:  ^  :ic  H«  :): 

More  than  half  a  year  later  a  crime  equally  abominable  was 
•petrated  at  Petrograd.  The  victims  were  the  Grand  Dukes 
ul  Alexandre vich,  Dmitri  Constantinovich,  Nicholas  Mik- 
lovich  (the  historian),  and  George  Mikhailovich.  They  had 
m  imprisoned  for  some  time  without  any  charge  being 
jferred  against  them.     On  January  29,   1919,   they  were 


128       THE  LAST   DAYS  OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

removed  to  the  Fortress  of  SS.  Peter  and  Paul,  and  there 
the  same  day  without  any  investigation  or  form  of  trial  th 
were  '  killed  by  Red  Guards  with  revolvers  ' — such  is  the  tr 
information  that  is  available.  But  the  crime  of  Ekaterinbu 
and  the  slaughter  of  Alapaevsk  give  a  clue  as  to  the  authorsh 
of  this  atrocity.  The  last  of  the  Romanovs  within  the  pow 
of  the  Jew-ruled  Soviet  had  passed  away.  Perhaps,  some  da 
N.  A.  Sokolov  will  be  able  to  investigate  the  crime  of  Petrogra 

:|c  :|e  :|c  *  * 

We  now  approach  the  end  of  this  long  martyrology.  Tl 
murders  of  which  I  am  about  to  speak  form  part  of  the  Rt 
Terror  ordained  by  the  Soviet  to  avenge  the  murder  of  Uritst 
and  the  attempt  on  Lenin,  which  took  place  about  a  month  aft* 
the  crime  of  Ekaterinburg. 

I  referred  above  to  the  transfer  of  certain  prisoners  from  th; 
city  to  Perm.  Volkov,  the  Tsar's  valet,  has  deposed  thi 
altogether  thirty-six  persons  travelled  in  the  prison  trai; 
Among  them  were  Countess  Hem-ikova,  Mile.  Schneide 
and  Princess  Elena.  They  all  found  themselves  interned  i 
the  same  prison  in  Perm.  Here  Volkov  met  Chelyshev,  wl 
had  also  been  locked  up,  and  from  him  heard  the  account  < 
the  abduction  of  the  Grand  Duke  Michael.  They  saw  tl 
Princess  leave.  After  great  difficulty  the  Serbian  Governmei 
had  managed  to  rescue  her.  She  did  not,  of  course,  know  thi 
her  husband  had  been  murdered.  She  thought  he  had  escapei 
and  went  away  willingly  enough  this  time. 

The  Terror  had  been  proclaimed  on  September  i,   igii 

The  official  Izvestiya  declared  that  the  '  proletariat  {sic)  wi 

reply  ...  in  a  manner  that  will  make  the  whole  bourgeoisie  shu( 

der  with  horror.'     The  Krasnaia   (Red)    Gazeta  announced 

'  We  will  kill  our  enemies  in  scores  of  hundreds.  .  .  .    L( 

them  drown  themselves  in  their  own  blood.'  ^ 

1  The  chrezvychaika  of  Petrograd,  presided  over  by  the  Jew  Peter 
proclaimed  that  '  the  criminal  hand  of  the  Socialist-Revolutionai 
Party,  directed  by  the  Anglo-French,  has  dared  to  fire  at  the  lead( 


Plate  VII 


RELICS    FOUND    NEAR 
THE   PYRES 

(a)  One  of  the  Empress's  huge  pearl  earrings. 
(6)   The  Empress's  great  diamond  pendant. 
(c)    Her  pectoral  cross,  set  with  emeralds. 


'FAITHFUL   UNTO  DEATH' 

This  group  was  taken  at  Tobolsk  during 
the  captivity.  All  except  M.  PieiTe  Gillard, 
the  French  tutor  (in  the  centre),  died 
for  their  loyalty  to  the  Imperial  Family. 
Countess  Hendrikova  is  seated  on  the 
right  with  Mile.  Schneider  by  her  side. 
Thei-r  mangled  bodies  were  found  outside 
Perm.  Count  Tatishchev  (left)  and  Prince 
Dolgoniky  (right)  disappeared  at  Ekaterin- 
burg. Two  bodies,  supposed  to  be  theirs, 
were  found  outside  the  city,  one  bearing 
documents  of  '  citizen  Dol^^orukov.' 


(a) 


Plate  VII 


(c) 


RELICS  FOUND  NEAR  THE  PVRES 


'  FAITHFUL  UNTt)  DEATH 


ALL  THE   ROMANOVS  129 

'  On  the  night  of  September  3  '—I  am  quoting  Volkov^ 
we  were  led  out  of  the  prison,  eight  of  us.  There  were 
puntess  Henrikova,  Mile.  Schneider,  and  Mme.  Znamerov- 
:aia,  myself,  and  four  others.  We  were  surrounded  by  twenty- 
vo  armed  guards,  part  Letts,  part  Magyars. 
'  We  had  been  told  that  we  were  to  be  transferred  to  another 
ison  ;  we  carried  our  smaU  possessions.  When  we  saw  that 
ley  were  leading  us  out  of  the  town,  we  realized  that  our  last 
Dur  had  come.  It  was  terribly  hard  on  the  ladies.  They 
ragged  themselves  along  with  difficulty  in  the  heavy  mud. 
iter  several  miles,  we  came  to  a  corduroy  road  with  swamps  on 
ther  side.'  (It  was  a  sewage  farm.)  '  Some  of  our  guards 
iddenly  began  offering  to  carry  our  bags.  I  knew  that  meant 
lat  they  were  going  to  shoot  us  directly,  so  each  one  wanted 
)  secure  his  booty  beforehand.  It  was  now  or  never.  While 
ley   were    wrangling    over    the    spoils    I    made    a  dash  for 

Volkov  leapt  the  ditch  and  was  scuttling  across  the  sHmy 
aste  when  the  Magyaro-Letts  opened  fire.  He  fell  just  as 
le  first  shot  rang  out  and  remained  lying.  They  thought  he 
as  dead  and  moved  on.     He  then  made  another  dash,  and 

the  working  classes.  .  .  .  This  crime  will  be  answered  by  mass 
rror  .  .  .  representatives  of  capital  will  be  sent  to  forced  labour  .  .  . 
unter-revolutionaries  will  be  exterminated.  .  .  .'  Petrovsky,  Komi- 
r  for  Interior,  telegraphed  all  local  Soviets,  reproving  them  for  '  the 
traordinarily  insignificant  number  of  serious  repressions  (the  hate- 
ien  Jew  could  not  abide  the  innate  kindliness  of  the  Russians)  and 
iss  shootings  of  White  Guards  and  bourgeoisie.'  Petrovsky  denounced 
ese  '  grandmotherly  '  methods.  He  ordained  that  '  all  Right 
'Cialist-Revolutionaries  must  be  immediately  arrested.  Considerable 
imbers  of  hostages  must  be  taken  from  bourgeoisie  and  former  officers. 
:  the  slightest  attempt  at  resistance,  or  the  slightest  movement  in 
hite  Guard  circles,  mass  shootings  of  hostages  must  be  immediately 
nployed.     Indecisive  and  irresolute  action  in  this  matter  on  the  part 

local  Soviets  will  be  severely  dealt  with.'  Zinoviev  (Appelbaum), 
1  e  of  the  cultured  leaders  of  Sovietdom,  then  declared  that  ninety 
I' t  of  loo  millions  of  the  population  must  be  '  won  over,'  but  '  as  for 
I  e  rest,  we  have  nothing  to  say  to  them ;  they  must  be  annihilated.' 

I 


130        THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  THE  ROMANOVS 

finally  got  away.  After  wandering  about  for  forty-three  da37s 
he  came  into  the  White  zone  and  was  saved.  || 

The  frightfully  mangled  remains  of  Countess  Henrikova  an( 
Mile.  Schneider  were  discovered  by  us  in  the  summer  of  las 
year  and  committed  to  the  grave  in  Perm,  in  fuU  view  of  th 
prison  windows  where  they  had  been  fellow  prisoners  of  Princes 
Elena. 

'  Comrade '  Petrovsky's  accusations  were  undeserved  ii 
Perm,  The  Red  Terror  ran  a  full  stream  of  blood  in  tha 
region.  The  peasants,  being  regarded  by  Bolshevists  as  th 
worst  kind  of  bourgeoisie,  provided  the  bulk  of  the  '  scores  o 
hundreds  '  of  victims.  For  details  of  these  horrors  I  woul( 
refer  the  reader  to  the  White  Book  on  Bolshevism  issued  ii 
April,  1919. 

Respecting  Count  Tatishchev  and  Prince  Dolgoruky,  nothinj 
is  known  as  to  the  manner  of  their  death.  According  to  Volkov 
who  was  in  prison  with  him  in  Ekaterinburg,  Tatishchev  wa 
summoned  to  the  office  on  or  about  June  8,  and  was  there  in 
formed  that,  by  order  of  the  Soviet,  he  was  to  be  deporte( 
to  the  province  of  Ufa.  He  was  thereupon  taken  away  froE 
the  prison  and  seen  no  more. 

Prince  Dolgoruky  remained  some  time  in  the  EkaterinbuTj 
House  of  Detention.  He  was  frequently  in  communicatio; 
with  the  worthy  Mr.  Preston,  trying  to  relieve  the  sufferings  c 
the  captives  in  Ipatiev's  house.  Probably  this  hastened  hi 
end.  We  know  that  the  British  Consul  was  threatened  wit 
death  if  he  '  interfered  '  any  more.  Dolgoruky  disappeared 
like  his  senior,  the  Count.  Their  memories,  hke  the  memorie 
of  Henrikova  and  Schneider,  mil  live  through  the  ages  as  c 
those  who  have  been  '  faithful  unto  death.' 


CHAPTER  XIII 

THE   JACKALS 

AROUND  the  tigers  of  the  Soviet  and  their  feasts  of  blood 
hovered  the  jackals,  singly,  in  twos  and  threes,  and  in 
packs,  waiting  to  snatch  some  morsel. 

It  would  be  impossible  to  mention  all  the  sorry  scavengers 
that  thronged  around  the  Romanovs  before  and  after  their 
mart5rrdom.  I  refer  only  to  such  of  them  that  affected,  one 
way  or  another,  the  course  of  the  tragedy  and  its  investigation. 

Chronologically  I  record  the  name  of  Soloviev  first  because 
he  figures  in  the  dossier  as  an  actor  while  the  Family  was  still 
at  Tobolsk.  The  depositions  of  numerous  witnesses  sub- 
stantiated by  Soloviev  himself  show  that  he  was  receiving 
a  salary  of    Rs.40,000    (nominally,   £4,000)   from   a    banker 

named  X (well  known  in  Petrograd  and  reputed  to  be 

a  Jew),  who  is  said  to  have  acted  for  the  Germans  during 
the  war,  having  the  disbursement  of  secret  funds  from 
Berlin  in  his  hands. 

Having  married  a  daughter  of  Rasputin,  named  Matrena, 
after  the  '  saint's  '  death,  and  formed  a  connexion  with  Anna 
Vyrubova,  then  at  liberty  in  the  Red  capital,  and  with  other 
friends  of  Grishka,  this  young  man,  an  ex-officer  in  the  Russian 
army  and  former  A.D.C.  to  Guchkov,  started  on  a  '  mission  ' 
to  Siberia.  Ostensibly  he  went  to  his  wife's  home.  His  own 
explanation  is  that  he  was  interested  in  the  fisheries  of  the  Ob  ; 
also  that  he  took  money  and  comforts  to  Tobolsk  to  the  Imperial 
Family  from  their  friends  in  Petrograd.     He  deposes  that  he 

131 


132       THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  THE   ROMANOVS  | 

handed  the  money  to  the  priest  Vasiliev,  also  the  presents. 
He  accuses  the  priest  of  appropriating  the  one  and  the  other. 
(The  priest  makes  counter-charges.) 

There  appears  to  be  reason  to  beheve  that  the  Empress 
knew  of  this  '  mission/  and,  retaining  to  the  very  end  all 
her  illusions  regarding  Grishka  and  Anna,  gave  her  confidence 
to  Soloviev  as  his  son-in-law  and  the  associate  of  Vyrubova. 
How  he  repaid  this  confidence  will  be  seen. 

X 's  agent  naturally  kept  him  and  the  Germans  in- 
formed as  to  all  the  happenings  at  Tobolsk,  but  one  may  be 
quite  sure  that  he  did  not  stop  there.  Information  given 
to  the  Germans  meant,  of  course,  its  communication,  when 
Berlin  so  desired,  to  the  Bolsheviks,  its  servants.  Is  it  sur- 
prising in  these  circumstances  that  each  of  the  four  separate 
and  independent  organizations  formed  to  release  the  Imperial 
exiles  Wcis  betraj^ed  before  anything  could  be  attempted  ? — 
for  the  Solovievs  were  many  and  X 's  tentacles  far- 
reaching. 

It  could  not  be  a  coincidence  that  officers  who  met  Soloviev 
in  Tiumen  were  arrested  by  the  Reds  and  '  disappeared.' 
Two  such  cases  are  recorded  in  the  dossier.  It  is  certainly 
more  than  a  coincidence  that  before  and  after  the  fall  of  the 
Kolchak  Government  he  was  in  mysterious  association  with 
persons  who  were  strongly  suspected  of  being  German  agents, 
and  could  give  no  satisfactory  account  of  the  source  of  his 
income,  since  he  had  been  cut  off  from  X 's  sup- 
plies. 

N.  A.  Sokolov  found  him  and  Matrena  at  Chita,  enjoying 
the  confidence  and  support  of  Maria  Mihailovna,  the  so-called 
'  Queen  of  Diamonds,'  who  presided  over  the  destinies  of  the 
Ataman's  household  and  had  a  decided  finger  in  the  Trans- 
Baikalian  pie.  The  '  Queen '  bore  a  striking  likeness  to  a 
certain  Jewess  who  had  spied  on  the  Russian  South-Western 
front  in  the  days  of  the  war.    She  came  in  person  to  release 


THE  JACKALS  133 

the  Solovievs  from  the  House  of  Detention  to  which  they  had 
been  relegated  by  Sokolov's  legal  order.  Sokolov  himself 
had  to  flee  from  Chita  to  avoid  worse  consequences. 

***** 
The  priest  Vasiliev  was  of  another  stamp.  His  antecedents 
should  have  dispensed  him  from  ecclesiastical  office.  He  had 
killed  the  sexton  of  the  church  where  he  had  previously 
served.  The  plea  of  accident  of  which  he  availed  himself 
to  secure  a  normal  punishment  of  '  penitence  '  could  not 
engender  a  proper  recognition  of  his  responsibilities.  The 
man  was  a  self-seeker  ;  he  saw  in  the  captivity  of  the 
Romanovs  an  opportunity  to  advance  his  own  and  his  son's 
interests.  He  indulged  in  all  manner  of  demonstrations  of 
loyalty — bell-ringing  and  prayers— without  regard  to  their 
effect  upon  the  captives  and  their  gaolers.  As  a  matter  of 
fact,  they  did  much  harm  to  the  family.  The  accusation 
brought  against  him  by  Soloviev  appears  to  be  borne  out  in 
part  by  the  discovery  of  a  certain  quantity  of  articles  belonging 
to  the  Imperial  Family  in  his  (Vasiliev 's)  house. 

*  *  *  *  * 

The  Czech  pharmacist  Gaida,  commanding  their  rearguard 
when  they  were  stopped  by  orders  from  Berlin  and  Moscow, 
who  afterwards  entered  the  service  of  the  Omsk  Government, 
played  a  sorry  part  in  the  investigation  of  the  Tsar's  murder. 
Immediately  after  the  occupation  of  Ekaterinburg  by  the 
Whites,  Gaida  requisitioned  Ipatiev's  house  for  his  personal 
use  and  took  the  room  in  which  the  Tsar  and  his  wife  had 
lived  for  himself.  The  judiciary  begged  him  not  to  do  so, 
explaining  that  it  was  most  necessary  that  the  house  should 
not  be  disturbed  in  the  interests  of  justice.  They  were  brushed 
aside.  Gaida  threatened  violence  if  they  did  not  leave  him 
alone.  They  drew  up  a  prods-verbal  on  the  matter.  It  is 
in  the  dossier. 

In  the  light  of  this  incident  it  is  rather  strange  to  read  the 


134       THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  THE  ROMANOVS 

Red  proclamations  denouncing  the  Czecho-Slovaks  as  the 
agents  of  the  counter-revolution,  who  were  coming  to  deliver 
Nicholas  Romanov.  Gaida's  complete  indifference  to  the 
Romanovs  and  their  fate  was  shared  by  his  countrymen,  and 
it  is  extremely  doubtful  if  they  would  have  behaved  better 
towards  the  Romanovs  than  they  did  afterwards  to  Kolchak.^ 

Among  the  spies  and  officers  employed  by  Gaida  some  are 
known  to  have  been  Bolshevist  agents.  One  of  the  officials 
of  his  intelHgence  branch  proved  to  be  the  Nikolsky  who  had 
behaved  so  brutally  to  the  exiles  at  Tobolsk,  and  was  after- 
wards president  of  the  local  Soviet.  When  the  Russian  officers 
at  Ekaterinburg  heard  of  his  previous  exploits,  they  killed  him, 
without  giving  the  investigation  an  opportunity  to  obtain 
his  deposition. 

Another  hostile  Czech  was  a  certain  Zaicek,  a  former  Austrian 
officer,  who  was  in  charge  of  an  important  section  of  the 
Intelligence  Department.  When  the  former  Extraordinary 
Komisar  Yakovlev,  repenting  of  the  part  he  had  played  in 
the  removal  of  the  Tsar  from  Tobolsk,  came  over  to  the  Wliites 
and  applied  to  General  Shenik  for  service,  he  happened  to 
come  into  the  hands  of  Zaicek,  who,  being  a  traitor  and  a  spy, 
took  measures  to  have  Yakovlev  sent  away,  perhaps  knowing 
that  he  had  been  in  the  confidence  of  Mirbach  and  might 
give  the  whole  German  show  away. 

The  Omsk  Government,  largely  composed  of  Socialist- 
Revolutionaries,  gave  little  encouragement  to  the  investigation. 
To  them  the  murder  of  the  ex-Tsar  appeared  to  be  a  matter 
of  quite  inferior  interest.  The  investigating  magistrate,  being 
in  straits  for  money,  applied  to  the  Governor-General  of  the 

^  Admiral  Kolchak  was  surrendered  by  the  Czechs  to  the  Reds  at 
Irkutsk  while  he  was  travelling  eastward  in  February,  1920,  under  the 
protection  of  the  Allied  flags.  The  order  to  surrender  him  was 
coxmtersigned  by  the  Czech  '  commander-in  chief.'  Admiral  Kol- 
chak was  shot  soon  afterwards  in  a  peculiarly  cruel  manner. 


THE   JACKALS  135 

Ural,  a  mining  engineer  named  P.,  for  a  sum  of  100  roubles 
(then  worth  about  £1)  to  provide  the  monthly  stipend  of  a 
typist.  Being  a  member  of  the  S.  R.  party,  this  high 
official  refused,  explaining  that  in  his  opinion  no  inquiry 
was  needed,  as  it  was  clearly  '  a  simple  case  of  the  shoot- 
ing of  hostages,'  too  common  to  worry  about. 

When,  at  a  later  stage,  this  person  was  making  his  way 
eastward  in  a  luxurious  car  stuffed  with  '  loot,'  the  officers 
of  Ataman  Semenov  searched  it,  found  several  millions  of 
Romanov  roubles  (the  currency  of  the  old  regime,  worth  even 
now  about  250  to  the  £),  besides  gold  and  platinum,  and  shot 
him  on  the  spot  as  a  '  speculator.' 

The  investigating  magistrate  was  able  to  discover  the 
whereabouts  of  a  noted  Bolshevist  named  Ilmer,  who  had  come 
to  Siberia  secretly  with  an  important  mission  from  Moscow. 
He  communicated  with  the  Secret  Service  at  Omsk,  requesting 
that  an  officer  should  be  sent  to  apprehend  Ilmer,  But  Ilmer 
did  not  turn  up.  It  was  ascertained  that  the  Secret  Service, 
instead  of  sending  the  officer,  had  sent  a  telegram,  with  the 
result  that  Ilmer  escaped. 

Perhaps  the  worst  enemies  of  the  investigation  were  in  the 
Ministry  of  Justice.  It  being  a  cardinal  maxim  of  the  Kolchak 
Government  that  it  wielded  supreme  authority  over  the 
Russian  dominions  pending  the  convocation  of  a  '  Constituent 
Assembly,'  the  blessed  formula  consecrated  by  advanced 
politicians  and  adopted  as  a  sine  qua  non  by  the  powers  of 
the  Entente,  the  Minister  of  Justice  had  to  be  a  Socialist- 
Revolutionary.  M.  Starynkevich,  a  lawyer  who  had  been 
exiled  by  the  former  regime,  fulfilled  the  '  necessary ' 
requirements. 

He  persistently  and  deliberately  declined  to  treat  the  Tsar's 
murder  as  anything  more  than  an  ordinary  penal  offence, 
and  would  not  appoint  a  special  investigator.     The  inquiry 


136       THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  THE  ROMANOVS 

was  therefore  conducted  casually.  A  member  of  the 
Tribunal  of  Ekaterinburg,  without  special  training  in  criminal 
investigation,  had  the  case  in  hand.  (Curiously  enough,  he 
was  of  Jewish  extraction.)  The  blunders,  or  worse,  then 
committed  are  directly  ascribable  to  Starynkevich. 

It  was  only  by  direct  and  categorical  orders  from  the  Supreme 
Ruler  (Admiral  Kolchak)  that  the  appointment  of  a  special  inves- 
tigator (N.  A.  Sokolov)  was  assured.  But  realizing  that  renewed 
and  constant  attempts  would  be  made  to  upset  the  investigation, 
Kolchak  gave  Sokolov  a  special  warrant  of  appointment  and 
otherwise  supported  him  in  his  work.  It  was  very  necessary, 
for  aU  that  Omsk  would  allow  him  for  expenses  was  Rs.4.50 
per  diem  (about  6d.),  and  when  he  arrived  in  Ekaterinburg 
he  had  exactly  165  Siberian  roubles  (then  about  £2)  in  his 
possession  for  all  outlays. 

Bad  enough,  this  was  nothing  to  what  came  after.  The 
investigation  was  frequently  embarrassed  by  the  excessive 
zeal  of  amateur  Sherlocks  or  Pushfuls.  In  some  cases  their 
thirst  for  information  could  not  be  ignored,  as  they  claimed 
to  make  their  demands  from  a  high  personage  friendly  to  the 
Omsk  Government.  In  February  of  last  year,  Sokolov  prepared 
a  confidential  report  for  transmission  abroad  and  handed  it 
to  Admiral  Kolchak.  The  next  morning  it  appeared  in.  fuU 
in  the  local  organ  of  the  Socialist-Revolutionary  party.  The 
paper  was  suppressed  a  few  hours  later,  but  of  course  the 
mischief  had  been  done.  The  murderers  knew  exactly  how 
the  investigation  stood.  All  the  names  of  the  accused  and 
witnesses  were  printed  in  full  for  the  whole  world  to  read, 
and  there  also  was  the  name  of  the  investigator  (Sokolov), 
whose  appointment  had  been  so  distasteful  to  Starynkevich, 
practically  inviting  anybody  to  come  and  kill  him.  (A  sum- 
mary of  the  disclosed  information  was  published  in  The  Times 
of  February  18,  1919.) 


THE  JACKALS  137 

This  same  Starynkevich,  now  an  ex-Minister,  has  lately 
ome  out  in  another  '  disclosure.'  He  has  informed  the 
epresentatives  of  Jewry  that  not  a  single  Jew  was  concerned  in 
he  murder  of  the  Imperial  Family.  It  seems  almost  incredible, 
mt  here  is  the  document ;  it  is  a  letter  from  the  Secretary 
»f  the  Joint  Foreign  Committee  of  the  Jewish  Board  of 
deputies  and  the  Anglo-Jewish  Association,  giving  details  of 
in  interview  with  M.  Starynkevich. 

It  says  :   '  the  Minister,  in  a  statement  given  to  me  written 

lown  with   his  own  hand,  and  herewith  literally  translated, 

leclares  that : — 

'  On  the  strength  of  the  data  of  the  preliminary  inquiry,  the  course  of 
vhich  was  reported  to  me  every  week  by  the  Attorney-General,  I  can 
;ertify  that,  among  the  number  of  persons  proved  by  the  data  of  the 
jreliminary  inquiry  to  have  been  guilty  of  the  assassination  of  the  late 
imperor  Nicholas  II  and  of  his  family,  there  was  not  any  person  of 
l^ewish  descent.' 

The  letter  proceeds  : — 

'  I  put  to  him  the  question  as  to  how  he  explains  the  fact  of  General 
Snox  having  sent  to  the  British  War  Of&ce  a  report  to  the  contrary. 
\ll.  Starynkevich  .  .  .  said  that  the  Russian  military  circles  had 
vehemently  asserted  from  the  very  outset  that  the  assassination  of 
he  Tsar's  family  was  the  handiwork  of  the  Jews,  and  that  this  point 
mist  be  established  by  the  inquiry.  They  started  an  investigation  of 
heir  own,  and  insisted  on  the  whole  course  of  the  inquirj'^  being  left 
0  themselves. 

'  The  Minister  of  Justice  had  to  contend  with  great  difficulties  before 
le  obtained  that  the  inquiry  should  be  carried  out  by  the  regular  organs 
)f  his  department.  Even  the  impartial  investigation  did  not  cease  to 
)e  hampered  by  the  interference  of  the  military.  Thus,  when  the  First 
ixamining  Magistrate,  Sergeiev,  had  failed  to  discover  any  trace  of 
fewish  participation  in  the  crime,  these  militarj^  circles  vociferously 
protested  against  him  and  insinuated  that  M.  Sergeiev  was  a  Jew 
limself .  This  campaign  was  so  violent  and  persistent  that  the  Minister 
)f  Justice  had  to  discharge  M.  Sergeiev  from  the  case  and  to  entrust 
he  further  proceedings  to  another  examining  magistrate.  His  suc- 
;essor  was  likewise  unable  to  discover  any  trace  of  Jewish  partici- 
iation  in  the  murder  of  the  Tsar's  family.' 

I  have  given  this  '  statement '  in  full  to  prevent  any 
subsequent  *  misapprehensions.'     M.  Starynkevich 's  record  is 


138        THE   LAST  DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

known  to  the  reader.  He  shows  himself  in  his  written  '  denial 
to  be  a  quibbler.  The  degree  of  '  guilt  '  of  the  implicatei 
persons  had  not  been  fully  established  in  the  initial  stage 
of  the  inquiry,  but  they  were  known  to  be  implicated  an^ 
known  to  be  Jews.  The  names  of  Yurovsky,  Goloshchekir 
Safarov,  Volkov  are  in  Sergeiev's  own  proces-verbaux,  an^ 
they  were  perfectly  known  by  him  to  be  Jews. 

It  was  only  natural  that  the  maintenance  of  Sergeie 
reputed  to  be  of  Jewish  descent  at  the  head  of  the  investi 
gation  alarmed  all  who  were  concerned  with  the  establishmen 
of  the  truth,  but  M.  Starynkevich  carefully  conceals  anothe 
still  more  important  reason  for  this  anxiety.  Sergeiev  wa 
a  judge,  not  an  investigating  magistrate.  He  had  beei 
deputed  to  take  over  the  conduct  of  the  investigation  fron 
the  first  magistrate  (Nametkin)  in  the  early  days  of  August 
1918,  and,  contrary  to  law  and  to  the  rules  of  criminal  in 
vestigation  in  Russia  as  well  as  in  other  countries,  had  con 
tinned  to  conduct  the  inquiry  after  the  formation  of  th' 
government  at  Omsk  and  despite  the  fact  that  fully  qualifie( 
investigating  magistrates  were  available. 

The  persistent  refusal  of  the  Minister  to  relieve  Sergeie 
could  be  understood  only  in  one  sense.  Not  till  Februar 
of  the  following  year  did  Starynkevich  at  last  comply  witl 
the  law,  but  even  then  it  was  not  by  his  own  initiative. 

Soon  afterwards  he  himself  had  to  leave.  Hence  his  com 
plete  ignorance  of  the  subsequent  course  of  the  investigation 
His  slurs  upon  the  military  are  beneath  contempt.  Bu 
Sokolov  and  the  dossier  are  here  to  answer  him  on  this  anc 
any  other  points,  if  necessary. 


CHAPTER  XIV 

BY  ORDER   OF  THE   '  TSIK  ' 

rHE  murderers  of  the  Romanovs  have  been  unmasked 
in  the  preceding  chapters,  but  not  all  of  them.  The 
irts  played  by  Yurovsky  and  Goloshchekin  are  apparent. 
hey  were  confidential  agents  of  Yankel  Sverdlov,  the  Red 
sar.  Other  veiy  important  personages,  although  they 
!mained  in  the  background,  were  Komisars  Safarov,  Voikov 
id  Syromolotov.  They  occupied  prominent  positions  in 
le  Regional  Government  of  the  Ural,  as  members  of  the  Presi- 
Lum  or  Board  of  the  Sovdep  (Council  of  Deputies). 

This  Board  it  was  that  '  decided  '  that  the  Romanov 
imily  should  be  shot.  The  local  Council,  i.e.  the  '  representa- 
ves  of  the  people,'  knew  nothing,  at  the  time,  of  the  execu- 
on.  Had  they  been  consulted,  of  course  the  whole  city 
ould  have  learned  about  it.  We  know  that  they  first  heard 
E  it  on  the  fourth  day. 

I  give  here  a  complete  hst  of  the  names  or  cognomens  of 
16  so-called  '  judges  '  :  (i)  Beloborodov,  (2)  Goloshchekin, 
;)  Sakovich,  (4)  Voikov,  (5)  Bykov,  (6)  Syromolotov,  (7) 
afarov,  (8)  Ukraintsev,  (9)  Kiselev,  (10)  Vainer,  (11)  Hotimsky, 
:2)  Vorobiev,  (13)  Andronikov,  (14)  Andreiev,  (15)  Simashko, 
:6)  Avdeiev,  (17)  Kariakin,  (18)  Zhilinsky,  (19)  Chufarov, 
50)  Yurovsky,  (21)  Efremov,  (22)  Anuchin.  The  above 
)rmed  the  Oblastnoy  Sovdep  (Regional  Council  of  Deputies), 
e,,  the  representatives  for  the  whole  of  the  Ural  region. 

139 


140       THE   LAST  DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

The  Board  was  composed  of  five  members,  Beloborodov,  tli 
Russian  '  dummy  '  as  president,  and  Goloshchekin,  Safaro 
Voikov  and  Syromolotov,  all  four  Jews,  as   members.    Tl 
Chrezvychaika     (Inquisition)     was    '  run '    by    Goloshcheki 
Yurovsky,  Efremov,  Chustkevich  and  three  other  Jews. 

These  '  inner  circles  '  are  the  men  who  '  tried  '  the  Ts; 
and  condemned  him  to  death,  in  other  words,  assumed  tl 
duty  of  carrying  out  Sverdlov's  orders.  They  sent  '  con 
promising  '  documents  to  Moscow  afterwards  :  letters  alleff' 
to  have  been  surreptitiously  exchanged  between  the  Tsc 
and  officers  outside.  They  are  clumsy  forgeries.  One  ( 
them  alludes  to  ■'  five  windows  '  facing  the  square  as  possib 
means  of  escape,  whereas  the  Tsar's  quarters  comprised  on! 
two  windows  on  that  side,  and  if  the  alleged  plotters  ha 
succeeded  in  penetrating  the  double  barriers,  scaling  the  houi 
and  entering  as  directed,  they  would  have  plumped  into 
veritable  hornet's  nest.  Besides,  how  could  they  have  hope 
to  escape  the  machine-gunner  on  the  roof. 

4:  ^  ^  :|c  9|: 

This  mockery  of  a  trial  has  been  perpetuated  by  the  '  fakes 
of  sensation-seekers  and  imaginative  writers.  One  enterpri 
ing  foreigner  cabled  thousands  of  words  from  Ekaterinbui 
not  long  after  the  murder,  describing  the  aeroplanes  the 
hovered  over  the  city — presumably  to  carry  off  the  Tsar- 
and  the  dropping  of  bombs,  etc.,  all  of  which  was,  of  cours 
rank  nonsense  ;  but  he  also  gave  a  wonderful  account  t 
'  the  Tsar's  faithful  servant,'  whose  name  had  never  bee 
heard  of,  who  told  with  a  wealth  of  detail  how  the  Tsar  wj 
fetched  away  '  for  trial '  and  how  he  came  back  and  toe 
an  affecting  leave  of  his  wife  and  children  before  being  sh( 
aU  alone.  .  .  .  There  are  pages  and  pages  of  this  stuff,  ar 
it  is  all  absolute  twaddle,  but  none  the  less  mischievous. 

There  was  no  trial  of  any  sort  whatsoever.  No  trial- 
therefore  no  verdicts,  judgments  or  other  such-like  formula 


BY   ORDER   OF  THE   '  TSIK  '  141 

i  no  reading  of  any  papers  to  the  Tsar  before  the 
nily  was  sent  to  its  last  account.  This  so-called  '  paper ' 
an  invention  inspired  by  the  murderers  to  fit  in  with  the 
)Scow  story  of  an  intended  trial.  The  only  '  paper ' 
icocted  by  the  murderers  was  the  '  Decision  '  as  to  the 
scecution.'  At  the  Soviet  Headquarters  in  Ekaterinburg 
merous  drafts  of  this  document  were  afterwards  discovered 
d  figure  in  the  dossier.  They  show  how  troubled  the  mur- 
rers  were  to  invent  a  lie  for  open  approval  by  Moscow. 

Why  was  the  Tsar  moved  from  Tobolsk,  and  why  was  he  not 
Dught  to  iMoscow,  as  Yakovlev  had  been  instructed  ?  It 
absurd  on  the  face  of  it  to  hint  that  the  Ural  Regional 
vdep  was  overriding  the  decisions  of  Moscow.  We  have 
it  seen  that  the  virtual  rulers  of  the  Ural  were  Yankel  Sverd- 
/'s  fellow- Jews  and  associates,  even  subordinates. 
An  answer  is  offered  by  the  Soviet  organ  of  Ma}^  4,  1918. 
explains  that  it  was  '  owing  to  alleged  indications  of  efforts 
ing  made  by  local  peasants  and  by  Monarchist  groups  to 
omote  escape.'  We  trace  here  the  handiwork  of  Soloviev 
d  Vasiliev.  And  it  adds  :  '  The  regional  Soviet  of  the 
:als  are  charged  with  surveillance  over  the  Imperial  Family.' 
'he  Times,  May  6,  1918.) 

But  while  this  answer  goes  a  certain  way  and  definitely 
volves  the  responsibility  of  the  Moscow  Government  for  aU 
at  happened  in  the  Urals,  it  by  no  means  teUs  the  whole 
nth.  The  inside  history  of  Yakovlev's  mission  has  been 
plained.  Yakovlev  was  the  agent  of  Sverdlov.  But 
^erdlov  as  president  of  the  Tsik  ^  was  over  the  foreign  as 
3II  as  the  domestic  affairs  of  Sovietdom,  being  in  fact  Prime 

^  Even  this  high  body  (the  Red  Cabinet  of  Ministers)  was,  like  all 
tviet  institutions,  ruled  by  an  Inner  Ring  (Presidium  or  Executive 
)mmittee),  which  was  (and  is)  invariably  composed  of  Jews,  with  one 
two  Russians  as  lay  figures. 


142         THE   LAST  DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

Minister.  Now  Sverdlov  had  been  a  paid  agent  of  Germa] 
and  was  still  in  the  closest  touch  and  relationship  with  Mirbac 
The  Tsar's  own  definition  of  -Yakovlev's  mission  was  unqu( 
tionably  right,  in  substance,  if  not  in  detail — to  obtain  1 
endorsement  of  the  Treaty  of  Brest-Litovsk. 

The  Soviet  organs  published  long  accounts  of  Yakovle^ 
journey.  In  these  he  is  falsely  described  as  the  representati 
of  the  Sovnarkom,  i.e.  of  Lenin's  parhament.  That  was  mere 
to  cover  up  the  tracks.  Yakovlev  is  quoted  as  speaking 
Nicholas  Romanov  as  a  pleasant  enough  person,  but  of  '  e 
traordinarily  limited  intellect.'  You  see,  he  was  not  clev 
enough  to  realize  the  advantages  that  were  offered 
him. 

The  Germans,  of  course,  were  extremely  displeased  by  tl 
contretemps,  more  especially  as  it  came  in  conjunction  wi 
the  failure  of  their  plan  to  nobble  the  Russian  intelligentz 
and  with  their  aid  to  set  up  the  '  new  government '  th: 
Ludendorff  craved.  One  of  Mirbach's  chief  assistants,  a  D 
Ritzier,  then  remarked  to  one  of  these  Russians,  that  '  tl 
Bolsheviks  are  still  necessary.'  A  few  months  later  tl 
Red  Terror  avenged  the  slight  inflicted  upon  the  German  ass 
ciates  of  Sverdlov. 

Hi  9|C  9|C  ^  ^ 

Voikov,  the  Jew,  boasted  to  his  '  lady  '  friends  in  Ekaterii 
burg  after  the  murder,  that  '  the  world  will  never  know  wh; 
we  did  with  the  bodies. '  It  was  his  accomplices  that  suggests 
to  the  remorse-stricken  Fesenko  that  the  '  cinders  were  n( 
there.'  The  insolent  confidence  in  the  superiority  of  the 
'  precautions  '  displayed  by  Voikov  is  characteristic  of  h 
race. 

The  murderers  invented  another  story  in  Perm,  of  whic 
I  have  not  yet  spoken.  Their  agents  gave  information  thi 
one  of  the  Grand  Duchesses  had  been  seen  in  the  city  and  thj 
she  had  been  shot  during  the  Terror  some  months  after  tl 


BY  ORDER  OF  THE   '  TSIK  '  143 

3xecution '  at  Ekaterinburg.  They  were  quite  positive 
3out  it.  They  even  pointed  out  the  place  where  '  Anastasia  ' 
ad  been  buried.  The  bodies — there  were  many — were 
ichumed  ;  the  only  one  that  was  a  young  woman's  was  un- 
listakably  identified  by  the  local  police  as  that  of  '  Nastia 
orovka  '  (the  thief  Nastia),  a  well-known  criminal. 

The  Komisar  Safarov,  afterwards  editor  of  the  official 
zvestiya,  wrote  an  article  on  the  '  execution  '  which  figures 
1  the  dossier  as  an  interesting  sidelight  on  the  motives  of  the 
rime  and  its  methods.  It  is  only  fair  that  the  accused  should 
peak  for  themselves.  I  here  give  a  plain,  unvarnished 
sndering  of  this  '  defence  '  : — 

'  In  the  places  seized  by  the  Czecho-Slovaks  and  bands  of  White 
ruards  in  Siberia  and  the  Southern  Ural,  authority  has  fallen  into  the 
ands  of  Black  Hundred  pogromists  composed  of  purest  Monarchists  by 
rof  ession.  The  real  intentions  of  the  White  Guards  of  the  Quadruple 
Entente  are  made  plain  by  the  mere  fact  that  at  the  head  of  them  all, 
s  supreme  war-lord,  stands  the  Tsar's  general  Alexeiev,  the  most 
evoted  servant  of  Nicholas  the  Sanguinary,  himself  a  convinced  blood- 
iedder  {paldch).  .  .  . 

'  Around  Nicholas  all  the  time  was  spread  an  artful  network  of 
onspiracies.  One  of  them  was  discovered  during  the  transit  from 
'obolsk  to  Ekaterinburg.'  (Safarov  here  suggests  that  Yakovlev  was 
traitor,  and  passes  over  in  silence  the  whole  history  of  the  interrupted 
)urney.  This  compels  the  inference,  which  is  borne  out  by  scores  of 
irect  evidences,  that  the  Tsik,  i.e.  Sverdlov,  deliberately  sent  the 
Lomanovs  into  a  death-trap.)  Safarov  continues  :  '  Another  plot 
'as  discovered  just  before  the  execution  of  Nicholas.  The  participants 
1  the  last  conspiracy  to  deliver  the  murderer  of  worlcmen  and  peasants 
ut  of  a  peasant -workman's  prison  clearly  identified  their  hopes  with 
le  hope  that  the  Red  capital  of  the  Ural  would  be  occupied  by  Czecho- 
lovak  White  Guard  pogromists. 

'  General  Alexeiev  wanted  to  bring  over  into  his  Stavka  (G.H.Q.) 
is  own  Tsar.'  (The  General  had  long  been  dead  when  Safarov  wrote 
lis  article.)  '  His  calculations  have  not  been  justified.  The  people's 
ssizes  {narodny  sud)  have  judged  the  All-Russian  murderer  and 
nticipated  the  plans  of  the  counter-revolution.  The  will  of  the  Revolu- 
Lon  has  been  accomplished,  although  many  of  the  formal  aspects  of 
ourgcois  legal  procedure, were  infringed,  and  the  traditional,  historical 
eremonial  of  the  execution  of  "  crowned  personages  "  was  not  ob- 
erved.     The  peasant  working-man's   authority   here  also   expressed 


144         THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

itself  in  a  form  of  extreme  democratism  ;  ^  it  made  no  difEerence  for  th< 
All-Russian  murderer  and  had  him  shot  just  like  an  ordinary  robbe 
{razboinik).  Nicholas  the  Sanguinary  is  no  more,  and  the  workmei 
and  peasants  may  with  full  right  say  to  their  enemies  :  You  playec 
your  stake  on  the  Imperial  crown.  You  have  lost.  Take  your  change 
— an  empty  crowned  head.' 

The  Russian  peasants  at  Ekaterinburg  looked  at  the  mattei 
differently.  They  caught  Vaganov,  one  of  the  regicides,  anc 
killed  him  on  the  spot.  It  was  very  distressful  to  the  Investi- 
gating Magistrate,  but  he  could  not  prosecute  the  peasants 
there  were  too  many  of  them,  and  they  would  not  have  under- 
stood. It  had  appeared  to  them  the  right  thing  to  do,  to  slaj 
the  Russian  who  had  laid  hands  upon  the  Tsar. 

But  Safarov  eludes  the  issue  he  himself  raises.     Why  not 

1  Here  is  the  way  democratism  '  was  applied.  I  cite  Bolshevist 
writers  : — 

The  '  instruction  '  issued  by  the  All-Russian  Extraordinary  Com- 
mission to  all  Provincial  Extraordinary  Commissions  {chrezvychaiki) 
says  :  '  The  All-Russian  Extraordinary  Commission  is  perfectly  inde- 
pendent in  its  work,  carrying  out  house  searches,  arrests,  executions, 
which  it  afterwards  reports  to  the  Council  of  the  People's  Commissaries 
(Sovnavkom)  and  to  the  Central  Executive  Council  (Tsik).  The  Pro- 
vincial and  District  Extraordinary  Commissions  are  independent  in 
their  activities,  and  when  called  upon  by  the  local  Executive  Council 
(Ispolkom)  present  a  report  of  their  work.  In  so  far  as  house  searches 
and  arrests  are  concerned,  a  report  made  afterwards  may  result  in 
putting  right  irregularities  committed  owing  to  lack  of  restraint.  The 
same  cannot  be  said  of  executions.  ...  It  can  also  be  seen  from  the 
"  instruction  "  that  personal  safety  is  to  a  certain  extent  guaranteed 
only  to  members  of  the  Government,  of  the  Central  Executive  Council 
(Tsik)  and  of  the  local  Executive  Committees  (Ispolkom).  With  the 
exception  of  these  few  persons  aU  members  of  the  local  committees  of 
the  (Bolshevik)  party,  of  the  Control  Committees  and  of  the  Executive 
Committee  of  the  party  may  be  shot  at  any  time  by  the  decision  of  any 
Extraordinary  Commission  of  a  small  district  towTi  if  they  happen  to 
be  on  its  territory,  and  a  report  of  that  made  afterwards.'  (From  an 
article  by  M.  Alminsk5^  Pravda,  October  8,  1918.) 

Comrade  Bokiv  gave  details  of  the  work  of  the  Petrograd  District 
Commission  since  the  evacuation  of  the  All-Russian  Extraordinary 
Commission  to  Moscow.  The  total  number  of  arrested  persons  was 
6,220.  Eight  hundred  were  shot  (during  about  six  months).  (From  a 
report  of  a  meeting  of  the  Conference  of  the  Extraordinary  Commission, 
Izvestiya,  October  19,  1918,  No.  228.)  ^ 


t'LATE   VI it 


THE  FAULTS   OF  THE   EARLIER 
INQUIRY 

N.  A.  Sokolov,  pointing  to  the  wall  of  Ipatiev's 
house,  calls  attention  to  p.  serious  omission  made  by  his 
predecessor.  General  Diterichs  (sealed)  listens.  The 
other  auditor  is  M.  Maynitsky,  Prokuror  (Public  Prose- 
cutor) of  the  Ekaterinbur}.;;  Court.  Photograph  taken 
in  the  jrarden,  beside  the  terrace. 


THE   HAND   OF  THE   RED  JEW 
MURDERERS 

A  facsimile  of  the  original  message  filed  at  the 
Ekaterinburg  Telegraph  Office  by  the  local  Soviet 
chiefs  to  the  Moscow  Tsik  (Central  Executive  Com- 
mittee) on  July  4,  1918,  twelve  days  before  the  murder. 
In  it  Beloborodov,  the  Russian  'dummy'  president, 
informs  Sverdlov  through  Goloshchekin  that  Syro- 
molotov  is  hastening  to  Moscow  to  take  the  final 
instructions  for  the  'aftair,'  and  that  the  Russian 
guards  have  been  replaced  by  '  others,'  i.e.,  by  German 
soldiers. 


M'llJJi 


Pi  ATE  VIII 


THl'     i\l   I  rs    OF    THE    EARLIER    INnI   \u\ 


M   0  C   K   B  A 


lIpeAceAarejiK)  IlUK     CsepAjioBy 
AJW     rOJlOUlEKMHA. 

•     CbipoMojiOTOB  KaKpa3  noexaji  njin  opraHnsaunH  aejia  corjracHo  yKaaaHMti 

UcHTpa  onaccHMfl  HanpacHW  ro^jKa     ABAees  cMeneH  ero  hdmoiuhmk  Moulkhh 
apecTOBaH   BMeCTO  AaJieeBa  lOpoBCKnK  BHyTpeHH^1^i   Kapayji   aecb   CMCHeH 

3aMeHneTCH\apyrMMM  TOMica.-      '^jjO 

BeJTO(5opoAOB 


THE  HAND  OF  THE  RED  JEW  MURDERERS 


BY   ORDER   OF   THE    '  TSIK  '  145 

ave  sent  the  Tsar  for  trial  to  the  capital,  to  Moscow  ?  Surely 
lat  was  the  place  where  the  *  will  of  the  Revolution  '  could 
ave  been  properly  displayed  !  All  these  wonderful  con- 
piracies  of  which  he  speaks  made  it  all  the  more  necessary 
3  send  him  there  and  save  the  Ural  Soviet  from  all  responsi- 
ility.  The  approach  of  the  Whites  should  have  caused  the 
)cal  chieftains  not  to  delay  one  single  day.  Why  not  ? 
lecause  Sverdlov  had  already  sent  for  Syromolotov  to  arrange 
le  murder. 

The  cynical  references  to  '  bourgeois  legal  procedure  '  and 
)  '  historical  ceremonial '  will,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  put  an  end 
)r  ever  to  the  legend  of  a  '  trial.' 

:|c  :ic  %  9[:  :f: 

Yankel  Sverdlov  conversed  with  his  agents  in  Ekaterinburg 
v^er  the  direct  wire  before  and  after  the  murder,  giving  direc- 
ons  when  necessary.  They  forgot  to  destroy  all  evidence  of 
lese  conversations.  When  the  investigation  was  confided 
)  experienced  and  fearless  hands,  one  of  the  first  measures 
iken  was  to  thoroughly  overhaul  the  records  of  the  telegraph 
ffice.  It  yielded  astonishing  results.  I  give  some  of  the 
ocuments  in  this  and  the  following  chapters. 

Here  is  the  record  of  a  conversation  between  the  Red  Tsar 
[id,  apparently,  Beloborodov,  the  former  in  Moscow,  the 
-tter  in  Ekaterinburg.  This  record  was  written  in  pencil 
a  the  backs  of  telegram  blanks.  There  are  six  such  blanks, 
he  writing  is  evidently  of  one  and  the  same  person.  It  con- 
sts  of  questions  asked  by  Sverdlov  and  answers  thereto, 
he  record  was  made  obviously  on  July  20,  four  days  after  the 
lurder.     Here  it  is,  textually  translated  : — 

What  is  heard  with  you  ? 

The  position  on  the  front  is  somewhat  better  than  it  appeared 
jsterday.  It  is  ascertained  that  the  opponent  has  denuded  all  fronts 
id  flung  all  his  forces  on  Ekaterinburg.  Can  we  hold  Ekaterinburg 
'Ug  ?  It  is  difficult  to  say.  We  are  taking  all  measures  to  hold  it. 
verything  superfluous  has  been  evacuated  from  Ekaterinburg, 
estcrday  a  courier  left  with  the  documents  that  interest  you.     Com- 

K 


146         THE   LAST  DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

municate  the  decision  of  the  Tsik,  and  may  we  acquaint  the  populatioi 
by  means  of  the  text  that  you  know  ? 

At  a  meeting  of  the  Tsik  presidium  on  the  i8th  it  was  decidec 
{postanovleno)  to  recognize  the  decision  of  the  Ur.  Reg.  Sovdep  as  regula: 
{■pravilnym).  You  may  publish  your  own  text.  With  us  yesterday 
in  all  the  newspapers  was  inserted  a  corresponding  announcement.  ] 
have  this  instant  sent  for  the  exact  text  and  will  communicate  it  to  yoi 
{iebie,  i.e.  to  thee.     Sverdlov  is  speaking  to  an  inferior). 

*  *  4:  *  * 

This  moment  I  shall  hand  over  the  exact  text  of  our  publication 

I  do  not  reproduce  it.  There  is  no  need.  The  '  wireless 
printed  in  The  Times  of  July  22, 1918,  is  the  exact  and  accurate 
translation  of  the  text  given  in  this  conversation  recordec 
in  Ekaterinburg  two  days  previously.  (The  Moscow  and  th( 
Ekaterinburg  texts  are  given  in  Chapter  X.) 

What  better  evidence  could  be  found  of  the  genuineness  0 
the  above  record  ?  It  stops  there.  But  it  tells  us  volumes 
It  is  the  language  of  conspirators,  of  accomplices  in  a  crimt 
and  of  a  superior  whose  orders  and  whose  initiative  alon( 
count.  Yankel  Sverdlov  assumes  his  true  proportions.  H' 
and  the  Bolshevist  Government  in  which  he  was  omnipoten 
as  president  of  the  Central  Executive  Committee  (Tsik)  anc 
virtually  chief  also  of  the  Red  Inquisition  are  for  ever  identifiec 
with  the  murders  that  have  been  described  in  this  work. 

The  courier  referred  to  is  Yurovsky.  We  know  that  h 
left  on  the  19th  with  the  plunder  and,  it  is  believed,  the  '  heads 
The  Whites  were  only  beginning  to  concentrate  their  force? 
That  was  four  days  after  the  '  execution.' 

But  why  all  these  precautions  ?  If  the  people  are  so  anxiou 
to  try  and  punish  their  late  ruler,  why  resort  to  aU  manner  c 
subterfuges,  both  in  committing  the  '  execution  '  and  i: 
acquainting  the  people  with  the  death  of  their  '  oppressor  '  , 

The  answer  is  a  simple  one  :  Sverdlov  and  his  associate 
were  not  sure  of  the  people.  The  reason  of  that  is  equal! 
simple :    they  were  not  Russians  ;    they  were  Jews.     The 


BY   ORDER   OF  THE   '  TSIK  '  147 

/ere  '  internationalists, '  repudiating  all  nationality,  yet  dis- 
uised  under  Russian  names.  The  Russians  in  their  midst 
/ere  dupes  or  dummies.  Krassin  might  come  to  clear  the 
round,  but  Apfelbaum-Kamenev  appeared  for  the  serious 
/ork.  What  happened  in  London  in  1920  is  comparable 
1  a  modest  way  with  the  Red  mechanism  in  Russia  itself. 

Taken  according  to  numbers  of  population,  the  Jews  re- 
iresented  one  in  ten  ;  among  the  komisars  that  rule  Bolshevist 
Russia  they  are  nine  in  ten— if  anything,  the  proportion  of 
ews  is  still  greater. 

These  men  feared  the  Russian  people,  they  feared  the 
iomanovs  because  they  were  Russians,  they  feared  Nicholas 
*omanov  because  he  had  been  a  Russian  Tsar,  and  when  he 
efused  to  be  seduced  from  his  loyalty  to  his  people  and  to  the 
Jlies  they  resolved  that  he  should  die — he  and  all  the  Roman- 
vs.  This  resolve  was  carried  out  when  the  advance  of  anti- 
)olshevist  forces  gave  a  reasonable  hope  of  sophisticating 
tie  crime  and  avoiding  a  just  punishment.  And  so  definite 
ras  Jew-ruled  Moscow  on  the  necessity  of  the  ex-Tsar's  death 
tiat  a  whole  month  before  the  murder  the  report  persisted 
tiat  Nicholas  II  was  dead. 

On  June  21  the  Komisar  of  the  Press,  named  Stark,  tele- 
raphed  to  the  Presidium  of  the  Sovdep  at  Ekaterinburg  : 
Urgently  inform  regarding  authenticity  reports  Nicholas 
'omanov  killed.'  On  the  23rd  Bonch-Bruevich,  the  secretary 
f  the  Sovnarkom  (Council  of  People's  Commissaries,  of  which 
.enin  is  president),  telegraphed  to  the  President  of  the  Eka- 
srinburg  Sovdep  (i.e.  Beloborodov)  :  '  Information  circulating 
loscow  alleging  former  Emperor  Nicholas  the  Second  killed, 
end  any  available  information.'  A  certain  Boyard  arrived 
1  Ekaterinburg  on  July  9  and  telegraphed  to  the  French  Con- 
a\  in  Moscow  :  '  Am  staying  meanwhile  at  British  Consulate, 
ieports  about  Romanov  false." 


148         THE   LAST  DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

The  Germans  knew  what  they  were  doing  when  they  sent 
Lenin's  pack  of  Jews  into  Russia.  They  chose  them  as  agents 
of  destruction.  Why  ?  Because  the  Jews  were  not  Russians 
and  to  them  the  destruction  of  Russia  was  all  in  the  way  of 
business,  revolutionary  or  financial.  The  whole  record  of 
Bolshevism  in  Russia  is  indelibly  impressed  with  the  stamp 
of  alien  invasion.  The  murder  of  the  Tsar,  dehberately 
planned  by  the  Jew  Sverdlov  (who  came  to  Russia  as  a  paid 
agent  of  Germany)  and  carried  out  by  the  Jews  Goloshchekin, 
Sjn^omolotov,  Safarov,  Voikov  and  Yurovsky,  is  the  act  not 
of  the  Russian  people,  but  of  this  hostile  invader. 

The  Jewish  domination  in  Russia  is  supported  by  certain 
Russians  :  the  '  burgess  '  Ulianov,  alias  Lenin,  the  '  noble  ' 
Chicherin,  the  '  dissenter '  Bonch-Bruevich.  They  are  all 
mere  screens  or  dummies  behind  which  the  Sverdlovs  and  the 
thousand  and  one  Jews  of  Sovdepia  continue  their  work 
of  destruction  ;  having  wrecked  and  plundered  Russia  by 
appealing  to  the  ignorance  of  the  working  folk,  they  are  now 
using  their  dupes  to  set  up  a  new  tyranny  worse  than  any  that 
the  world  has  known. 

Sovietdom  has  consecrated  three  heroes  to  whom  monuments 
have  been  erected  :  to  Karl  Marx,  to  Judas  Iscariot,  and  to 
Leo  Tolstoi,  the  three  names  that  are  associated  with  Revolu- 
tion, Apostasy,  and  Anarchism  ;    two  of  them  Jews. 

^  :ic  4:  ^  4: 

When  the  Jew  Kanegisser  assassinated  the  Jew  Uritsky, 
the  Soviets  ordained  a  Terror  throughout  the  land.  Rivers 
of  Russian  blood  had  to  wipe  away  the  stain  caused  by  a  Jew 
who  dared  to  oppose  the  Jewish  rulers  of  unhappy  Russia. 


CHAPTER    XV 

THE   RED    KAISER 

WHEN  Yakovlev  failed  to  remove  the  Tsarevich  from 
Tobolsk  and  to  '  convert  '  the  Tsar,  he  disappointed 
/lirbach  more  than  he  disappointed  Sverdlov. 

The  Jews  feared  the  Russians,  but  the  Germans  wanted 
o  use  them.  The  Red  Tsar  planned  to  exterminate  the 
Romanovs,  but  the  Red  Kaiser  proposed  to  reinstate  Nicholas. 

For  a  time  their  respective  schemes  assumed  divergent 
ourses  ;  in  the  end,  Wilhelm's  agents  realized  that  they 
ould  not  dissociate  themselves  from  the  Red  Tsar,  and  it 
/as  the  latter's  plan  that  prevailed.  But,  morally  as  well 
s  practically,  the  German  hand  which  had  brought  the  Jew 
fiurderers  into  Russia,  controlled  and  directed  the  assassins' 
rork.  Only  when  Berlin  realized  that  the  Romanovs  were 
rrevocably  on  the  side  of  the  Entente  did  they  release  the 
:ands  of  the  murderers. 

The  proposal  that  Yakovlev  brought  to  Tobolsk  was  much 
lore  insidious  than  the  Tsar  understood  it  to  be.  Nicholas 
/as  not  only  to  endorse  the  peace  concluded  at  Brest ;  he 
.^as  to  seize  the  reins  of  power  with  the  help  of  German 
layonets  and  to  give  his  only  son  to  be  a  lawful  Tsar  under 
German  tutelage.  This  meant  the  intervention  of  Russia  in 
he  war  again,  but  on  the  German  side.  The  Red  Kaiser 
nd  his  staff  did  not  trust  their  Red  agents  any  more. 

While  Yakovlev  went  to  Tobolsk  as  envoy  extraordinary  of  the 
'sik  (but  in  reality  of  the  German  G.H.Q.),  the  official  repre- 
entative  of  Germany  to  the  Soviet  Government,  with  which 

149 


150         THE   LAST  DAYS  OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

she  was  in  treaty  and  in  virtual  alliance,  was  summoning  a 
secret  conference  of  Anti-Soviet  Russians  to  arrange  for  the 
advent  of  the  '  new  government  '  desired  by  Ludendorff. 

It  was  a  very  pretty  scheme,  quite  on  German  lines.  But 
it  failed  at  every  point.  The  Germans  once  more  had  shown 
a  total  incapacity  to  understand  human  nature.  Nicholas 
scorned  the  base  overtures  ;  the  Russian  intelligentsia  dis- 
played, on  this  occasion,  a  sound  understanding  of  their  duties 
and  interests.^  The  illness  of  Alexis  was  another  obstacle, 
though  in  itself  it  made  no  difference. 

^  ^~  ^  it:  H/i 

Sverdlov  was  not  disturbed  by  Yakovlev's  failure  to  bring 
Nicholas  and  Alexis  to  Moscow.  He  had  his  agents  every- 
where. While  Soloviev  acted  as  watch-dog  over  the  cap- 
tives of  Tobolsk  so  that  no  stranger  to  German  plans 
should  spirit  them  away,  innumerable  Red  Solovievs  hemmed 
the  captives  in.  The  common  herd  of  the  Soviets  knew 
nothing,  of  course.  The  strings  were  cunningly  and  discreetly 
pulled  from  Moscow  according  to  the  best  methods  of  Pots- 
dam and  Wilhelmstrasse. 

No  sooner  had  Yakovlev  started  on  the  terrible  rush  of 
1 60  miles  over  bogs  and  rivers  running  deep  water  over 
breaking  ice  to  Tinmen,  than  the  Jewish  conclave  in  Ekater- 
inburg received  its  orders — to  stop  the  travellers  at  all  costs. 
Omsk  was  at  once  '  stampeded  '  by  the  false  statement  that 
Yakovlev  was  trying  to  arrange  a  rescue.  Yakovlev  was 
really  seeking  to  escape  the  North  Ural  net  by  taking  the 
South  Ural  route.  He  did  not  have  to  go  through  Omsk 
at  all,  but  to  change  from  the  Perm  on  to  the  Samara  line. 
There  was  no  escaping  out  of  the  country  by  that  route  then. 
It  could  lead  only  to  Moscow.  Nevertheless,  this  train  turned 
back  to  Ekaterinburg.  Sverdlov  did  not  really  want  the 
Romanovs  to  go  further.  He  could  not  afford  to  quarrel 
^  See  footnote,  Chapter  VH. 


THE   RED   KAISER  151 

penly  with  his  former  paymasters,  but  he  was  probably 
drewd  enough  and  sufficiently  well  informed  to  suspect 
heir  secret  designs. 

The  talk  of  a  trial  in  Moscow  did  not  begin  till  much  later, 
/hen  Moscow  rumour  reported  the  Tsar  as  already  defunct, 
nd  solely  as  an  antidote  to  those  rumours,  as  they  threatened 
0  upset  the  plan  of  murder. 

Sakovich,  formerly  surgeon  in  a  hussar  regiment  and  ex- 
itra-monarchist,  appertained  to  the  Ural  Regional  Sovdep 
s  Komisar  of  Health.  He  deposed  afterwards  that  he  had 
'Verheard  Goloshchekin,  Safarov  and  Voikov  discussing  with 
5eloborodov  the  alternative  of  wrecking  the  train  with  Nicholas 
Romanov  or  of  '  arranging  '  an  accident.  In  the  former 
ase,  the  responsibility  would  be  placed  on  '  counter-revolu- 
ionaries  '  trying  to  effect  a  rescue.  He  did  not  listen  to 
.11  the  details  as  it  did  not  concern  his  department.  But 
he  Jews  did  not  have  to  carry  out  the  plan  then.  The 
Germans  were  still  in  favour  of  the  survival  of  Nicholas. 
?he  idea  was  carried  out  some  months  later  at  Alapaevsk. 

have  a  copy  of  the  message  sent  afterwards  to  Moscow 
nd  Petrograd  in  which  the  murderers  seriously  describe 
he  '  rescue  '  staged  by  them  after  the  murder  as  having 
•een  the  cause  of  the  grand  ducal  '  disappearance.' 

The  Romanovs  were  suffered  to  live.  A  German  mission 
ostensibly  Red  Cross)  came  to  Ekaterinburg  at  the  end  of 
lay  to  ascertain  all  about  the  life  of  the  '  residents  of  Ipatiev's 
ouse,'  as  the  Imperial  prisoners  were  officially  styled.  These 
pies  went  straight  to  Berlin  with  their  report.  The  Red 
[aiser  knew  full  well  what  torments  were  being  endured  by 
hose  whom  he  had  professed  to  cherish,  who  after  all  were 
is  kith  and  kin.  He  could  have  saved  them  at  any  time. 
5ut  .  .  .  they  would  not  be  saved  by  him.  .  .  , 

Mirbach's   death   did   not,   perhaps,   introduce   any   modi- 


152         THE   LAST  DAYS  OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

fication  of  the  plan  of  slaughter.  He  was  assassinated  one 
week  before  the  event.  The  Bolsheviks  declared  that  his 
death  was  an  act  of  provocation  committed  by  their  Socialist 
opponents  and  gravely  resolved  that  they  must  not  quarrel 
with  Germany,  because  that  would  only  be  playing  into  the 
hands  of  the  assassins.    This  solemn  farce  had  a  deeper  meaning. 

He  iH  iK  H<  4: 

During  the  summer  of  that  year  the  Siberian  anti-Bolshevist 
units  began  to  grow  in  numbers  and  strength.  The  Germans 
had  themselves  foolishly  promoted  this  reaction  by  arresting 
the  departure  of  the  Czechs  and  compelling  them  to  fight. 
A  Siberian  Army  was  quickly  springing  into  existence.  It 
might  drive  the  Red  Tsar  out  of  Moscow  and  thus,  instead 
of  an  ally  or  agent  there,  the  Red  Kaiser  would  find  himself 
confronted  by  a  hostile  Russia.  The  war  was  slowly  drag- 
ging to  its  fateful  end  ;  every  battalion  counted.  The  Entente 
knew  what  the  assistance  of  Russia  meant,  so.  the  Entente 
went  to  the  aid  of  the  Czechs  and  Siberians. 

Ludendorff  does  justice  to  this  tragic  dilemma  in  his  book 

of  War  Memories  : — 

'  .  .  .  The  Entente,  realizing  that  they  could  not  work  with  a 
Government  which  looked  for  support  to  Germany,  took  action  against 
Bolshevism,  and  instead  of  sending  these  troops  (the  Czechs)  to  France, 
held  them  up  along  the  Siberian  railway  on  the  frontier  between  Russia 
and  Siberia,  in  order  to  fight  the  Government  in  IMoscow.  In  addition 
to  this,  by  garrisoning  the  railway,  the  Entente  prevented  the  return  of 
our  prisoners  of  war  from  Siberia.  This  was  unquestionably  a  serious 
loss  to  us.*     (Vol.  II,  p.  654.) 

The  holding  up  of  the  Czechs  was  Ludendorff's  own  work. 
He  is  ashamed  to  admit  it,  and  puts  the  cart  before  the  horse 
in  pleading  that  the  Entente  displayed  such  far-sighted 
activity.  Moreover,  it  was  precisely  the  German-Magyar 
prisoners  of  war  who,  rallying  to  the  appeal  of  their  Kaisers, 
stopped  the  departure  of  the  Czechs.  Ludendorff  is  too 
modest.  But  his  statement  makes  one  point  crystal-clear  : 
that  in  the  German  view  the  plan  to  get  rid  of  the  played-out 


THE   RED   KAISER  153 

^ed  Tsar,  to  put  a  subservient  White  Tsar  in  his  place,  had  to 
)e  dropped.  The  Red  Tsar  might  still  be  useful  yet.  As  Dr. 
Ritzier  had  remarked  :    '  The  Bolsheviks  are  still  necessary.' 

The  usefulness  of  the  Bolsheviks  was  to  be  twofold  :  (i) 
0  defend  the  German  front  in  Russia  ;  (2)  to  prevent  the 
/Vhite  Tsar  from  joining  the  Russian  forces  of  the  Entente. 

ij:  iK  4:  4:  'K 

This  being  the  story  of  the  Tsar's  murder,  we  are  concerned 
:hiefly  with  the  second  part  of  Yankel  Sverdlov's  German 
)rogTamme.  How  was  it  to  be  carried  out  so  that  there 
hould  be  no  possible  mistake?  Obviously,  there  was  only 
)ne  way — through  death's  dark  portals.  To  bring  the  Tsar 
)r  the  Tsarevich  to  Moscow  would  involve  risks.  The  Jews 
vere  in  a  fright ;  telegrams  discovered  in  Ekaterinburg  show 
hat  they  trusted  none  of  the  Russians  in  their  employ.  That 
3  why  the  Romanovs  remained  in  Ekaterinburg. 

Four  days  before  Mirbach's  assassination,  consequently 
vhile  the  Red  Tsar  had  his  daily  audiences  with  the  repre- 
entative  of  the  Red  Kaiser,  Goloshchekin  was  already  in 
kloscow,  and  had  discussed  the  murder  with  Sverdlov,  had 
elegraphed  to  Beloborodov  to  send  another  member  of  the 
enclave  to  Moscow. 

The  Germans  approved  the  murder  ;  there  can  be  no  doubt 
•n  this  point.  The  position  held  by  Mirbach  in  Moscow, 
lis  daily  reports  from  the  members  of  the  Red  Inquisition, 
/hich  naturally  had  the  closest  connexion  with  the  arrange- 
lents  for  the  murder,  such  as  the  sending  to  Ekaterinburg 
f  the  ten  Magyar-German  '  Letts '  as  executioners,  are 
onclusive  evidences.  The  Red  Tsar  and  the  Red  Kaiser 
/ere  in  accord. 

But  it  was  absolutely  essential  that  no  Russians  should 
'C  left  inside  the  house  where  the  Romanovs  were  to  die. 
Vhether  the  Germans  assented  to  the  wholesale  slaughter 
hat  took  place  remains  in  doubt.     By  that  time  Mirbach 


154         THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

had  gone  to  his  last  account,  and  the  bloodthirstiness  of  the 

Jewish    murderers    perhaps    exceeded    the    German    design, 

and  therein  may  be  found  a  good  reason  for  the  report  of 

their  '  safety ' ;  but  the  Red  Kaiser  cannot  escape  responsi- 

bihty  for  the  whole  crime  any  more  than  can  the  Red  Tsar 

who  planned  it  and  the  Soviet  regime  that  rendered  such  a 

butchery  possible. 

***** 

Here  is  a  translation  of  the  original  typewritten  telegram 

found  in  the  archives  of  the  telegraph  office  in  Ekaterinburg 

and  included  in  the  dossier : — 

MOSCOW. 

To  President  of  Tsik  Sverdlov  for  Goloshchekin. 
Syromolotov  has  just  gone  for  organization  of  affair  in  accordance 
with  directions  of  Centre.     Apprehensions  unfounded  stop.     Avdeiev 
superseded,  his  assistant  Moshkin  arrested.    Yurovsky  replaces  Avdeiev. 
Interior  guard  all  reUeved  replaced  by  others.     4558. 

Beloborodov. 

Below  the  text  in  black  ink  is  marked  the  date,  '  4/VII,' 
and  further,  in  ink  of  the  same  colour,  '  Telegram  received,' 
after   which    in    black    pencil    is   the    signature,    '  Komisar 

To '  (the  rest  of  the  name  illegible),  this  representative  of 

the  Soviet  being  in  charge  of  the  telegraph  office  and  endorsing 
all  official  messages  as  they  were  handed  in  for  transmission. 

The  message  is  its  own  explanation.  It  is  a  full  and  crush- 
ing confirmation  of  all  that  has  preceded — fear  of  the  Rus- 
sians ;  preparation  of  the  murder  ;  direction  of  the  plan  from 
Moscow,  and  eagerness  of  the  local  Jews  to  anticipate  the 
signal  for  the  butchery.  The  horrible  servility  of  the  dummy 
president,  Beloborodov,  is  disclosed  in  all  its  nakedness.  He 
hastens  to  assure  his  Jewish  masters  that  their  '  apprehen- 
sions '  are  '  unfounded.'  The  German-Magyars  who  had 
done  their  best  to  carry  out  the  Red  Kaiser's  behest  to 
capture  Siberia  and  to  crush  any  hope  of  Russia's  military 
revival,  were  now  called  in  to  consummate,  the  Red 
Kaiser's  plan  by  murdering  the  Tsar. 


THE   RED   KAISER  155 

ijc  *  *  *  * 

For  all  that  has  been  stated  in  these  chapters  there  is  unim- 
eachable  authority.  There  is  the  dossier.  And  there  is  the 
verwhelming  corroboration  of  the  horrible  realities  that  have 
onverted  a  large  part  of  Europe  into  a  charnel ;    Russia  into 

pest-house,  and  the  rest  of  the  world  into  a  hotbed  of  unrest. 

And  pre-eminent  among  the  doers  of  evil,  murderers  and 
espoilers,  has  been  the  Red  Kaiser. 

When,  in  1915,  he  wrote  to  the  Tsar,  asking  him  to  recall 
he  days  when  they  were  friends,  and  Nicholas,  mindful  of 
he  bitter  lessons  that  friendship  had  entailed,  replied  that 
hose  days  must  for  ever  be  forgotten,  Wilhelm  of  Hohen- 
ollern  started  the  machinery  that  was  to  sweep  out  of  exist- 
nce  the  Tsardom  and  Russia,  and  the  hapless  Romanovs. 

In  the  autumn  of  1915  there  assembled  in  Vienna  the  repre- 
entatives  of  the  German  and  Austrian  General  Staffs  to 
liscuss  a  plan  for  the  promotion  of  a  revolutionary  movement 
n  Russia.  It  was  then  that  all  the  outlines  of  the  '  Russian  ' 
evolution  were  laid  down  ;  it  was  at  that  meeting  that  the 
?ading  actors  in  the  Red  tragedy  were  chosen  :  the  Lenins 
nd  the  Sverdlovs  and  the  host  of  Jewish  wreckers,  who  spent 
he  interval  between  their  engagement  and  their  appearance 
n  the  Russian  stage  in  the  calm  of  Swiss  resorts,  studying 
nd  rehearsing  their  parts. 

The  money  that  financed  the  '  Russian  '  revolution  was 
ierman  money,  and — I  say  it  on  the  strongest  evidence  which 
an  be  corroborated  in  the  German  secret  archives — Yankel 

iVERDLOV    RECEIVED    A    SALARY    FROM    THE     GERMANS    TILL 

November  7,   1917,  when,  becoming  Red  Tsar  of  All  the 
^ussias,  he  had  at  his  disposal  loot  unimaginable. 

And  thus  it  came  to  pass  that  the  Germans  who  slew  the 
'sar  and  the  Jews  who  organized,  aided  and  abetted  the 
aurder,  each  left  his  marks  upon  the  walls  of  Ipatiev's  house. 


CHAPTER  XVI 

EPILOGUE 

MANY  hundreds  of  relics  were  collected  in  and  around 
Ekaterinburg  by  the  law,  and  more  particularly  by 
the  military,  officers  of  the  White  Government.  The  larger 
number  had  no  value  as  clues.  They  were  personal  belong- 
ings— jewellery,  clothing,  linen — that  had  been  stolen  before  and 
after  the  murder.  By  Admiral  Kolchak's  orders,  this  property 
was  taken  to  Vladivostok  by  General  Diterichs  in  February, 
1919,  and  sent  to  the  Tsar's  sister,  the  Grand  Duchess  Xenia, 
as  next-of-kin. 

Those  of  the  Romanovs  who  had  not  been  in  the  power  of 
the  Soviets  and  had  succeeded  in  leaving  the  country  were 
destitute.  The  total  fortune  belonging  to  the  Tsar  in  England 
amounted  to  ;^500. 

Two  days  after  the  murder,  the  Soviet  Government  issued 
a  decree  declaring  all  the  property  and  possessions  of  the 
Romanovs  forfeited  to  them.  This  act  had  a  double  purpose  : 
to  afford  any  banks  holding  funds  to  the  credit  of  the  famUy 
a  pretext  for  non-payment ;  to  '  legitimise  '  the  robbery  of 
the  corpses  in  the  wood  and  the  appropriation  of  the  valuables 
left  in  Ekaterinburg, 

The  ropes  of  pearls  and  the  matchless  pearl  necklace  snatched 
from  the  bodies  have  been  the  objects  of  barter  on  the  Con- 
tinental and  London  markets.  Red  missions  smuggled  in  a 
huge  quantity  of  jewels  belonging  to  the  Crown  and  to  the 
Romanovs  personally  as  well  as  to  other  individuals — all 
'  forfeited  '  in  the  same  manner. 

4:  >K  *  *  * 

156 


EPILOGUE  157 

Among  the  relics  was  a  private  code  that  was  found  in  the 
3ntilator  of  the  Ipatiev  lavatory.  It  bore  the  following 
scription  in  the  Empress's  hand  :  '  For  my  own  beloved 
icky,  dear,  to  use  when  he  is  absent  from  his  "  spitzbub." 
r.  his  lovingly,  Alice.  Osborne,  July,  1894.'  The  German 
ord  had  been  erased  and  rewritten  in  Russian  !  The  owner 
:  this  little  book  had  evidently  prized  it  above  everything 
se,  and  fearing  that  it  might  be  taken  away  from  him  had 
.dden  it — hoping,  no  doubt,  to  claim  it  some  day. 
Also  among  the  mementoes  from  the  funeral  pyre  came  a 
iby  that  belonged  to  the  murdered  Empress.  It  was  iden- 
fied  by  her  maid,  who  told  the  following  story  :  '  The  Emperor 
ive  her  Majesty  a  ruby  ring  when  she  was  only  fifteen.  They 
U  in  love  even  then.  It  was  at  the  wedding  of  her  sister  the 
rand  Duchess  Elizabeth.  After  that  they  thought  about 
Lch  other  for  eight  years.  The  Empress  always  wore  the 
iby  ring  hanging  on  a  chain  on  her  breast.' 
The  spaniel  Joy  also  came  to  England.  Both  the  dogs  that 
ere  most  highly  prized  by  the  Imperial  family  were  of  English 
reeds.  Jemmy,  who  died  with  her  masters,  was  a  diminutive 
!ack-and-tan  King  Charles,  so  small  that  she  could  not  mount 
le  Ipatiev  stairs  unaided. 

The  sufferings  of  the  Romanovs  in  Ipatiev's  house  were  so 
irrible  that  it  is  not  seemly  to  misrepresent  them,  as  some 
riters  have  done,  in  sordid  fashion.  I  have  the  inventory 
:  the  house  and  its  contents,  signed  by  Ipatiev  and  the  Kom- 
ars  ;  I  have  the  proces-vcrhal  of  Sergeiev's  inspection,  made 
ithin  a  fortnight  of  the  murder  ;  lastly,  I  have  the  evidence 
:  my  own  eyes.  The  house  itself  contained  every  comfort 
id  convenience  :  electric  light,  excellent  stoves,  a  well- 
Dpointed  bath-room  and  lavatory,  electric  bells  everywhere, 
Lenty  of  good  and  even  luxurious  furniture.  The  bath  was 
I  working  order,  and,  when  Sergeiev  visited    it,  contained 


158       THE  LAST   DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

firewood  for  the  heater,  sheets  bearing  the  Imperial  monogram, 
and  a  cake  of  soap  on  the  rack,  besides  numerous  other  signs 
of  frequent  usage.  The  brutal  guards,  being  used  to  the  Rus- 
sian steam-bath,  were  not  interested  in  this  '  outlandish  ' 
contrivance,  and  except  for  their  prying  and  offensive  habits 
did  not  apparently  stand  in  the  way  of  personal  cleanliness. 

The  story  of  the  girlish  locks  shorn  because  of  the  impossi- 
biUty  of  other  methods  of  combating  dirt  and  its  consequences 
is  not  borne  out  by  the  evidence.  '  Combings  '  of  hair  of  four 
different  hues  were  found  ;  also  some  short  hair  in  the  bath- 
room. One  would  expect  to  find  them.  It  is  stated  in  the 
dossier  that  a  barber  visited  the  house  to  attend  the  Tsar  and 
the  Tsarevich. 

Each  member  of  the  family  had  his  or  her  bed.  There  were 
sheets,  pillows  and  blankets.  There  was  a  wash-house  in  the 
courtyard. 

For  some  reason  the  house  was  deficient  in  crockery,  plate 
and  table-linen,  hence  quite  needless  discomfort  was  inflicted 
upon  the  family  at  meal-times.  The  peasant-guards,  inocu- 
lated with  the  anti-bourgeois  theories,  saw  no  particular 
hardship  in  their  feeding  out  of  one  dish,  as  they  themselves 
were  accustomed  to  do  in  the  villages. 

The  torment  that  was  endured  by  the  captives  was  far  worse 
than  any  merely  physical  privations.  But  one  such  privation 
did  affect  them  very  grievously  :  the  utter  impossibility  of 
seeing  anything  at  all  beyond  the  painted  glass  of  their  windows. 
The  youngest  Grand  Duchess  (Anastasia)  could  not  brook  this 
privation  any  longer  one  day,  and  managed  to  open  a  window 
in  the  girls'  room.  She  almost  paid  for  this  act  with  her  life. 
The  sentry  in  the  inner  hoarding  immediately  fired,  just  miss- 
ing her.  The  bullet  lodged  in  the  window-frame.  Anastasia 
gained  nothing  except  a  fright.  She  saw  nothing  except  the 
hoarding  and  the  sentry,  and  did  not  wait  for  a  second  shot. 


Vosnesansky    Prospekb 


PLAN  OF  UPPER.  STOREY- IPATIEVS  HOUSE 


20     10     O      lO     20    30    40     50 

"  I  ?  I  t  I  ?  !  V  I 


Vo5nE3ensky    Prosfakt 


REFERENCE 

o.d -Outer  Door 

w     d    -  Door 

w  -    Window 

s    -       Stairs 


PLAM    OF    LOWER^    FLOOR^ 


Shed 


Back  Yard 


1  Bath  house     Shed 


SummsrHoui; 


Ceila: 


Tv.'3.Sta 


tourbyard         Gata 


Garden 


\l 


Front  Door  — 
of  Upper  Floor  Hi 


Two -Storey     \ 
Stone 
House 


OF 
IPATIEVS 
PROPERTX 

EKATERINBURG 

^0    ;;,     lj>     y     y>   7^     100  ip    150 
SCALE      OF      FEET. 


Front  Entrance  of  Lov*er  Roor 


i6o         THE   LAST   DAYS   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

In  the  room  where  the  Imperial  couple  and  Alexis  lived  and 
slept — next  to  the  chamber  in  which  their  four  daughters  were 
crowded — Alexandra  placed  a  good-luck  sign.  It  was  so 
unobtrusive  that  Gaida,  the  Czech  commander  who  forcibly 
installed  himself  in  this  room,  probably  did  not  notice  it.  In 
pencil  she  formed  the  mystic  sign  of  the  swastika  and  inscribed 
the  date  '  1730  April,'  the  day  of  her  arrival  in  the  house. 

In  the  death-chamber  in  addition  to  the  '  Belsatzar ' 
inscription  was  one  that  has  yet  to  be  deciphered.  It  is  in 
thick  black  ink,  written  with  an  expert  hand,  and  just  below, 
on  the  window-siU,  are  three  groups  of  figures  that  may  or 
may  not  have  a  meaning. 


The  Empress    Alexandra's 
Good- Luck  Sign, 


The  Mysterious  Inscription  in  the 
Death  Chamber. 


Some  of  the  persons  with  whom  the  reader  has  become 
familiar  have  gone  to  their  last  account. 

The  Russian  regicide  Medvedev  died  in  prison  of  typhus 
early  last  year.  His  accomplice  Yakimov  died  in  prison  of 
inflammation  of  the  lungs  at  the  end  of  last  year.  Their 
death  and  burial  certificates  are  both  in  the  dossier. 

Yurovsky  wrote  a  letter  to  a  certain  Dr.  A.  before  he  fled 
from  Ekaterinburg  imploring  him  to  protect  his  old  mother, 
'  who  does  not  share  my  views,  but  who  may  suffer  simply 
because  I  am  her  son,'      It  is  at  once  an  avowal  of  guilt  and 


EPILOGUE  i6i 

a  proof  that  even  the  most  bloodthirsty  wretch  has  some  good 
in  him.  This  man  had  coolly  tortured,  murdered  and  cut  up 
innocent  children,  and  was  not  able  to  remove  his  old  mother 
because  he  had  to  take  the  proofs  of  his  crime  to  Moscow ;  yet 
he  does  not  forget  her.  Before  the  Kolchak  armies  left  Ekater- 
inburg we  heard  that  Yurovsky  had  been  seen  in  the  city. 
Had  he  come  at  great  risk  to  look  for  his  mother  ?  Sokolov 
had  had  her  removed  to  Irkutsk.  She  feared  and  loathed  her 
son. 

Yankel  Sverdlov,  the  Red  Tsar,  died  in  Moscow  early  in 
igig.  He  was  knocked  on  the  head  by  the  workmen  at  one 
of  the  Morozov  mills,  and  succumbed  to  concussion  of  the  brain. 
Sovietdom  was  in  an  uproar.  It  was  officially  announced 
that  this  '  valiant  defender  of  the  people's  rights  '  had  come 
to  a  natural  end,  by  inflammation  of  the  lungs.  Nevertheless, 
the  Chrezvychaika  could  not  allow  the  Red  Tsar  to  be  so  dis- 
honoured. Yankel  was  followed  to  the  outer  bourne  by  thou- 
sands of  innocent  victims  offered  up  in  holocaust  to  his  memory. 

The  mortal  remains  of  the  blood-stained  agent  and  associate 
of  the  Red  Kaiser  were  exposed  to  the  public  gaze  and  given 
a  pompous  Red  funeral,  and  the  Theatre  Square  which  faces 
the  building  where  Yankel  had  spun  his  web  of  blood  received 
a  new  name,  the  accursed  name  of  Sverdlov. 

None  of  the  Red  Jews  dared  to  wear  the  mantle  of  Yankel 
Sverdlov  openly.  His  office  was  delegated  to  Kalinin,  a 
'  dummy '  of  the  Beloborodov  variety,  who  provided  the 
needful  Russian  screen  to  cloak  their  villainies.  For  there 
was  no  change  in  the  spirit  of  the  Red  Jew  government  of 
Russia,  only  an  adaptation  of  methods,  a  variation  of  victims — 
first  the  bourgeois,  then  the  proletire. 

The  Russians  who  fought  and  bled  for  their  country  are 
almost  extinct.  One  of  the  last  who  died  in  the  sacred  cause 
was  Nicholas  II  and  the  other  Romanov  victims  of  the  Red 

L 


i62  THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  THE  ROMANOVS 

invaders,  German  and  Jewish.  A  remnant  persisted  to  the 
end.  To  them  the  Red  usurpers  of  Moscow  could  never  be 
anything  except  an  ahen  domination. 

I  recall  the  night  before  we  left  Ekaterinburg.  The  Reds 
were  approaching,  but  Sokolov  went  into  the  darkness  and  the 
rain  to  obtain  the  evidence  of  important  peasant  witnesses. 
He  told  them  who  he  was  and  the  object  of  his  call.  They 
could  have  locked  him  up  in  a  cellar  and  given  him  up  to  the 
Reds.  It  was  to  their  advantage  to  do  so.  By  giving  him 
information  they  incurred  great  risk.  He  explained  it  all  to 
them.  '  And  now  what  will  you  do  ?  '  he  asked.  '  Will  you 
help  justice  ?  Will  you  remember  that  he  who  is  dead  was  your 
Tsar  ?  '  They  did  not  hesitate  one  instant.  They  chose  the 
path  of  honour,  of  justice,  of  self-sacrifice.  They  gave  their 
evidence  and  brought  Sokolov  on  his  way. 

It  is  the  peasant  that  will  bring  Russia  back  to  new  life. 
Alexandra's  vision  may  yet  come  true,  and  Nicholas  and  the 
Romanovs  may  not  have  died  in  vain. 


AUTHOR'S  POSTSCRIPTUM 

I  HAVE  alluded  in  my  opening  chapter  to  the  reasons  that 
prevented  me  from  publishing  the  text  of  the  dossier 
which  had  been  committed  to  my  care.  Other  persons  have 
not  been  so  meticulous.  But  since  the  indiscretion  has  been 
committed  in  another  country,  I  have  no  reason  to  object  to 
publication  here,  and  as  incomplete  or  distorted  versions  of 
the  documents  may  be  issued  by  irresponsible  persons,  I  think 
it  only  right,  after  reading  the  translations,  to  say  that  I  find 
that  they  have  been  made  from  accurate  copies  of  the  original 
depositions. 

ROBERT  WILTON. 
London, 
August  19,  1920. 


163 


THE  STORY  OF  THE  PUBLISHED   DOCUMENTS 

AT  the  end  of  July,  1918,  the  town  of  Ekaterinburg  was 
taken  from  the  Bolsheviks  by  the  forces  of  the  Siberian 
Government.  Shortly  after  their  occupation  of  the  district  an 
investigation  was  ordered  to  be  made  of  the  circumstances  at- 
tendant on  the  murder  of  the  Imperial  Family  at  Ekaterinburg, 
as  the  news  of  the  crime  had  broken  through  the  barriers  of 
Bolshevism,  and  was  already  known  in  Russia  and  to  the  world 
at  large. 

An  administrative  investigation  of  the  crime  therefore  took 
place,  followed  by  a  judicial  examination  of  the  witnesses 
connected  with  the  life  of  the  Imperial  Family  at  Tsarskoe- 
Selo,  Tobolsk  and  Ekaterinburg  by  N.  A.  Sokolov,  the  Investi- 
gating Magistrate  for  Cases  of  Special  Importance  of  the 
Omsk  Tribunal. 

The  combined  depositions  which  are  now  published  for  the 
first  time  reconstruct  the  life-story  of  the  Imperial  Family  from 
the  time  of  the  Emperor's  abdication  until  the  murder  of  him- 
self, his  wife,  his  children  and  their  few  faithful  servants  in 
Ipatiev's  house  at  Ekaterinburg. 

Copies  of  the  depositions  were  taken  from  the  archives 
by  M.  George  G.  Tellberg,  Professor  of  Law  at  the  University 
of  Saratov,  and  Minister  of  Justice  at  Omsk,  when  he  fled  with 
the  other  ministers  of  Kolchak's  Government. 

165 


i66       THE   LAST   DAYS   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

The  translator  has  endeavoured  to  preserve  the  original 
simphcity,  and  in  some  cases  the  crudeness  and  lack  of  edu- 
cation apparent  in  the  witnesses.  Colonel  Kobylinsky,  M. 
Gillard  and  Mr.  Gibbes  are  educated  men  who  apparently 
gave  their  evidence  without  displaying  any  outward  emotion, 
but  although  they  did  not  exaggerate  the  sufferings  of  the  Im- 
perial Family,  they  were  not  eye-witnesses  of  the  final  hours 
of  their  captivity. 

The  evidence  of  the  soldiers  strikes  a  more  sinister  note. 
Two  of  them  witnessed  most  of  the  daily  happenings  at  Ipa- 
tiev's  house,  but  they  display  certain  evidences  of  pity,  and  of 
having  been  well-disposed  towards  the  prisoners,  whose  mur- 
der they  condemned.  Indeed,  these  men  are  most  insistent 
that  the  crime  was  committed  by  the  '  Letts.'  The  third 
soldier  (Medvedev)  took  an  active  part  in  the  murder. 


Part    II 

(A.)— TSARSKOE-SELO  TO  TOBOLSK 

MARCH  2  (15),  1917,  TO  APRIL  13  (26),  1918 

THE  DEPOSITIONS  OF  COLONEL   KOBYLINSKY 

THE  deposition  of  Colonel  Kobylinsky  affords  complete 
documentary  evidence  of  the  conditions  of  life  experi- 
enced by  the  Imperial  Family  from  March,  1917,  until  May, 
1918,  during  which  time  they  were  under  his  charge.  Colonel 
Kobylinsky  appears  to  have  been  a  brave  soldier  and  a  just 
man,  who  did  what  he  considered  to  be  his  duty,  but  who 
treated  the  unfortunate  prisoners  with  humanity  and  courtesy. 
His  statement  will  be  of  enormous  value  to  historians  of  the 
future,  inasmuch  as  it  reveals  a  new  aspect  of  the  character 
of  the  Emperor  Nicholas  II,  and  negatives  the  pro-German 
tendencies  of  which  both  he  and  the  Empress  have  been  so 
persistently  accused. 

On  April  6-10,  1918,  the  Investigating  Magistrate  for  Cases 
of  Special  Importance  of  the  Omsk  Tribunal  questioned  in 
Ekaterinburg,  in  conformity  with  Paragraph  443  of  the  Code 
of  Criminal  Procedure,  the  undermentioned  person  in  the 
capacity  of  a  witness.     The  witness  stated  ; — 

My  name  is 

Eugene  Stepanovitch  Kobylinsky. 
I  am  forty  years  of  age,  and  I  am  a  Colonel  attached  to  the 
Command  of  the  Tiumen  Military  District.     I  belong  to  the 

167 


i68        THE   LAST   DAYS   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

Orthodox  Church.  At  the  beginning  of  the  Great  War  I  was  in 
command  of  a  company  of  the  Petrogradsky  Guards  regiment. 

On  November  8  (21),  1914,  I  was  wounded  in  the  foot  by 
a  rifle  bullet.  In  July,  1916,  I  was  severely  shell-shocked  on 
the  Austrian  Front  during  the  battle  near  Gouta-Staraya. 
The  shell-shock  was  productive  of  very  bad  results,  as  I  deve- 
loped kidney  trouble.  In  September,  1916,  I  was  sent  to  the 
hospital  in  Tsarskoe-Selo.  From  this  hospital  I  was  sent  to 
Yalta,  and  on  my  return  to  Tsarskoe-Selo  in  191 6 1  was  reported 
as  physically  unfit  for  active  service,  and  I  was  transferred  to 
the  reserve  battalion  of  my  regiment.  I  was  in  this  battalion 
at  the  beginning  of  the  revolution. 

Late  in  the  evening  of  March  5  (18),  I  was  ordered  to  report 
myself  at  the  headquarters  of  the  Petrograd  Military  Dis- 
trict. At  II  p.m.  I  went  to  the  headquarters  and  was  told 
that  I  had  been  sent  for  by  General  Kornilov  (the  famous 
Komilov,  who  at  this  time  was  commanding  the  forces  of  the 
Petrograd  Military  District). 

I  was  received  by  Kornilov,  who  said  bluntly  :  '  I  have 
assigned  you  an  important  and  responsible  position.'  I 
asked  him  what  it  was.  '  I  will  tell  you  to-morrow,'  answered 
the  General.  I  tried  to  find  out  from  him  why  the  choice  had 
fallen  on  me,  but  the  General  answered  :  '  Mind  your  own 
business  and  get  ready.'  I  saluted  and  left.  The  next  day, 
March  19,  I  received  no  further  orders,  and  no  orders  arrived 
on  March  20.  I  began  to  think  that  my  appointment  had 
lapsed,  when  suddenly  I  was  told  on  the  telephone  that  Korni- 
lov ordered  me  to  be  at  Tsarskoe-Selo  station  at  8  a.m.  on 
March  21.  On  my  arrival  at  the  station  I  met  General  Korni- 
lov and  his  A.D.C. 

When  we  were  seated  in  our  compartment,  Kornilov  turned 
to  me  and  said  :  '  I  will  now  enlighten  you  as  to  our  destina- 
tion. We  are  going  to  Tsarskoe-Selo.  I  am  going  thither  to 
place  the  Empress  under  arrest.     You  are  going  to  take  over 


THE  DEPOSITIONS  OF  COLONEL  KOBYLINSKY    169 

the  command  of  the  Tsarskoe-Selo  Garrison  ;  Captain  Kotse- 
bue  will  be  Commandant  of  the  Palace,  but  you  will  supervise 
the  Palace  and  Kotsebue  will  be  subordinate  to  you.' 

We  arrived  at  the  Palace.  In  one  of  the  ante-rooms  we 
were  received  by  General  Benckendorff,  Grand  Marshal  of 
the  Imperial  Court,  and  Kornilov  explained  to  him  that  he 
would  like  the  Emperor's  suite  to  assemble,  and  he  begged 
Her  Majesty  to  receive  him.  Benckendorff  sent  a  footman  to 
ask  everybody  to  come  down,  and  he  went  in  person  to  ask 
the  Empress  to  grant  us  an  audience.  When  he  returned  he 
told  us  that  the  Empress  would  receive  us  in  ten  minutes,  and 
shortly  afterwards  we  were  told  by  a  footman  that  Her  Majesty 
desired  to  see  us.  When  Kornilov  and  I  entered  the  chil- 
dren's room,  there  was  nobody  there,  but  a  moment  after  the 
Empress  entered  from  another  door.  We  bowed.  She  extended 
her  hand  to  Kornilov  and  nodded  to  me.  Kornilov  said  to 
her  :  '  I  have  come  to  inform  you  of  the  decision  of  the  Coun- 
cil of  Ministers.  From  this  moment  you  must  consider  your- 
self under  arrest.  If  you  are  in  need  of  anything,  will  you 
kindly  apply  to  the  new  Commandant.'  After  saying  this, 
Kornilov  immediately  turned  to  me :  '  Colonel,  leave  us  to- 
gether and  take  up  your  position  outside  the  door.'  I  retired. 
About  five  minutes  later  Kornilov  called  me,  and  when  I 
entered  the  room  the  Empress  held  out  her  hand  to  me.  We 
bowed  to  her  and  then  we  went  downstairs.  Some  members 
of  the  Emperor's  suite  were  already  assembled  in  an  ante-room, 
and  Kornilov  said  briefly,  '  Gentlemen,  this  is  the  new  Com- 
mandant ;  from  this  time  onwards  the  Empress  is  under  ar- 
rest. If  any  of  you  wish  to  share  the  fate  of  the  Imperial 
Family  you  are  at  liberty  to  stay  with  them,  but  make  up  your 
minds  at  once,  as  later  I  will  not  permit  any  one  to  enter  the 
Palace.'  At  this  time  the  guard  was  kept  by  His  Majesty's 
Svodny  Guard  Regiment,  commanded  by  Major-General 
Ressin,  and  at  this  very  moment  the  Major-General  said  that 


170        THE   LAST  DAYS  OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

he  wanted  to  leave.  The  Grand  Marshal  of  the  Imperial 
Court,  Count  Benckendorff  and  Count  Apraksin,  who  was  in 
charge  of  the  Empress's  personal  affairs,  decided  that  they 
would  remain  with  the  Empress. 

The  same  day  Kornilov  confirmed  his  instructions  regarding 
the  status  of  the  arrested  persons  and  the  restrictions  to  be 
imposed  upon  them.  I  he  guards  of  the  Svodny  Regiment 
were  relieved  by  the  First  Rifle  Regiment,  and  Kornilov  then 
left  Tsarskoe-Selo  and  1  remained  there  as  Commandant. 

Before  changing  the  guards  Colonel  Lazarev  asked  my  per- 
mission to  say  good-bye  to  the  Empress.  I  allowed  him  to  do 
so,  and  Colonel  Lazarev  went  in  to  see  the  Empress  and  wept 
bitterly.  He  also  broke  down  when  he  saw  the  colours  of  the 
Svodny  Regiment  taken  out  of  the  ante-room.  Some  days 
later  (I  do  not  remember  the  date)  1  was  notified  by  telephone 
of  the  arrival  of  the  Emperor,  and  I  went  to  the  station.  After 
the  arrival  of  the  train  the  Emperor  left  his  compartment 
and  walked  very  quickly  through  the  station  without  bestow- 
ing a  single  glance  upon  anybody  ;  he  then  took  his  seat  in 
an  automobile,  accompanied  by  a  Marshal  of  the  Court,  Count 
Vasily  Alexandrovich  Dolgoruky. 

Two  men  in  mufti  now  advanced  ;  one  of  them  was  Vershinin, 
a  member  of  the  Dmna.  They  told  me  that  their  mission  was 
ended,  and  that  from  this  time  the  Emperor  was  under  my 
charge. 

I  cannot  forget  one  circumstance  in  particular  which  I 
witnessed  at  that  time.  Quite  a  number  of  persons  had  trav- 
elled in  the  Emperor's  train,  but  when  the  Emperor  left  the 
train  these  people  crowded  out  of  the  station  and  quickly 
dispersed,  throwing  frightened  looks  in  all  directions.  It 
appears  that  they  were  very  much  afraid  of  being  recognized. 
I  thought  this  behaviour  was  rather  disgusting. 

I  accompanied  the  Emperor  to  the  Palace,  and  he  imme- 
diately went  upstairs  to  see  his  children  who  were  ill. 


THE  DEPOSITIONS  OF  COLONEL  KOBYLINSKY    171 

Shortly  afterwards  the  Emperor's  luggage  was  brought 
from  the  station. 

The  life  of  the  Imperial  Family  during  their  stay  in  Tsar- 
skoe-Selo  was  regulated  by  certain  instructions.  These 
instructions  limited  the  relations  of  the  Imperial  Family 
with  the  outer  world,  and  of  course  brought  certain  restrictions 
into  their  private  life.  The  mail  always  passed  through  the 
hands  of  the  Commandant  of  the  Palace,  and  the  outgoing 
mail  was  only  allowed  to  leave  the  Palace  through  the  park. 
The  Palace  and  the  park  were  always  surrounded  by  sentinels, 
and  walking  in  the  park  was  only  permitted  from  early  morning 
until  dusk. 

These  were  the  chief  restrictions,  and  the  Government  by 
no  means  interfered  with  the  private  life  of  the  Family. 
Except  the  above-mentioned  hmitations,  the  Government 
made  no  other  restrictions. 

During  my  first  days  in  Tsarskoe-Selo  all  the  children  were 
ill  with  the  measles ;  Maria  Nikolaevna  and,  I  think,  Olga 
Nikolaevna  had  inflammation  of  the  lungs.  But  they  speedily 
recovered. 

The  day  was  usually  spent  in  the  following  manner  :  The 
Family  got  up  early,  with  the  exception  of  the  Empress,  who 
usually  stayed  in  bed  a  long  time.  At  8  a.m.  the  Emperor 
took  a  walk  in  the  company  of  Dolgoruky.  They  walked 
for  about  an  hour  and  a  half,  and  took  some  sort  of  physical 
exercise.  At  one  o'clock  the  Family  had  lunch.  After  lunch 
the  Family  used  to  work  in  the  garden  until  three  o'clock. 
The  children  then  had  their  lessons.  Tea  was  served  at  4  p.m., 
and  sometimes  after  tea  the  Family  went  out  in  the  park. 
Dinner  was  served  at  seven  o'clock. 

During  my  stay  in  Tsarskoe-Selo,  several  incidents  occurred 
to  which  I  would  like  to  draw  your  attention.  A  few  days 
after  the  arrest  of  the  Imperial  Family,  a  disagreeable  incident 
happened  concerning  the  body  of  Rasputin.     His  corpse  had 


172         THE   LAST   DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

been  taken  to  Tsarskoe-Selo  where  a  church  was  being  built, 
and  his  body  was  buried  there.     When  the  soldiers  knew  this 
they  opened  the  grave,  removed  the  cover  of  the  cofi&n  and 
examined  the  body.     They  found  a  Holy  Image  in  the  coffin 
which   bore   the   signatures   of   '  Alexandra,'     '  Olga,'    '  Ta- 
tiana,'     '  Maria,'     '  Anastasia  '    and    '  Ania.'       This    image 
was  placed  close  to  the  right  cheek   of   Rasputin.     In   some 
way  this  became  known  to  the  commandant  of  an   anti-air- 
craft battery  and  he  took  the  image  away  from  the  soldiers. 
I  saw  it  myself.     I  think  the  image  represented  the  Holy 
Virgin.     I  reported  these  facts  by  telephone  to  the  district 
headquarters,  and  I  was  instructed  to  take  the  body  of  Ras- 
putin to  the  station  and  to  ship  it  to  Sredniaya-Rogatka, 
where  it  was  to  be  interred.     I  was  told  to  do  this  in  secret. 
But  it  was  impossible  for  me  to  carry  out  this  order  without 
the  soldiers  and  the  population  knowing  what  had  transpired. 
Later,  I  was  told  to  take  the  body  to  Tsarskoe-Selo  station. 
This  I  did  and  had  it  put  in  a  luggage  van.     I  stationed  some 
soldiers  in  another  carriage,  but  I  did  not  tell  them  what  they 
had  to  guard. 

The  next  day  a  Commissar  by  the  name  of  Koupchinsky 
(who  was  also  in  charge  of  the  automobiles)  forwarded  me  a 
written  order  signed  by  the  Chairman  of  the  Council  of  Min- 
isters. The  order  stated  that  I  was  to  transmit  the  body  of 
Rasputin  (the  name  was  written  as  '  Novykh  ')  to  Koup- 
chinsky, so  that  he  might  take  it  away  on  a  lorry  to  its  destin- 
ation. We  could  not  do  this  in  Tsarskoe-Selo,  so  we  shunted 
the  luggage  van  containing  the  corpse  to  the  station  Pavlovsk 
Second.  Here  we  found  an  old  packing-case,  into  which  we 
put  the  cofftn  containing  Rasputin's  body.  The  case  was 
covered  with  mats  and  empty  bags.  Koupchinsky  went  with 
the  body  to  Petrograd,  but  on  the  way  the  secret  became 
known  to  the  mob,  who  threatened  to  seize  the  corpse,  so 
Koupchinsky  was  obliged  to  burn  it  en  route. 


THE  DEPOSITIONS  OF  COLONEL  KOBYLINSKY    173 

Another  incident  in  our  peaceful  life  was  the  sudden  arrival 
of  a  stranger.  This  stranger  came  to  me,  introduced  himself 
as  Maslovsky,  and  handed  me  a  letter  from  the  Executive 
Committee  of  the  Soviet  of  the  Workmen  and  Soldiers'  Deputies. 
He  wore  the  uniform  of  a  Colonel.  I  do  not  remember  his 
personal  appearance.  The  letter  was  in  the  nature  of  a 
demand  and  ordered  me  to  assist  the  bearer  in  the  execution 
of  his  duty.  I  remember  that  the  letter  was  signed  by 
Chkheidze,  a  member  of  the  Duma.  It  also  bore  an 
official  seal.  The  man  who  called  himself  Maslovsky  told 
me  that  he  had  been  instructed  by  the  Executive  Com- 
mittee to  take  the  Emperor  to  the  Fortress  of  St.  Peter  and 
St.  Paul,  but  I  told  Maslovsky  that  under  no  circumstances 
would  I  permit  him  to  do  so.  '  Well,  Colonel,  the  blood 
that  will  now  be  spilt  will  be  on  your  own  head,'  answered 
Maslovsky.  I  said  I  could  not  help  it,  and  he  retired.  I  thought 
he  had  left  for  good,  but  it  appears  that  he  went  to  the  Palace, 
where  he  was  met  by  the  commander  of  the  First  Regiment, 
Captain  Aksiuta.  Maslovsky  showed  him  the  letter  and  told 
him  that  he  wanted  to  see  the  Emperor.  After  searching 
Maslovsky 's  pockets,  Aksiuta  let  him  see  the  Emperor  in 
such  a  way  that  the  Emperor  would  not  be  aware  of  his 
scrutiny.  I  reported  this  incident  to  Headquarters,  by  whom 
my  actions  were  approved. 

Kotsebue  did  not  long  occupy  the  position  of  Commandant 
of  the  Palace.  He  was  dismissed  on  account  of  the  following 
circumstance.  Madame  Vyrubova,  a  maid-of -honour  to  the 
Empress,  and  a  lady  by  the  name  of  Dehn  who  wore  a  Red 
Cross  uniform,  had  chosen  to  remain  with  the  Imperial  Family 
at  the  time  when  Kornilov  first  came  there. 

The  soldiers  learned  through  the  servants  that  Kotsebue 
often  stayed  quite  a  long  time  with  Madame  Vyrubova  and 
spoke  English  to  her.  After  I  heard  this  rumour  I  verified 
it.     The  footman  (I  do  not  remember  his  name)  who  had  first 


174         THE   LAST   DAYS   OF   THE    ROMANOVS 

told  the  soldiers,  also  told  me  Kotsebue  was  often  in  Madame 
Vyrubova's  company.  Fearing  agitation  amongst  the  men, 
I  reported  what  I  had  heard  to  Kornilov,  who  sent  for  Kotsebue 
and  forbade  him  to  enter  the  Palace.  I  was  then  ordered  to 
undertake  the  duties  of  the  Commandant  of  the  Palace. 

I  had  not  occupied  my  new  position  for  more  than  a  week 
when  Paul  Alexandrovich  Korovichenko  was  appointed 
Commandant  of  the  Palace.  Korovichenko  was  a  Colonel 
in  one  of  the  regiments  stationed  in  Finland.  He  had  gradu- 
ated from  the  Military  Academy  of  Law,  after  which  he  had 
been  on  active  service.  He  had  been  called  up  for  active 
service  at  the  beginning  of  the  war.  He  had  also  some  private 
connexion  with  Kerensky,  who  at  this  period  had  succeeded 
Prince  Lvov  and  had  relinquished  his  own  position  of  Minister 
of  Justice  to  Pereverzev,  with  whom  Korovichenko  was  also 
on  very  good  terms. 

Kerensky  visited  Tsarskoe-Selo  several  times.  The  first 
time  he  arrived  when  Korovichenko  was  there.  I  am  unable 
to  tell  you  anything  about  his  behaviour  to  the  Emperor,  as 
I  was  never  present  at  their  conversations.  I  cannot  tell  you 
anything  that  Korovichenko  said  about  it.  So  far  as  I  can 
remember,  Tegleva  told  me  that  Kerensky  always  behaved 
in  a  very  courteous  manner.  Madame  Vyrubova  was  arrested 
during  one  of  Kerensky's  visits. 

This  took  place  when  I  was  present.  Korovichenko  and  I 
entered  Madame  Vyrubova's  room  and  Korovichenko  told  her 
that  she  was  to  be  taken  at  once  to  Petrograd.  She  hastily 
dressed  herself,  and  then  asked  our  permission  to  say  good-bye 
to  the  Empress.  This  was  granted.  We  were  present  at 
their  parting  and  watched  what  transpired  from  a  distance. 
They  both  spoke  in  EngUsh  and  both  wept  bitterly.  Madame 
Dehn  was  taken  to  Petrograd  with  Madame  Vyrubova. 

Korovichenko  was  once  present  at  a  conversation  between 
Kerensky   and   the   Emperor.     Kerensky   told   the   Emperor 


THE  DEPOSITIONS  OF  COLONEL  KOBYLINSKY    175 

that  he  had  decided  to  confiscate  his  private  papers  and  that 
he  had  asked  Korovichenko  to  carry  out  his  instructions, 
I  was  ordered  to  be  present,  and  I  distinctly  remember  the 
excessively  unpleasant  scene.  The  private  papers  belonging 
to  the  Emperor  were  kept  in  a  special  case.  This  case  contained 
a  large  number  of  papers  tied  together  in  neat  packets.  Whilst 
showing  us  these,  the  Emperor  took  a  letter  from  the  case, 
saying  :  '  This  letter  is  merely  a  private  communication.' 
The  Emperor  by  no  means  wanted  to  keep  the  letter  from 
being  confiscated  ;  he  simply  picked  it  up  as  it  was  lying 
separately  from  the  others,  and  I  am  sure  that  he  intended  to 
put  it  back  in  the  case.  But  Korovichenko  suddenly  grabbed 
the  letter,  and  for  a  moment  it  seemed  as  if  the  Emperor  was 
pulling  one  side  of  the  letter  and  Korovichenko  was  pulling 
at  the  other.  The  Emperor  looked  very  angry.  He  let  go  his 
end  of  the  letter,  saying  as  he  did  so  :  *  Well,  it  appears  that 
I  am  not  wanted  here ;  I  had  better  go  out  and  have  a  walk.' 

Korovichenko  took  all  the  papers  which  he  considered  of 
interest,  and  sent  them  to  Kerensky.  Later,  he  told  Kerensky 
and  Pereverzev  that  he  fully  expected  to  find  something  to 
implicate  the  Emperor  or  the  Empress,  and  stamp  them  as 
pro-Germans,  especially  as  at  the  time  this  was  suggested  by 
nearly  all  the  newspapers.  Nothing  was  found  that  could 
possibly  compromise  either  the  Emperor  or  the  Empress. 
At  last  he  discovered  a  telegram  that  had  been  sent  in  code 
from  the  Emperor  to  the  Empress.  After  some  hard  work  in 
deciphering  it  they  made  out  the  simple  sentence  :  '  Feeling 
well,  kisses  !  ' 

The  Imperial  Family  did  not  like  Korovichenko,  but  I 
know  that  Korovichenko  exerted  every  effort  to  please  them, 
and  that  he  obtained  permission  for  them  to  work  in  the 
garden  and  to  row  on  the  lake.  But  those  best  disposed 
towards  the  Imperial  Family  were  the  soldiers  and  officers 
of  the, First  Regiment. 


176         THE   LAST   DAYS   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

Following  an  old  custom  the  Officer  of  the  Day  on  duty  at 
the  Palace  used  to  be  given  a  pint  of  wine  at  Easter.  This 
custom  was  not  altered,  but  when  the  soldiers  heard  about  it 
they  started  some  agitation,  and  it  took  fifty  bottles  of  vodka 
to  cool  their  temper  ! 

Once  the  soldiers  even  accused  Ensign  Zeleny  of  having 
kissed  the  Empress's  hand  ! 

This  last  incident  and  the  story  about  the  wine  caused  a  lot 
of  trouble,  and  an  investigation  took  place. 

The  morale  of  the  soldiers  grew  worse  and  worse.  They 
became  quite  intoxicated  by  their  own  peculiar  rendering  of 
the  word  freedom,  and  they  began  to  invent  all  sorts  of  mad 
demands.  The  worst  offenders  were  the  Second  Regiment, 
where  not  only  the  soldiers,  but  the  officers  behaved  badly. 

On  one  occasion  an  officer  of  the  Second  Regiment  shouted  : 
'  We  must  see  the  Family  for  ourselves.  As  they  are  under 
guard  they  must  be  seen.'  It  was  obvious  that  only  vulgar 
curiosity  or  a  desire  to  inflict  useless  mental  suffering  prompted 
the  officer  to  make  such  a  demand.  My  efforts  to  oppose 
them  were  fruitless,  and  my  argument  that  the  Emperor  and 
the  Empress  would  never  try  to  escape  and  leave  their  sick 
children,  had  no  effect  whatever.  Fearing  that  they  would 
accomplish  their  purpose  without  my  authority,  I  reported  this 
matter  to  General  Polovtsev,  who  at  that  time  occupied 
General  Kornilov's  position.  It  was,  therefore,  decided  that 
when  the  new  Officer  of  the  Guard  relieved  the  old,  both  were 
to  be  taken  to  the  Emperor,  when  the  Empress  was  also  present. 
To  avoid  any  unnecessary  embarrassment  we  decided  to  do 
this  just  before  lunch — the  time  when  the  Family  were  always 
together.  It  was  arranged  that  the  outgoing  officer  of  the 
guard  should  then  take  leave  of  the  Emperor,  who,  at  the  same 
time,  would  receive  his  successor.  After  this  had  been  carried 
out,  another  very  disagreeable  incident  took  place.  When 
the  men  of  the  First  Regiment  were  being  relieved  by  the  men 


THE  DEPOSITIONS  OF  COLONEL  KOBYLINSKY    177 

of  the  Second,  both  captains  went  to  see  the  Emperor.  The 
Emperor  wished  the  captain  of  the  departing  guard  good-bye, 
and  shook  hands  with  him.  When  the  Emperor  stretched  out 
his  hand  to  the  new  captain  of  the  guard,  his  hand  remained 
outstretched,  as  the  officer  stepped  backwards  and  didn't  take 
it.  Being  disagreeably  impressed  by  this  behaviour,  the  Em- 
peror went  towards  the  officer,  put  both  hands  on  his  shoulders, 
and  said  with  tears  in  his  eyes  :  '  \\  hy  did  you  do  that  ?  ' 
The  officer  once  more  drew  back  and  answered  :  '  I  was  born 
of  common  people  and  when  they  stretched  out  their  hand  to 
you,  you  did  not  take  it,  so  now  I  will  not  shake  hands  with 
you.'  I  relate  this  story  exactly  as  I  heard  it  from  the  officer 
of  the  First  Regiment  who  witnessed  this  revolting  incident. 

As  the  Revolution  proceeded  the  agitation  grew  deeper 
amongst  the  soldiers.  Having  no  opportunities  to  find  out 
anything  wrong  with  the  lives  of  the  persons  under  arrest,  they 
tried  to  discover  new  methods  of  inflicting  suffering  upon  the 
Imperial  Family.  On  one  occasion  they  saw  the  Tsarevitch 
carr3dng  a  small  rifle.  This  rifle  was  a  model  of  the  standard 
infantry  rifle,  and  it  had  been  presented  to  the  Tsarevitch  by 
some  munition  works.  It  was  absolutely  harmless,  as  special 
cartridges  had  to  be  used  for  it  and  none  of  the  cartridges  were 
now  available. 

The  trouble  was  started  by  the  soldiers  of  the  Second  Regi- 
ment, and  all  the  efforts  of  the  officer  (I  do  not  remember  the 
name)  to  persuade  the  men  that  their  anger  was  ridiculous 
were  useless.  In  order  to  avoid  violence  he  took  the  rifle 
away  from  the  Tsarevitch,  but  when  I  came  to  the  Palace 
Gillard  and  Tegleva  told  me  the  story,  and  added  that  the 
Tsarevitch  was  crying.  I  ordered  the  rifle  to  be  given  to  me, 
and  when  I  got  it  I  took  it  apart,  and  in  this  way  I  smuggled 
it  back  to  the  Tsarevitch. 

Finally  the  soldiers  and  the  Soviet  of  Tsarskoe-Selo  ceased 
to  comply  with  any  of  my  orders,  and  appointed  Ensign  Dom- 

M 


178         THE   LAST  DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

odziantz,  an  Armenian,  to  execute  the  duties  of  my  assistant. 
He  was  a  rough  man,  and  he  made  the  greatest  efforts  to  get 
into  the  Palace,  where  I  tried  my  best  to  prevent  him  from 
going.  After  this,  he  began  to  pass  most  of  his  time  in  the 
park,  especially  when  the  Family  were  walking  there.  Once 
the  Emperor  held  out  his  hand  to  him,  but  he  refused  to  shake 
hands  with  the  Emperor,  saying  he  had  no  right  to  do  it  as  he 
was  an  assistant  commandant. 

After  this  incident  was  told  Kerensky,  he  came  to  the  Palace 
at  Tsarskoe-Selo  and  sent  for  the  chairman  of  the  Local  Soviet 
(he  did  not  actually  come  about  this  incident,  but  on  some 
other  business).  The  chairman  of  the  Soviet  said  to  Keren- 
sky  ;  '  I  want  to  let  you  know  at  once.  Minister,  that  we 
have  elected  Ensign  Domodziantz  to  be  assistant  commandant 
of  the  Palace.'  Kerensky  answered  :  '  Yes,  I  know,  but  why 
was  it  so  necessary  to  elect  him.  Couldn't  you  have  elected 
somebody  else  ?  '  However,  no  changes  were  made,  as  Keren- 
sky himself  had  no  power. 

It  was  Domodziantz  who  told  the  soldiers  not  to  answer  the 
Emperor's  greeting.  The  soldiers  followed  his  advice,  and 
they  were,  of  course,  soldiers  of  the  Second  Regiment.  I  had 
to  ask  the  Emperor  not  to  speak  to  the  men,  as  I  was  losing  all 
control  over  them,  so  the  Emperor  refrained  from  any  further 
attempts  at  conversation. 

I  must  in  fairness  state  that  it  was  not  only  the  soldiers 
who  were  hostile  towards  the  Imperial  Family. 

People  began  to  get  frightened  to  show  any  kindly  feelings 
towards  the  Imperial  Family.  The  Grand  Duchess  Olga  was 
very  friendly  with  a  young  lady  named  Margaret  Hitrovo,  who 
often  came  to  me  and  asked  me  to  deliver  letters  to  Olga 
Nikolaevna.  She  always  used  to  sign  her  letters  '  Margaret 
Hitrovo.'  In  the  same  way,  all  the  letters  which  were  brought 
me  by  Olga  Kolzakova  bore  her  full  signature.  But  there  were 
some   letters   which   were   signed   merely    '  Lily '  (Dehn)    or 


THE  DEPOSITIONS  OF  COLONEL  KOBYLINSKY    179 

'  Titi '  (Velichkovskaia).  I  said  to  Miss  Hitrovo  :  '  You 
always  sign  your  letters  with  your  full  name,  and  so  does  Olga 
Kolzakova,  but  there  are  others  who  hide  their  names.  This 
is  not  fair.  Supposing  the  mail  should  be  examined  by  some- 
body else,  and  I  am  asked  who  are  the  writers  of  those  letters  ? 
My  position  will  then  be  extremely  embarrassing.  Please 
inform  the  writers  of  these  letters  that  I  want  them  to  call  on 
me.  I  must  know  who  they  are.'  After  that  I  ceased  receiv- 
ing letters  from  '  Lily  '  or  '  Titi.' 

Shortly  after  the  arrest.  Count  Apraksin  asked  permission  to 
resign,  as  his  duties  in  the  Palace  were  over,  and  his  family 
resided  in  Petrograd.  By  order  of  the  Minister  of  Justice  (the 
order  was  given  to  me  through  Kornilov)  he  was  allowed  to 
leave  the  Palace. 

I  have  now  related  everything  that  I  remember  about  the 
life  of  the  Imperial  Family  in  Tsarskoe-Selo. 

I  can  only  add  that  the  Imperial  Family  received  all  the 
newspapers  that  appeared  as  well  as  the  English  and  French 
magazines.  Out  of  the  Russian  newspapers,  I  can  name  : 
Russkoe-Slovo ,  Russkaia-Volia,  Rech,  Novoe-Vremia,  Petro- 
gradsky  Lisiok,  and  Petrogradskaia-Gazeta. 

I  will  now  tell  you  why  the  Imperial  Family  was  removed 
to  Tobolsk.  Their  removal  was  preceded  by  the  following 
events.  About  a  week  before  their  departure,  Kerensky  arrived 
at  Tsarskoe-Selo.  He  sent  for  me  as  well  as  for  the  chairman 
of  the  Soviet  and  the  chairman  of  the  Military  Section  of  the 
Tsarskoe-Selo  Garrison,  Ensign  Efimov,  who  was  an  officer  of 
the  Second  Regiment.  Kerensky  said  to  us  :  '  Before  speak- 
ing to  you  I  must  ask  you  to  give  me  your  word  that  everything 
I  say  will  be  kept  secret  by  you.'  We  gave  our  word  to  Keren- 
sky. He  then  told  us  that  according  to  the  resolution  of  the 
Council  of  Ministers,  the  Imperial  Family  were  to  be  taken 
away  from  Tsarskoe-Selo,  but  that  the  Government  did  not 
want  this  to  be  kept  a  secret  from  the  '  Democratic  Organiza- 


i8o         THE   LAST   DAYS   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

tions.'  He  also  said  that  I  was  to  accompany  the  Imperial 
Family.  After  this  I  retired,  but  Kerensky  continued  his 
conversation  with  the  chairman  of  the  Soviet  and  Efimov. 
In  about  an  hour's  time  I  met  Kerensky  and  asked  him  where 
we  were  going,  adding  that  I  must  give  notice  to  the  Family  so 
that  they  could  prepare  themselves  for  the  journey.  Kerensky 
replied  that  he  would  do  this  himself,  and  he  proceeded  to  the 
Palace,  where  he  had  a  personal  interview  with  the  Emperor, 
but  he  did  not  give  me  any  answer  as  to  when  and  where  we 
were  going. 

I  saw  Kerensky  about  two  or  three  times  afterwards,  and  I 
always  asked  him  where  we  were  going  and  what  things  were 
to  be  taken  by  the  Imperial  Family.  Kerensky  did  not 
answer  my  questions,  but  only  replied,  '  Tell  them  that  they 
must  take  plenty  of  warm  things.' 

About  two  days  before  our  departure  Kerensky  sent  for  me, 
and  ordered  me  to  form  a  detachment  of  men  out  of  the  First, 
Second  and  Fourth  Regiments  for  guard  duty,  and  also  to 
appoint  officers  to  the  companies.  The  word  '  appoint- 
ment '  at  this  time  had  quite  a  special  meaning.  The  agita- 
tion in  the  army  was  so  great  that  we  could  not  make  appoint- 
ments. The  commander  of  a  regiment  had  no  influence  what- 
ever— his  power  was  in  the  hands  of  the  soldiers'  committee. 

Being  afraid  that  amongst  the  officers  selected  there  would 
be  some  undesirable  persons,  I  asked  Kerensky's  permission 
to  make  my  own  choice  of  five  officers  for  each  company,  out 
of  which  two,  according  to  the  military  regulations,  could  be 
selected  by  the  men.     Kerensky  agreed  to  this. 

The  evening  of  the  same  day  I  sent  for  the  commander  of 
the  regiment  and  the  chairman  of  the  regimental  committee. 
I  said  to  them  :  '  A  very  secret  and  important  mission  is 
about  to  take  place.  I  want  each  commander  of  a  regiment 
to  choose  a  company  of  ninety-six  men  and  two  officers.'  At 
the  same  time  I  gave  them  a  list  of  officers  that  I  named,  from 


THE  DEPOSITIONS  OF  COLONEL    KOBYLINSKY   i8i 

which  the  selection  could  be  made.  In  answer  to  my  words 
the  commanders  of  the  regiments  and  the  chairmen  of  the 
committees  of  the  First  and  Fourth  Regiments  merely  replied : 
'  Very  well,  sir.'  But  the  chairman  of  the  committee  of  the 
Second  Regiment,  a  soldier  (whose  name  I  don't  remember), 
cried  :  '  We  have  made  our  choice.  We  know  what  sort  of 
mission  this  is.'  '  How  can  you  possibly  know  when  I  don't 
know  anything  about  it  myself  ?  '  I  asked  him.  '  Certain 
people  have  told  us  all  about  it  and  we  have  elected  Ensign 
Dekonsky,'  he  answered. 

This  ensign  had  been  previously  dismissed  from  the  Fourth 
Regiment  by  its  own  officers  and  men,  but  he  had  been  taken 
into  the  Second  Regiment,  and  I  know  that  at  this  time  Ensign 
Dekonsky  was  undoubtedly  a  Bolshevik.  When  I  heard  about 
his  election  I  told  the  chairman  of  the  committee  that  Dekon- 
sky should  not  go  with  us.  The  chairman  said  rudely  :  '  Yes, 
he  shall.'  I  went  to  Kerensky  and  told  him  that  if  Dekonsky 
went  to  the  mission  I  should  refuse  to  go,  and  I  also  said  that 
as  Kerensky  was  Minister  of  War  he  could  easily  arrange 
matters.  Kerensky  came  to  Tsarskoe-Selo  and  sent  for  the 
chairman  of  the  committee,  and  some  desperate  arguments 
ensued.  Kerensky  insisted  on  his  demand,  but  the  chairman 
kept  on  repeating  :  '  Dekonsky  shall  go.'  Finally  Kerensky 
got  excited  and  said  in  a  very  loud  voice  :  '  These  are  my 
orders.'  The  chairman  said  nothing  and  departed.  But 
when  the  soldiers  learned  that  Dekonsky  was  not  going,  they 
refused  to  go  with  the  detachment,  and  in  consequence  the 
company  of  the  Second  Regiment  was  composed  of  the  very 
worst  elements. 

On  July  29  (August  11)  I  called  on  Kerensky  and  met  the 
Assistant  Commissar  of  the  Ministry  of  the  Court,  Paul  Mikaelo- 
vich  Makarov,  an  engineer  by  profession.  From  their  conver- 
sation I  understood  for  the  first  time  that  the  Imperial  Family 
were  to  be  transferred  to  Tobolsk.     The  same  day  Makarov 


i82         THE   LAST   DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

ordered  Engineer  Ertel,  who  used  formerly  to  accompany  the 
Dowager  Empress  on  her  pleasure  trips,  to  prepare  a  special 
train  for  2  a.m.  on  August  i  (14). 

On  July  30  (August  12),  the  Imperial  Family  asked  me  to 
bring  the  Znamensky  Holy  Image  of  the  Virgin  from  the 
Znamensky  Church  to  the  Palace  as  they  wanted  to  hold  divine 
service  on  the  birthday  of  Alexis  Nikolaevich.  I  remember 
that  on  this  day  as  well  as  on  the  following  one  I  had  an  enor- 
mous amount  of  trouble  on  account  of  the  state  of  mind  of  the 
soldiers,  and  I  personally  had  to  fulfil  all  the  requests  of  the 
Imperial  Family.  After  the  question  of  the  Holy  Image  was 
settled  I  was  visited  by  the  commander  of  the  District  Forces 
(at  that  time  Ensign  Kuzmin),  a  colonel  and  another  man  in 
mufti.  The  latter  extended  his  hand  to  me  and  said  :  '  May 
I  introduce  myself,  I  was  in  prison  in  the  Kresty  ?  '  To  this 
day  I  still  remember  his  filthy  hand. 

Kuzmin  and  the  colonel  hid  themselves  in  a  room  with  a 
door  leading  into  the  corridor,  and  waited  there  for  a  full  hour 
for  the  end  of  the  service,  on  purpose  to  watch  the  Imperial 
Family  returning  from  church.  That  evening  after  the  depar- 
ture of  Kuzmin  and  his  gang,  Makarov  and  Ilia  Leonidovich 
Tatishchev  came  to  see  me.  Tatishchev  told  me  that  the 
Emperor  had  asked  him  through  Kerensky  and  Makarov  to 
share  the  fate  of  the  Family.  He  said  :  '  I  was  rather  sur- 
prised, as  I  am  not  a  member  of  the  Court,  but  if  it  is  the 
Emperor's  wish,  I  will  not  hesitate.'  The  Emperor  asked 
Tatishchev  to  go  instead  of  Benckendorff,  as  it  was  obvious 
that  the  latter  could  not.  He  was  very  old  and  his  wife  was 
very  old  and  very  ill.  Benckendorff  had  married  the  Princess 
Dolgoruky,  the  mother  of  Vasily  Alexandrovich  Dolgoruky, 
so  it  happened  that  the  stepson  had  to  take  the  stepfather's 
place.  For  a  similar  reason  Madame  Naryshkina,  the  lady-in- 
waiting  to  the  Empress,  could  not  go  with  the  Imperial  Family 
as  she  was  extremely  old  and  had  inflammation  of  the  lungs 


THE  DEPOSITIONS  OF  COLONEL  KOBYLINSKY    183 

The  same  day  Margaret  Uitrovo  called  on  me  and  made  a 
terrible  scene,  accusing  me  of  concealing  the  fate  of  the  Iiiiperial 
Family  from  her  and  stating  that  she  had  heard  that  they  were 
to  be  imprisoned  in  a  fortress. 

In  the  evening  Kerensky  telephoned  that  he  would  come  to 
Tsarskoe  Selo  at  midnight  on  August  i  (14)  to  say  a  few  words 
to  the  detachment  of  soldiers  before  its  departure. 

I  spent  the  greater  part  of  July  31  (August  13)  in 
making  preparations  for  my  departure.  So  far  as  I  remember 
nothing  important  occurred.  Kerensky  arrived  at  midnight. 
The  detachment  was  ready,  and  we  went  to  inspect  the  First 
Battalion.  Kerensky  said  a  few  words  to  the  soldiers,  the 
substance  of  which  was  :  '  You  kept  guard  over  the  Imperial 
Family  in  Tsarskoe-Selo,  and  you  are  to  do  the  same  in  Tobolsk, 
where  the  Imperial  Family  are  to  be  removed  according  to  the 
resolution  of  the  Council  of  Ministers.  Remember,  don't  strike 
a  man  when  he  is  down.  Don't  behave  yourselves  like  ruffians. 
You  will  receive  the  same  allowance  as  in  the  Petrograd  dis- 
trict, besides  tobacco  and  soap,  you  will  also  receive  a  daily 
allowance. ' 

Kerensky  repeated  these  words  to  the  Fourth  Battalion,  but 
he  did  not  visit  the  Second  Battalion.  I  must  draw  your 
attention  to  the  fact  that  the  soldiers  of  the  First  and  Fourth 
Regiments  were  quite  different  from  the  soldiers  of  the  Second 
Regiment.  The  men  of  the  former  dressed  smartly  and  had  a 
large  stock  of  clothes,  but  the  soldiers  of  the  Second  Regiment 
were  men  of  low  morale,  they  were  dirty  in  their  habits  and 
they  had  a  much  smaller  supply  of  clothes.  This  difference  led 
to  very  important  results.  After  Kerensky  had  said  farewell 
to  the  soldiers,  he  said  to  me  :  '  Now  go  and  fetch  Michael 
Alexandrovich.  He  is  at  present  with  the  Grand  Duke  Boris 
Vladimirovich.'  I  went,  therefore,  to  the  house  of  the  Grand 
Duke,  where  I  found  Boris  Vladimirovich,  a  lady,  and  Michael 
Alexandrovich,  with  his  wife,  and  Mr.  Johnson,  an  English 


i84         THE   LAST   DAYS   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

secretary.  The  three  of  us,  Michael  Alexandre vich,  Mr.  John- 
son and  myself,  proceeded  to  the  Alexandrovsk}'  Palace.  Mr. 
Johnson  remained  in  the  motor-car,  and  Michael  Alexandrovich 
went  to  the  ante-room  where  Kerensky  and  the  officer  of  the 
day  awaited  his  arrival.  All  three  then  went  to  see  the 
Emperor.  I  remained  in  the  ante-room.  Suddenly  Alexis 
Nikolaevich  ran  towards  me  and  asked  :  'Is  that  Uncle  Mimi 
who  has  just  come  ?  '  I  answered  that  it  was,  and  Alexis 
Nikolaevich  asked  my  permission  to  hide  himself  behind  the 
door.  '  I  want  to  see  him  when  he  goes  out,'  said  the  Tsare- 
vitch.  So  he  hid  behind  the  door  and  looked  through  the 
crack  of  it  at  Michael  Alexandrovich,  laughing  like  a  child  at 
his  ingenuity,  Michael  Alexandrovich  talked  to  the  Emperor 
for  about  ten  minutes  and  then  took  leave  of  him. 

The  Imperial  Family  left  for  the  station  at  five  o'clock  in  the 
morning.  Two  trains  were  in  readiness.  The  Imperial  Family, 
the  people  with  them,  their  servants  and  a  company  of  the 
First  Regiment  went  by  the  first  train ;  the  remainder  of  the 
soldiers  and  servants  took  the  second  train.  The  luggage  was 
distributed  in  both  trains.  In  the  first  train  were  Vershinin, 
a  member  of  the  Duma,  Makarov,  the  engineer,  and  the  chair- 
man of  the  Mihtary  Section,  Ensign  Efimov,  who  had  been  sent 
by  Kerensky's  wish  to  report  to  the  Soviet  the  arrival  of  the 
Imperial  Family  at  Tobolsk.  The  places  in  the  train  were 
arranged  in  the  following  manner  :  The  Emperor  occupied  the 
first  comfortable  car  (of  the  International  Co.  of  Sleeping 
Cars) ,  the  Empress  was  in  another,  the  Grand  Duchesses  were 
in  the  third,  Alexis  Nikolaevich  and  Nagorny  were  in  the 
fourth.  Demidova,  Tegleva  and  Erzberg  in  the  fifth,  and 
Chemodurov  and  Volkov  occupied  the  sixth  compartment. 
In  another  carriage  were  Tatishchev  and  Dolgoruky  ;  Dr. 
Botkin  was  in  a  small  compartment,  Schneider  and  her  maids 
Katia  and  Masha  were  together,  and  Gillard  was  in  another 
compartment  with  Hendrykova,  her  maid,  and  Mejanz 


THE  DEPOSITIONS  OF  COLONEL  KOBYLINSKY    185 

In  the  third  car  were  Vershinin,  Makarov,  myself,  my  A.D.C. 
Lieutenant  Nicholas  Alexandrovich  Moundel,  the  commander 
of  the  First  Company,  Ensign  Ivan  Trofimovich  Zima,  Ensign 
Vladimir  Alexandrovich  (I  am  not  quite  sure  of  his  name), 
and  Mesiankin,  but  Ensign  Efimov  was  alone  in  a  small  com- 
partment, as  nobody  seemed  inclined  to  travel  in  his  company. 
The  fourth  car  contained  a  dining  saloon  in  which  the  Imperial 
Family  used  to  have  their  meals,  except  the  Empress  and 
Alexis  Nikolaevich,  who  took  their  meals  alone  in  the  Empress's 
compartment.  The  soldiers  occupied  three  third-class  cars. 
Several  luggage  vans  were  attached  to  the  train. 

Nothing  particular  happened  until  we  arrived  at  Perm,  but 
just  before  our  arrival  the  train  was  stopped,  and  a  big  white- 
bearded  man  who  looked  like  a  minor  railway  official  boarded 
my  compartment.  He  introduced  himself  as  the  chairman  of 
the  Railroad  Workmen  and  said  that  the  '  Tovarishch ' 
(Comrades)  wanted  to  know  who  was  in  the  train  and  would 
not  allow  the  train  to  proceed  until  their  curiosity  was  gratified. 
Vershinin  and  Makarov  showed  him  the  official  papers  with 
Kerensky's  signature.  The  train  then  continued  its  journey. 
We  arrived  at  Tinmen  on  the  evening  of  August  4  or  5  (old 
style,  i.e.,  August  17  or  18),  and  on  the  same  day  we  went  on 
board  two  river  steamers.  The  Imperial  Family,  the  persons 
with  them,  and  the  company  of  the  First  Regiment  took  their 
places  on  the  steamer  Rnss.  Some  of  the  servants  and  the 
company  of  the  Second  and  Fourth  Regiments  embarked  on 
the  steamer  Kormilets.  The  vessels  were  comfortable,  but  the 
Kormikis  was  inferior  to  the  Russ.  We  arrived  at  Tobolsk,  so 
far  as  I  can  remember,  on  the  evening  of  x\ugust  6  (August  19) 
about  5  or  6  p.m.  The  house  selected  as  the  residence  of  the 
Imperial  Family  was  not  yet  ready,  so  we  spent  a  few  days  on 
the  boats. 

When  we  travelled  by  train  the  train  did  not  stop  at  the 
large  stations,  but  only  at  the  intermediate  ones.   The  Emperor 


i86         THE   LAST  DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

and  the  other  passengers  frequently  left  the  train  and  proceeded 
ahead,  and  the  train  moved  slowly  after  them.  When  we  were 
on  board  the  steamer  we  sometimes  came  alongside  the  bank  at 
a  distance  of  about  ten  versts  from  the  town  in  order  that  the 
Family  might  have  a  walk. 

During  the  time  the  Family  lived  on  the  steamers  Makarov 
was  putting  the  house  in  order.  Tatishchev,  Hendrykova, 
Schneider,  Tutelberg,  Erzberg,  Tegleva  and  Demidova  arranged 
the  furniture.  When  the  house  was  ready  the  Family  pro- 
ceeded thither,  for  which  purpose  a  smart-looking  carriage  was 
assigned  the  Empress.  She  went  in  this  with  Tatiana  Niko- 
laevna.     All  the  others  walked. 

Two  houses  were  assigned  as  the  residence  of  the  Imperial 
Family,  their  suite  and  their  servants.  One  was  the  Governor's 
house,  the  other  was  opposite  and  belonged  to  M.  Kornilov. 

None  of  the  furniture  was  removed  from  Tsarskoe-Selo, 
so  that  the  furniture  of  the  Governor's  house  was  used,  but 
some  new  things  were  ordered  and  bought  in  Tobolsk. 

The  only  things  which  were  taken  from  Tsarskoe-Selo  for 
the  Imperial  Family  were  some  camp  beds,  but  later  a  number 
of  things  were  sent  on  after  the  necessity  for  them  was  dis- 
covered by  Makarov. 

The  arrangement  of  the  rooms  was  as  follows  :  The  first 
floor  led  to  the  hall,  and  from  this  a  corridor  divided  the  house 
into  two  parts  ;  the  first  room  on  the  right-hand  side  was  occupied 
by  the  officer  of  the  day.  Next  to  it  was  the  room  occupied 
by  Demidova,  and  in  this  room  she,  Tegleva,  Tuelberg  and 
Erzberg  had  their  meals.  The  next  room  was  occupied  by 
Gillard,  who  gave  lessons  to  Alexis  Nikolaevich,  Maria  Niko- 
laevna  and  Anastasia  Nikolaevna.  The  dining-room  used  by 
the  Imperial  Family  was  next  to  this.  On  the  left  side  of  the 
corridor  opposite  to  the  room  of  the  officer  of  the  day  was  a 
room  occupied  by  Chemodurov.  Then  came  the  pantry,  and 
next  to  the  pantry  was  a  room  occupied  by  Tegleva  and  Erzberg, 


THE  DEPOSITIONS  OF  COLONEL  KOBYLINSKY    187 

and  lastly  came  a  room  occupied  by  Tutelberg.  The  staircase 
above  Chemodurov's  room  led  to  the  upper  storey  and  the 
'  work-room  '  of  the  Emperor,  next  to  the  '  work-room  '  was 
the  hall ;  there  was  also  another  staircase  leading  from  the  hall 
to  the  lobby.  The  first  room  on  the  right  was  the  drawing-room, 
next  it  was  the  Emperor  and  Empress's  bedroom,  next  to  their 
bedroom  was  that  of  the  Grand  Duchesses.  Opposite  the  draw- 
ing-room was  the  room  occupied  by  Alexis  Nikolaevich,  next  to 
it  was  the  lavatory,  and  the  bathroom  was  next  the  lavatory. 

The  members  of  the  suite  lived  in  Kornilov's  house. 

The  following  persons  arrived  at  Tobolsk  with  the  Imperial 
Family  :  (i)  Ilia  Leonidovich  Tatishchev,  general  A.D.C. 
to  the  Emperor  ;  (2)  Prince  Alexander  Vasilievich  Dolgoruky  ; 
(3)  Eugene  Sergeievich  Botkin,  physician  ;  (4)  Countess 
Anastasia  Vasilievna  Hendrykova,  personal  maid-of-honour 
to  the  Empress  ;  (5)  Baroness  Sophie  Karlovna  Buxhoevden, 
personal  maid-of-honour  to  the  Empress  ;  (6)  Katherine 
Adolfovna  Schneider,  Court  reader  ;  (7)  Pierre  Andreievich 
GiUard  ;  (8)  Alexandra  Alexandrovna  Tegleva,  nurse  ;  (9) 
Elizabeth  Nikolaevna  Erzberg,  maid  to  the  Grand  Duchesses  ; 

(10)  Maria  Gustavovna  Tutelberg,  maid    to    the    Empress  ; 

(11)  Anna  Stephanovna  Demidova,  another  maid  to  the  Em- 
press ;  (12)  Victorina  Vladimirovna  Nikolaeva,  an  adopted 
child  of  Hendry kova's  ;  (13)  Pauline  Megans,  Hendrykova 's 
maid  ;  (14)  Tania  and  Masha  (I  do  not  know  their  surnames), 
Miss  Schneider's  maids ;  (15)  Terenty  Ivanovich  Chemodurov, 
the  Emperor's  valet  ;  (16)  Stephan  Makarov,  assistant  valet 
to  Chemodurov  ;  (17)  Alexis  Andreievich  Volkov,  an  attend- 
ant ;  (18)  Ivan  Dmitrievich  Sedneff,  another  attendant  on  the 
Grand  Duchesses  ;  (19)  Michael  Karpov,  the  Grand  Duchesses' 
footman  ;  (20)  Klementy  Gregorievich  Nagorny,  the  Tsare- 
vitch's  servant  ;  (21)  Sergius  Ivanov,  Gillard's  manservant ; 
(22)  Tiutin,  manservant  to  Tatishchev  and  Dolgoruky  ;  (23) 
Francis  Zhuravsky,  a  waiter  ;    (24)  Alexis  Trupp,  footman  ; 


i88         THE   LAST  DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

(25)  Gregory  Soloduhin,  a  footman  ;  (26)  Dormidontov,  a 
footman  ;  (27)  Kisselev,  a  footman  ;  (28)  Ermolay  Gusev, 
a  footman  ;  (29)  Ivan  Michailovich  Haritonov,  a  cook  ;  (30) 
Kokicheff,  a  cook  ;  (31)  Ivan  Vereshchagin,  a  cook  ;  (32) 
Leonid  Sedneff,  an  assistant  cook  ;  (33)  Sergius  Mikhailov,  an 
assistant  cook  ;  (34)  Francis  Turkovsky,  an  assistant  cook  ; 
(35)  Terchin,  an  assistant  cook ;  (36)  Alexander  Kirpiichnikov, 
a  clerk  who  performed  the  duties  of  janitor  in  Tobolsk  ;  (37) 
Alexis  Nikolaevich  Dimitriev,  a  barber  ;  (38)  Rozhkoff,  in 
charge  of  the  wine  cellars,  and  after  our  arrival  in  Tobolsk  we 
were  joined  by  (39)  Vladimir  Nikolaevich  Derevanko,  physician, 
and  (40)  Mr.  Sidney  Ivanovitch  Gibbes. 

Our  life  in  Tobolsk  went  on  peacefully.  The  restrictions 
were  the  same  as  in  Tsarskoe-Selo,  but  everybody  felt  much 
happier. 

The  officer  of  the  day  remained  in  his  own  room,  and  nobody 
interfered  with  the  private  life  of  the  Imperial  Family.  They 
all  rose  early,  except  the  Empress.  In  the  morning  after 
breakfast  the  Emperor  took  a  walk  and  went  in  for  some  sort 
of  physical  exercise.  The  children  also  had  a  walk.  Every- 
body did  what  he  pleased.  In  the  morning  the  Emperor  used 
to  read  and  write  up  his  diary,  the  children  had  their  lessons. 
The  Empress  read,  embroidered  or  painted.  Lunch  was  served 
at  eleven  o'clock.  After  lunch  the  Family  usually  had  a  walk. 
The  Emperor  frequently  used  to  saw  logs  with  Dolgoruky, 
Tatishchev  and  Gillard,  and  sometimes  the  Grand  Duchesses 
took  part  in  this.  Tea  was  served  at  four  o'clock,  and  every- 
body stood  at  the  window  and  watched  the  life  of  the  town. 
Dinner  was  at  six,  and  after  dinner,  Tatishchev,  Dolgoruky, 
Botkin  and  Derevenko  joined  us  and  sometimes  we  played 
cards.  The  only  card  players  in  the  Family  were  the  Emperor 
and  the  Grand  Duchess  Olga.  The  Emperor  occasionally  used 
to  read  aloud.  Sometimes  French  or  English  plays  were 
staged.     Tea  was  served  at  eight  o'clock,  and  conversation 


THE  DEPOSITIONS  OF  COLONEL  KOBYLINSKY    189 

became  general  until  eleven,  but  never  later.  After  eleven 
o'clock  everybody  retired  for  the  night ;  the  Tsarevitch  went 
to  bed  at  nine  or  thereabouts. 

The  Empress  always  dined  upstairs,  and  sometimes  the  Tsare- 
vitch dined  with  her ;  the  rest  of  the  Family  dined  in  the  dining 
room. 

The  members  of  the  suite  and  the  servants  were  allowed  to 
go  out  of  the  house  whenever  they  wanted,  as  they  were  under 
no  restrictions.  The  movements  of  the  Imperial  Family  were, 
of  course,  restricted  in  the  same  way  as  in  Tsarskoe-Selo,  and 
they  were  only  allowed  to  go  to  church.  Divine  service  was 
conducted  in  the  following  manner :  Late  services  took 
place  in  the  house,  and  were  performed  by  the  clergy  of  Blago- 
veschensky  Church.  The  Priest,  Father  Vasiliev,  officiated. 
The  Imperial  Family  only  went  outside  to  church  for  the  early 
services  ;  in  order  to  attend  these  they  had  to  go  through  the 
garden  and  across  the  street,  but  sentries  were  stationed  all 
the  way  to  the  church,  and  strangers  were  not  admitted. 
So  far  as  I  can  judge  the  Government  tried  to  maintain  the 
conditions  of  life  compatible  with  the  position  of  the  Imperial 
Family,  When  we  left  Tsarskoe-Selo  Kerensky  said  most 
emphatically  :  '  Don't  forget  that  your  charge  is  a  former 
Emperor,  and  he  and  his  Family  must  want  for  nothing.' 
The  guard  of  the  house  was  under  my  control,  and  after  the 
Family  arrived  at  Tobolsk  I  think  they  got  used  to  me  and  so 
far  as  I  understand  they  bore  me  no  ill-wiU.  I  can  state  this 
with  perfect  truth,  as  before  their  departure  the  Empress 
received  me  and  gave  me  a  Holy  Picture  with  which  she 
blessed  me. 

This  peaceful  life  did  not  continue,  and  I  can  trace  some 
resemblance  between  the  first  periods  of  life  in  Tsarskoe-Selo 
and  Tobolsk.  The  relatively  easy  conditions  of  life  in  Tsarskoe- 
Selo  had  gradually  disappeared.  At  that  time  the  Government 
was  gradually  losing  all  the  ground  from  under  its  feet,  and  the 


IQO        THE   LAST   DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

agitation  increased  amongst  the  soldiers,  whose  dissatisfaction 
became  worse  and  worse.  Finally,  faced  with  the  necessity  of 
fighting  for  power,  and  at  the  same  time  not  wishing  to  injure 
the  Family,  the  Kerensky  Government  made  up  its  mind  to 
transfer  them  from  the  centre  of  the  political  struggle  to  some 
quiet  spot.  This  turned  out  to  be  absolutely  the  right  course. 
The  population  of  Tobolsk  was  well  disposed  towards  the 
Imperial  Family,  as  when  we  arrived  at  Tobolsk,  all  the  inhabi- 
tants came  on  to  the  piers,  and  when  the  Family  proceeded 
towards  the  Governor's  house  it  was  apparent  that  the  popula- 
tion was  well  disposed  towards  them.  But  now  most  people 
were  afraid  to  show  their  sympathies,  although  they  showed 
their  respect  in  secret.  Many  gifts  were  made  to  the  Imperial 
Family,  mostly  of  food  and  sweets,  but  they  received  very  little, 
as  the  greater  portion  was  eaten  by  the  servants. 

The  general  agitation  now  spread  to  Tobolsk,  as  special 
attention  was  now  given  this  town  by  all  kinds  of  politicians, 
simply  because  it  happened  to  be  the  residence  of  the  Imperial 
Family. 

I  only  commanded  my  men  until  September.  In  Septem- 
ber a  commissar  of  the  Government  by  the  name  of  Vasily 
Semenovich  Pankratov  came  to  Tobolsk.  This  man  brought  a 
letter  signed  by  Kerensky  which  stated  that  from  now  onward 
I  was  to  be  subordinate  to  Pankratov  and  obey  all  his  orders. 

At  the  age  of  eighteen,  Pankratov  had  killed  a  gendarme 
in  Kiev  whilst  defending  a  woman.  For  this  he  was  court- 
martialled  and  imprisoned  in  the  Fortress  of  Schliisselburg, 
where  he  remained  in  solitary  confinement  for  fifteen  years, 
after  which  he  was  exiled  to  the  Yakut  District,  where  he  lived 
for  twenty-seven  years. 

His  assistant  was  Ensign  Alexander  Vladimirovich  Nikolsky, 
who  had  also  been  exiled  to  the  Yakut  for  being  a  member 
of  the  Socialist  Revolutionary  Party.  During  this  time  he 
became  friendly  with  Pankratov,  and  when  Pankratov  was 


THE  DEPOSITIONS  OF  COLONEL  KOBYLINSKY    191 

appointed  commissar  to  the  Imperial  Family  he  asked  Nikolsky 
to  be  his  assistant. 

Pankratov  was  a  clever  man  with  a  well-developed  mind, 
and  an  extraordinarily  mild  disposition.  Nikolsky  was  rough. 
He  had  graduated  from  an  ecclesiastical  seminary  and  had 
hardly  any  manners,  he  was  as  obstinate  as  a  bull,  and  the 
moment  he  made  up  his  mind  about  anything,  he  swept  all 
obstacles  from  his  path.  After  their  arrival  and  when  they 
had  seen  how  things  were  progressing,  Nikolsky  expressed  his 
surprise  at  the  casual  way  in  which  the  servants  and  the  suite 
came  and  went.  '  This  can't  go  on,'  he  said.  '  Why,  they 
could  easily  let  in  an  outsider.  Photos  must  be  taken  at  once 
of  everybody.'  I  tried  to  persuade  him  not  to  do  this,  as 
the  sentries  knew  everybody  well  by  sight.  Nikolsky  answered 
bitterly  :  '  Yes,  we  were  once  ordered  by  the  police  to  have 
our  photographs  taken  full  face  and  profile,  and  so  now 
their  pictures  shall  be  taken.'  He  went  at  once  to  the  photo- 
grapher, and  photographs  were  taken  of  a  number  of  people 
and  suitable  inscriptions  were  placed  on  each  photo.  Alexis 
Nikolaevich,  who  was  a  very  mischievous  boy,  peeped  through 
the  fence  and  watched  the  proceedings,  but  when  Nikolsky 
heard  this  he  made  a  huge  fuss  about  it.  He  reprimanded 
the  soldier  on  duty  and  spoke  very  sharply  to  the  Tsarevitch. 
The  boy  was  offended,  and  complained  that  Nikolsky  had 
shouted  at  him.  The  same  day  I  asked  Pankratov  to  try  to 
moderate  Nikolsky's  zeal. 

As  I  stated  before,  Pankratov  did  not  want  to  harm  the 
Imperial  Family,  but  it  turned  out  that  he  and  Nikolsky  were 
largely  responsible  for  a  great  deal  of  trouble.  Not  under- 
standing the  realities  of  life,  and  being  genuine  members  of 
the  S.R.  Party,  they  insisted  upon  everybody  joining  their 
Party,  and  they  began  to  convert  the  soldiers  to  their  own 
beliefs.  They  started  a  school  where  they  taught  soldiers 
literature  and  all  sorts  of  useful  knowledge,  but  after  every 


192         THE  LAST  DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

lesson  they  discussed  politics  with  their  pupils,  and  told  them 
the  programme  of  the  S.R.  Party.  The  soldiers  listened,  and 
the  result  of  these  lectures  was  that  the  soldiers  were  converted 
to  Bolshevism.  Pankratov  and  Nikolsky  also  wanted  to  print 
a  newspaper  under  the  title  of  Zemlia  i  Volia  (Land  and 
Freedom). 

A  man  by  the  name  of  Pisarevsky  lived  in  Tobolsk  at  this 
time.  He  was  a  furious  democrat  and  an  enemy  to  the  S.R.'s, 
and  he  therefore  started  a  campaign  against  Pankratov  and 
Nikolsky.  Pisarevsky  published  a  newspaper  called  Rabochaia- 
Gazeta  (The  Workmen's  Newspaper),  and  seeing  that  Pankratov 
had  a  certain  influence  amongst  the  soldiers,  Pisarevsky  began 
to  demoralize  them.  Shortly  after  the  arrival  of  Pankratov 
and  Nikolsky,  our  detachment  was  divided  into  two  groups  : 
the  Pankratov  Party  and  the  Pisarevsky  Party,  or  in  other 
words,  the  Bolshevists.  The  Bolshevist  Party  was  composed 
of  the  soldiers  of  the  Second  Regiment,  who  were  poor  crea- 
tures with  a  very  low  standard  of  morality.  A  small  number 
of  men  formed  a  third  group,  or  I  should  say,  a  neutral  group, 
and  most  of  its  members  were  soldiers  who  were  mobilized  in 
1906  and  1907. 

These  political  campaigns  resulted  in  the  complete  demorali- 
zation of  the  soldiers,  who  began  to  act  like  hooligans.  For- 
merly they  did  not  appear  to  wish  to  make  things  unpleasant 
for  the  Imperial  Family.  But  now  they  did  not  seem  to  know 
what  next  to  demand  for  themselves,  and  as  the}^  studied 
their  own  interests,  the  result  was  that  either  a  member  of 
the  Imperial  Family  or  some  of  the  suite  had  to  suffer.  At 
first  the  soldiers  under  the  influence  of  the  political  struggle 
came  to  me  and  complained  :  '  We  have  to  sleep  in  bunks, 
our  food  is  bad,  but  "  Nikolashka  "  (a  slang  name  for  the  Em- 
peror popular  during  the  Revolution)  who  is  under  arrest  has 
so  much  food  that  his  cooks  throw  it  into  the  pig  pails.'  At 
this  time  life  in  Tobolsk  was  not  expensive.     But  Kerensky 


THE  DEPOSITIONS  OF  COLONEL  KOBYLINSKY    193 

had  not  fulfilled  his  promise,  and  although  we  received  Omsk 
allowance  and  not  those  of  the  Petrograd  District,  the  allowances 
were  still  large  enough  to  obtain  very  good  food  for  the  men. 
For  the  purpose  of  avoiding  further  friction  with  the  soldiers 
it  became  necessary  to  take  up  the  question  of  money  matters 
with  Pignatti,  the  District  Commissar,  and  increase  the  allow- 
ance to  one  thousand  roubles,  substituting  the  soldiers'  former 
good  plain  food  with  that  which  was  unnecessary  and  luxu- 
rious. 

As  I  have  said  before,  Kerensky  had  promised  the  soldiers 
some  pay  in  addition  to  their  previous  daily  allowance.  The 
month  of  November  came,  but  no  additional  money  was  for- 
warded to  us.  The  soldiers  began  to  grumble  :  '  They  promise 
everything  and  do  nothing.'  '  We  will  help  ourselves  to  our 
daily  pay.  We  shall  demolish  the  shops  and  so  obtain  our 
daily  pay  in  this  manner.'  Once  again  I  visited  Pignatti 
and  borrowed  fifteen  thousand  roubles  from  him.  In  this 
way  I  distributed  to  the  soldiers,  daily  pay  to  the  amount  of 
fifty  kopeks,  and  so  shut  their  mouths  for  a  time.  But  the 
soldiers  decided  to  send  delegates  to  Moscow  and  Petrograd 
to  settle  the  question  of  the  daily  pay,  and  they  chose  Matveiev 
and  Lupin  as  their  representatives.  After  some  time  they 
returned  (Matveiev  returned  as  an  officer),  and  told  the  men 
that  the  money  would  be  forwarded  from  Moscow.  Again  I 
had  to  go  to  Pignatti  and  beg  once  more  for  fifteen  thousand 
roubles,  as  the  soldiers  did  not  now  believe  in  promises,  and 
being  beyond  my  control,  they  could  create  any  amount  of 
trouble. 

When  some  of  the  soldiers  learned  from  the  newspapers 
that  the  men  called  to  the  colours  in  1906-1907  had  been 
demobilized,  they  demanded  their  own  demobilization  also. 
But  I  had  most  of  the  soldiers  who  were  not  to  be  demobilized 
on  my  side,  and  they  were  easily  persuaded  to  stay. 

Then  came  the  Bolshevist  Revolution,  that  wild  movement 

N 


194         THE   LAST   DAYS   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

which  spread  throughout  Russia  and  caused  us  so  many  suffer- 
ings ! 

The  following  unpleasant  incident  took  place  about  this 
time.  Father  Vasiliev,  the  priest  who  performed  divine 
service,  was  not  a  tactful  man.  Although  he  was  very  well 
disposed  towards  the  Imperial  Family,  he  rendered  them  very 
poor  service  by  his  subsequent  behaviour.  On  October  24 
— -November 6 — (before  the  Bolshevist  Revolution),  the  day 
of  the  anniversary  of  the  accession  of  the  Emperor  to  the 
Throne,  the  Imperial  Family  received  Holy  Communion,  and 
the  day  before,  after  the  evening  service,  the  Imperial  Family 
made  their  confessions.  Nobody  took  any  particular  notice 
of  divine  service  on  this  day,  but  Father  Vasiliev  most  fool- 
ishly ordered  the  church  bells  to  ring  continuously  from  the 
time  the  Imperial  Family  left  the  church  until  they  entered 
the  Governor's  house  ! 

On  Christmas  Day,  the  Imperial  Family  were  present  in 
church  during  the  early  service,  and  after  the  service  the 
customary  Thanksgiving  prayer  was  read.  On  account  of 
the  intense  cold,  I  usually  relieved  the  sentries  before  the  end 
of  the  service,  and  I  only  left  a  small  number  on  duty  by  the 
church.  Sometimes  some  of  the  remaining  soldiers  entered 
the  church ;  the  older  ones  came  to  pray,  but  the  majority 
came  to  warm  themselves.  The  total  number  of  soldiers  in 
the  church  at  any  one  time  was  generally  very  small.  But 
on  this  particular  day  I  noticed  that  more  soldiers  than  usual 
were  present,  and  I  thought  that  the  reason  for  this  was  that 
Christmas  Day  was  considered  a  holiday.  When  the  thanks- 
giving service  was  coming  to  an  end  I  left  the  church  and 
ordered  a  soldier  to  call  the  guard.  I  did  not  re-enter  the 
church  and  I  did  not  hear  the  end  of  the  service.  But  after 
the  Imperial  Family  had  left  the  church,  Pankratov  said  to 
me  :  '  Do  you  know  what  the  priest  has  done  ?  He  has  read 
the  prayer  for  the  prolongation  of  the  life  of  the  Emperor, 


THE  DEPOSITIONS  OF  COLONEL   KOBYLINSKY    195 

the  Empress  and  the  whole  Family,  mentioning  their  names 
in  the  prayer,  and  directly  the  soldiers  heard  it  they  began 
to  murmur.'  Father  VasiUev's  useless  loyalty  resulted  in  a 
great  disturbance,  as  the  soldiers  started  a  riot  and  made  up 
their  minds  to  kill,  or  at  least  to  arrest  the  officiating  clergy. 
It  was  most  difficult  to  persuade  them  not  to  take  any  aggres- 
sive steps  and  await  the  decision  of  an  investigating  committee. 
Bishop  Hermogen  immediately  transferred  Father  Vasiliev  to 
the  Abalaksky  Monastery,  as  the  situation  was  so  strained, 
and  I  went  to  see  the  Bishop  personally  and  ask  him  to 
appoint  another  clergyman.  After  this  Father  Hlynov  offici- 
ated at  the  services  for  the  Imperial  Family. 

The  result  of  this  fresh  trouble  was  that  the  soldiers  lost 
all  faith  in  my  word  and  kept  on  saying  :  '  When  the  service 
takes  place  in  the  house,  most  probably  there  is  a  prayer  for 
the  prolongation  of  the  life  of  the  Imperial  Family.'  So  the 
men  decided  not  to  allow  the  Imperial  Family  to  go  to  church, 
and  only  allowed  them  to  pray  in  the  presence  of  a  soldier.  The 
sole  concession  I  was  able  to  obtain  was  permission  for  the 
Imperial  Family  to  visit  church  on  the  Dvounadesiatye  Drazd- 
niky  (important  Holy  Days  in  the  Orthodox  Church).  I  was 
forced  to  submit  to  the  men's  decision  that  a  soldier  should  be 
present  at  divine  ser\dce  in  the  Governor's  house.  In  this 
way  the  tactless  behaviour  of  Father  Vasiliev  resulted  in  the 
soldiers  being  permitted  to  enter  the  Governor's  house,  which 
prior  to  this  time  they  had  not  been  allowed  to  do.  Another 
incident  happened  a  little  later.  A  soldier  by  the  name  of 
Rybakov,  who  was  present  at  divine  service,  heard  the  clergy- 
man mention  the  name  of  Tsaritsa  Alexandra  (a  Saint)  :  a 
new  grievance  instantly  arose  and  I  had  to  send  for  Rybakov, 
find  a  calendar,  and  explain  to  him  that  Tsaritsa  Alexandra 
did  not  mean  the  Empress  Alexandra,  but  was  only  the  name 
of  a  Saint,  known  as  Tsaritsa  Alexandra. 

When  the  demobilization  of  the  army  occurred,  my  rifle-men 


196         THE   LAST  DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

began  to  take  their  discharges.  To  replace  the  old  soldiers 
who  were  leaving,  some  young  ones  were  sent  from  the  reserves 
of  Tsarskoe-Selo.  And  these  soldiers,  having  been  in  the  midst 
of  the  political  struggle,  were  now  vicious  and  corrupt. 

The  Pisarevsky  group  increased  in  number  and  strength  by 
these  new  Bolsheviks.  Finally,  Pankratov  (thanks  to  Pisarev- 
sky's  propaganda)  was  declared  to  be  '  counter-revolutionary  ' 
and  he  was  dismissed  by  the  soldiers.  He  left  Tobolsk,  and 
Nikolsky  went  with  him. 

The  soldiers  now  sent  a  telegram  requesting  the  presence 
of  a  Bolshevik  Commissar  in  Tobolsk,  but  for  some  reason  the 
Commissar  did  not  arrive. 

Not  knowing  what  other  objections  they  could  make,  the 
soldiers  decided  to  forbid  members  of  the  suite  to  leave  the 
house.  I  tried  to  explain  how  ridiculous  this  was,  and  so  the 
men  changed  their  minds  and  decided  to  let  members  of  the 
suite  go  out  accompanied  by  a  sentry.  Finally  they  got  tired 
of  this  and  allowed  everybody  to  go  out  twice  a  week,  but  not 
for  longer  than  two  hours. 

On  one  occasion,  as  he  wished  to  say  good-bye  to  a  large 
number  of  departing  soldiers,  the  Emperor  and  the  Empress 
ascended  a  small  hill  which  had  been  made  out  of  the  frozen 
snow  for  the  amusement  of  the  children.  The  soldiers  who 
remained  were  very  angry  at  this  and  levelled  the  little  hill 
to  the  ground,  saying  that  somebody  might  easily  shoot  at 
the  Imperial  Family  when  they  were  on  the  top  of  the  hill, 
and  that  if  this  happened  they  would  be  held  responsible. 

One  day  the  Emperor  dressed  himself  in  a  '  cherkeska  ' 
(the  Caucasian  tribal  dress)  and  put  a  dagger  in  his  belt.  A 
commotion  instantly  arose  amongst  the  soldiers,  who  cried  : 
'  They  must  be  searched,  they  carry  weapons.'  I  made  every 
effort  to  persuade  the  men  not  to  insist  upon  this  search.  I 
went  to  the  Emperor  and  explained  the  situation  and  asked 
him  to  give  me  the  dagger  (later  it  was  taken  by  Rodionov). 


THE  DEPOSITIONS  OF  COLONEL   KOBYLINSKY    197 

Dolgoruky  and  Gillard  both  handed  me  their  swords,  and  those 
were  hung  up  on  the  wall  of  my  office. 

I  have  quoted  Kerensky's  words  to  me  before  our  departure 
from  Tsarskoe-Selo.  The  Imperial  Family  at  first  was  not  in 
need  of  anything  in  Tobolsk,  but  presently  our  money  vanished 
and  no  more  arrived.  We  began  to  live  on  credit.  I  wrote  to 
Lieutenant-General  Anichkoff,  who  was  charged  with  the 
Intendancy  of  the  Court,  but  with  no  result.  Finally,  Hari- 
tonov,  the  cook,  began  to  say  that  he  was  not  trusted  in  the 
shops,  and  it  looked  as  if  our  credit  was  exhausted.  I  went  to 
see  the  Director  of  the  Tobolsk  Branch  of  the  National  Bank, 
who  advised  me  to  discuss  the  question  with  a  merchant,  Mr, 

X ,  who  was  a  monarchist,  and  who  had  money  in  the  bank. 

By  virtue  of  a  letter  of  exchange  endorsed  by  Tatishchev, 
Dolgoruky  and  myself,  the  merchant  advanced  me  twenty 
thousand  roubles.  Of  course  I  asked  Tatishchev  and  Dolgoruky 
to  keep  silent  about  this  loan  and  by  no  means  to  mention  it 
to  the  Emperor  or  to  any  of  the  Imperial  Family.  But  these 
contretemps  tried  me  greatly.  This  was  hell  and  not  life. 
My  nerves  were  strained  to  the  limit  of  endurance.  It  was 
very  hard  for  me  to  beg  money  for  the  maintenance  of  the 
Imperial  Family,  so  that  when  one  day  the  soldiers  made  a 
new  resolution  that  all  officers  must  remove  their  shoulder- 
straps,  I  felt  I  could  bear  no  more.  I  knew  that  I  had  abso- 
lutely lost  all  control  of  the  men,  and  I  fully  realized  my  impo- 
tence !  So  I  went  to  the  Governor's  house  and  asked  Tegleva 
to  tell  the  Emperor  that  I  begged  him  to  receive  me.  The 
Emperor  at  once  received  me  in  Tegleva 's  room,  and  I  said  to 
him  :  '  Your  Majesty,  all  authority  is  fast  slipping  out  of  my 
hands.  The  men  have  removed  our  shoulder-straps !  I  can- 
not be  useful  to  you  any  more,  so  I  wish  to  resign,  if  you  do 
not  object.  My  nerves  are  strained.  I  am  exhausted.'  The 
Emperor  put  his  arm  on  my  shoulder,  his  eyes  filled  with  tears. 
He  replied  :    '  I  implore  you  to  remain.      Evgeni  Stepanovich, 


igS         THE   LAST   DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

remain  for  my  sake,  for  the  sake  of  my  wife  and  for  the  sake 
of  my  children.  You  must  stand  by  us.  You  see  how  all 
of  us  are  suffering.' 

Then  he  embraced  me  and  we  kissed  each  other,  and  I 
resolved  to  remain. 

It  then  happened  that  Dorofeiev,  a  soldier  of  the  Fourth 
Regiment  (the  appearance  of  the  detachment  had  completely 
changed),  came  to  me  and  said  that  at  a  meeting  of  the 
Soldiers'  Committee  it  had  been  decided  that  the  Emperor 
must  remove  his  shoulder-straps,  and  his  orders  were  to  go 
with  me  and  remove  them.  I  tried  to  persuade  Dorofeiev  not 
to  do  this.  He  behaved  most  aggressively,  called  the  Emperor 
'  Nikolashka  '  and  was  extremely  angry  during  the  conversa- 
tion. I  pointed  out  that  it  would  be  very  embarrassing  if  the 
Emperor  were  to  refuse.  The  soldier  answered  :  '  If  he  refuses 
I  will  tear  them  off.'  I  then  said  :  '  But  suppose  he  strikes 
you  ?  '  Dorofeiev  replied  :  '  Then  I  will  strike  him  also.' 
What  more  could  I  do  ?  I  started  again  to  try  and  persuade 
him,  saying  that  things  were  not  always  as  easy  as  they  seemed, 
and  I  told  him  that  the  Emperor  was  a  cousin  of  the  King  of 
England,  and  that  very  serious  complications  might  follow. 
I  advised  the  soldiers  to  ask  instructions  from  Moscow,  and  as 
I  had  them  on  that  point  they  went  away  and  wired  to  Moscow. 
I  then  went  to  see  Tatishchev  and  asked  him  to  beg  the  Em- 
peror to  refrain  from  wearing  shoulder-straps  in  the  presence 
of  the  soldiers.  After  that  the  Emperor  wore  a  black  sheep- 
skin overcoat  with  no  shoulder-straps. 

Swings  had  been  made  for  the  children,  as  the  Grand  Duch- 
esses liked  to  swing,  but  the  soldiers  of  the  Second  Regiment 
who  were  on  sentry  duty,  carved  most  indecent  words  on  the 
seats  of  the  swings.  After  the  Emperor  had  seen  this  the 
seats  were  removed.  This  was  done  when  Sergeant  Shikunov 
was  the  captain  of  the  Guard.     He  was  a  Bolshevik. 

I  do  not  remember  exactly  which  day  I  received  a  tielegram 


THE  DEPOSITIONS  OF  COLONEL   KOBYLINSKY    199 

from  Karelin,  the  Commissar  in  charge  of  the  former  ministry 
of  the  Imperial  Court.  The  telegram  stated  that  the  nation 
could  no  longer  maintain  the  Tsar's  family  and  that  they  must 
support  themselves,  but  the  Soviets  would  give  them  a  soldier's 
ration,  quarters  and  heat. 

This  was  the  greatest  trial  which  the  Bolsheviks  inflicted 
on  the  Imperial  Family.  The  telegram  also  said  that  the 
Family  must  not  spend  more  than  six  hundred  roubles  monthly 
per  person.  After  this  order,  the  quality  of  the  food  served 
to  the  Family  deteriorated.  It  also  affected  the  suite.  The 
Imperial  Family  could  no  longer  maintain  the  persons  belong- 
ing to  their  suite,  so  those  who  had  no  private  means  were 
obliged  to  leave.  A  number  of  servants  were  discharged  : 
(i)  The  waiter  Gregorii  Ivanov  Solodukhin  ;  (2)  waiter  Er- 
molai  Gusev  ;  (3)  Dormidontov,  waiter  ;  (4)  Kiselev,  waiter  ; 
(5)  Vereshchagin,  cook  ;  (6)  Semen  Mikhailov,  cook's  assist- 
ant ;  (7)  Frantz  Purkovsky  ;  (8)  Stepan  Makarov,  Chemo- 
durov's  assistant ;  (9)  Stupel,  the  valet  (I  forgot  to  mention 
his  name  before),  and  some  others. 

As  the  minds  of  the  soldiers  were  still  occupied  with  the 
question  of  their  daily  pay,  they  sent  a  man  named  Lupin, 
a  Bolshevik,  to  Moscow.  When  Lupin  returned,  he  described 
the  situation  in  Moscow  in  rosy  hues,  and  brought  the  soldiers 
most  encouraging  news.  He  said  that  instead  of  the  fifty  kopeks 
per  day  which  they  had  received  at  the  time  of  the  Provincial 
Government,  they  were  now  to  get  three  roubles  per  day. 
This  news  made  Bolsheviks  of  all  the  soldiers.  They  said  : 
'  This  shows  what  good  fellows  the  Commissars  are  !  The 
Provisional  Government  promised  us  fifty  kopeks  per  day,  but 
did  not  pay  it.  The  Commissars  will  give  us  three  roubles 
a  day,'  and  they  told  this  joyful  news  to  one  another. 

Lupin  brought  back  an  order  to  arrest  Tatishchev,  Dolgoruky, 
Benckendorff,  and  Schneider.  He  also  brought  the  news  that 
our  detachment  was  soon  to  be  relieved,  and  that  a  new  Com- 


200         THE   LAST   DAYS   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

missar  would  arrive  with  a  new  detachment.  I  think  the 
soldiers  dreaded  the  arrival  of  the  new  Commissar.  They  now 
decided  to  transfer  all  persons  belonging  to  the  suite  to  the 
Governor's  house,  and  put  them  under  guard.  All  were  there- 
fore removed  to  the  Governor's  house  except  Gibbes,  the 
Englishman,  who  did  not  care  to  live  with  anybody  else,  and 
so  he  was  allowed  a  room  outside. 

New  partitions  were  put  up  in  the  entrance  room  adjoining 
Chemodurov's  room,  thereby  providing  room  for  Demidova, 
Tegleva  and  Erzberg.  Demidova's  room  was  divided  by  a 
curtain,  and  Tatishchev  and  Dolgoruky  shared  the  other  half. 
In  the  room  which  Erzberg  and  Tegleva  had  previously  occu- 
pied, Schneider  and  two  of  her  maids  were  now  placed.  Tutel- 
berg's  room  was  given  to  Hendrykova  and  Nikolaevna,  and 
Tutelberg  was  placed  in  a  room  under  the  main  staircase  be- 
hind the  partition.  In  this  way  we  were  able  to  avoid  intrud- 
ing upon  the  privacy  of  the  Imperial  Family. 

Mr.  Gibbes  settled  in  a  small  house  near  the  kitchen,  and 
every  one,  including  the  servants,  was  now  under  arrest.  The 
servants  were  only  allowed  to  go  into  the  town  in  cases  of 
extreme  necessity. 

The  new  Commissar  duly  arrived,  but  he  was  not  the  same 
man  of  whom  Lupin  had  spoken.  This  Commissar,  who  had 
been  sent  from  Omsk  to  supervise  the  life  of  the  Imperial 
Family,  was  a  Jew  named  Dutzman.  He  took  up  his  quarters 
in  Kornilov's  house,  but  he  did  not  take  any  active  part  in 
affairs  and  he  never  came  to  the  Governor's  house.  Shortly 
afterwards  he  was  elected  secretary  of  the  district  Soviet, 
and  he  stayed  there  permanently. 

At  this  time  the  Soviet  leaders  were  :  Dutzman,  a  Jew 
named  Peissel,  and  a  Lett  named  Disler.  Zaslavsky  also  took 
part  in  the  Soviet  activities.  He  was,  so  1  understand,  the 
representative  of  Ekaterinburg,  or  more  properly  of  the  Ural 
District  Soviet.     The  reason  for  his  arrival  was  not  clear  to 


THE  DEPOSITIONS  OF  COLONEL   KOBYLINSKY    201 

me.  It  seemed  that  the  Omsk  Bolsheviks  were  quarrelling 
with  the  Ekaterinburg  Bolsheviks,  as  the  Omsk  Bolsheviks 
wished  to  include  Tobolsk  under  their  jurisdiction  in  Western 
Siberia — but  the  Ekaterinburg  people  wished  to  include  it  in 
the  Ural  District.  Dutzman  was  an  Omsk  Bolshevik  represen- 
tative, and  Zaslavsky  was  a  representative  of  the  Ekaterin- 
burg Bolsheviks.  I  presume  that  Zaslavsky  came  to  Tobolsk 
because,  even  at  this  time,  the  Ekaterinburg  Bolsheviks  in- 
tended to  remove  us  from  Tobolsk  to  Ekaterinburg.  Mat- 
veiev,  a  Bolshevik  whom  I  have  mentioned  many  times,  used 
frequently  to  visit  the  Soviet,,  and  he  once  told  me  that  the 
Soviet  wished  two  soldiers  from  each  company  to  come  and 
see  them.  Six  soldiers  were  delegated  to  do  this,  and  these 
informed  me  afterwards  that  the  Soviet  had  decided  to  trans- 
fer all  the  Tsar's  family  to  '  The  Hill,'  which  meant  to  prison, 
as  the  Tobolsk  prison,  which  was  situated  on  a  height,  was 
always  called  '  The  Hill.'  I  pointed  out  that  the  Tsar's 
family  was  under  the  authority  of  the  central  Soviet  and  not 
of  the  local  Soviet,  but  this  did  not  help  matters.  I  then 
advanced  another  argument,  saying  it  was  impossible  to  exe- 
cute this  order,  as  if  the  Imperial  Family  were  imprisoned,  it 
would  be  necessary  to  transfer  all  the  soldiers  of  our  detach- 
ment to  prison  also,  which  would  not  be  practicable,  and  that 
in  case  of  an  attack  on  the  prison  there  would  be  no  force 
left  to  defend  it.  As  our  soldiers  began  to  get  troublesome, 
the  Soviet  was  obliged  to  change  its  mind,  and  it  announced 
that  no  decision  had  been  arrived  at,  and  that  the  Soviet  had 
merely  made  a  tentative  suggestion. 

All  of  us  anxiously  awaited  the  arrival  of  the  new  Commissar. 
It  was  rumoured  that  Trotzky  himself  was  coming.  Finally, 
the  Commissar  Yakovlev  arrived.  He  arrived  at  Tobolsk 
in  the  evening  of  February  9  (22),  and  stayed  in  Kornilov's 
house.  He  was  accompanied  by  a  certain  Avdeiev  (I  looked 
upon  him  as  Yakovlev's  assistant),  a  telegraph  operator,  who 


202         THE   LAST   DAYS   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

transmitted  Yakovlev's  telegrams  to  Moscow  and  Ekaterin- 
burg, and  a  young  boy. 

Yakovlev  appeared  to  be  about  thirty-two  or  thirty-three 
years  of  age.  His  hair  was  jet  black  ;  he  was  taller  than  the 
average,  thin,  but  strong  and  muscular ;  he  was  apparently  a 
Russian  and  he  gave  one  the  impression  of  being  very  energetic. 
He  dressed  like  a  sailor  ;  his  speech  was  abrupt,  but  his  lan- 
guage was  suggestive  of  a  good  education.  His  hands  were 
clean  and  his  fingers  thin,  and  he  seemed  to  have  acquired  the 
training  and  experience  usually  associated  with  those  who  have 
lived  abroad.  When  he  took  leave  of  Gillard,  he  said  :  '  Bon 
jour,  monsieur.'     This  showed  some  knowledge  of  French. 

Yakovlev  informed  me  that  he  had  lived  in  Finland,  where 
for  some  reason  or  other  he  had  been  sentenced  to  be  hanged, 
but  he  had  succeeded  in  escaping,  and  had  lived  in  Switzer- 
land and  in  Germany.  So  far  as  I  remember,  his  Christian 
names  were  Vasily  Vasilievich  ;   Yakovlev  was  his  surname. 

Avdeiev  appeared  to  be  about  twenty-six  or  twenty-seven 
years  of  age.  He  was  of  medium  height  and  rather  thin  ;  he 
was  dirty  and  uncouth,  and  he  usually  wore  a  uniform.  His 
face  was  round  but  not  fat,  and  it  bore  no  signs  of  drunkenness. 

I  forgot  to  mention  that  Yakovlev  also  told  me  he  was  born 
in  Ufa  or  somewhere  in  the  Ufa  district.  A  detachment  of 
Reds,  consisting  of  cavalry  and  infantry,  came  with  him  to 
Tobolsk,  and  they  were  all  young  soldiers.  Yakovlev's  idea 
was  to  make  us  understand  that  as  he  was  popular  in  Ufa, 
and  knew  a  large  number  of  people,  he  had  organized  his  de- 
tachment there.  His  men  were  quartered  partly  in  Korni- 
lov's  house  and  partly  in  the  rooms  occupied  by  my  soldiers. 
On  the  morning  of  April  lo  (23)  Yakovlev  came  to  me,  together 
with  Matveiev,  and  introduced  himself  as  a  Special  Commissar. 
Three  documents  were  in  his  hands.  These  documents  bore 
the  imprint  of  the  '  Russian  Federative  Soviet  Republic,' 
and  were  signed  by  Sverdlov  and  Ovanesov  (or  Avanesov). 


THE  DEPOSITIONS  OF  COLONEL  KOBYLINSKY    203 

The  first  document  was  addressed  to  me  and  ordered  me  to 
comply  without  delay  with  all  requests  of  the  Special  Commis- 
sar Tovarishch  (comrade)  Yakovlev,  who  had  been  assigned  a 
mission  of  great  importance.  My  refusal  to  execute  these 
orders  would  result  in  my  being  instantly  killed.  The  second 
document  was  addressed  to  the  soldiers  of  our  detachment. 
Its  contents  were  much  the  same  as  the  first,  and  it  also  car- 
ried a  threat  of  the  same  penalty — i.e.,  court-martial  by  a 
revolutionary  tribunal  and  instant  death.  The  third  docu- 
ment was  an  identification  of  Yakovlev,  and  it  stated  that  he 
had  been  assigned  a  special  mission,  but  no  details  were  given. 
Without  giving  me  any  reason,  Yakovlev  now  said  that  he 
wished  to  talk  to  the  soldiers.  At  eleven  o'clock  I  therefore 
assembled  the  men  of  my  detachment.  Yakovlev  told  them 
that  their  representative,  Tovarishch  (comrade)  Lupin,  had  been 
to  Moscow,  where  he  had  petitioned  for  an  increase  in  their 
daily  allowance.  Yakovlev  had  now  brought  the  money  with 
him,  and  every  soldier  was  to  receive  three  roubles  per  day. 
After  this  he  exhibited  his  paper  of  identification  and  Mat- 
veiev  read  it  aloud.  The  soldiers  began  to  examine  the  docu- 
ment and  paid  great  attention  to  the  official  seal.  But  it 
seemed  as  if  they  did  not  repose  much  confidence  in  Yakovlev. 
Yakovlev  felt  this  and  began  speaking  about  daily  allowances, 
and  he  said  the  time  of  the  relief  of  the  detachment  was  ap- 
proaching, and  many  similar  things.  Apparently  he  knew 
how  to  handle  a  mob  and  how  to  play  upon  its  weaknesses. 
He  spoke  eloquentlj^  and  earnestly.  At  the  conclusion  of 
his  speech  he  touched  on  the  misunderstanding  between  the 
soldiers  and  the  local  Soviet  on  account  of  the  Soviet's  deci- 
sion to  imprison  the  Imperial  Family,  and  he  promised  to  settle 
the  question.  After  this  he  went  with  me  to  see  the  Governor's 
house.  He  first  looked  at  the  exterior  ;  then  he  entered  the 
lower  floor,  and  then  the  upper.  So  far  as  I  can  remember,  he 
saw  the  Emperor  and  the  Grand  Duchesses  in  the  distance. 


204       THE   LAST   DAYS   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

as  they  were  at  that  time  in  the  courtyard.  I  suppose  he  did 
not  see  the  Empress,  but  I  remember  that,  accompanied  by 
Avdeiev,  he  visited  the  Tsarevich.  I  had  the  impression  that 
Yakovlev  tried  to  persuade  Avdeiev  that  the  Tsarevich  was 
ill.  I  remember  that  the  officer  on  duty  was  Ensign  Semenov, 
but  when  Avdeiev  wished  to  remain  in  his  room  Semenov 
protested  and  succeeded  in  getting  rid  of  him.  Nothing  else 
happened  during  the  day. 

On  April  ii  (24)  Yakovlev  again  requested  the  soldiers  to 
assemble.  Zaslavsky,  a  representative  of  the  Soviet,  and 
Degtiarev,  a  student,  came  to  the  meeting  with  him.  The 
student  had  been  sent  from  Omsk  to  represent  the  Siberian 
interests  in  the  Tobolsk  Soviet.  Zaslavsky  represented  the 
interests  of  the  Ural  District.  The  student  began  to  speak  to 
the  soldiers.  He  accused  Zaslavsky  of  unsettling  them  and  of 
spreading  false  rumours  about  the  danger  threatening  the 
Imperial  Family,  and  in  saying  that  a  tunnel  was  being  dug 
under  the  house.  Such  rumours  really  existed,  and  once  we 
had  passed  a  very  disturbed  night  awaiting  trouble.  These 
rumours  originated  in  the  Soviet,  and  I  had  first  learned  about 
them  when  I  came  to  the  Soviet  at  the  time  they  had  resolved 
to  imprison  the  Imperial  Family,  and  the  main  argument  for  this 
decision  was  the  '  Danger  for  the  Imperial  Family  to  remain 
in  the  Governor's  house.'  Such  was  the  substance  of  the  stu- 
dent's speech.  Zaslavsky  vainly  tried  to  defend  himself.  He 
was  hissed,  and  quickly  disappeared.  Zaslavsky  came  to  To- 
bolsk about  a  week  before  Yakovlev's  arrival,  and  left  Tobolsk 
about  six  hours  before  Yakovlev's  departure.  I  will  tell  you 
later  the  motive  for  this  idea  of  assembling  the  soldiers  and 
why  Yakovlev  had  to  do  it. 

The  same  day  at  eleven  o'clock  in  the  evening,  Captain 
Aksiuta  came  to  me  and  reported  that  Yakovlev  had  assem- 
bled the  committee  of  the  detachment  and  announced  his 
intention   to   take   the  Tsar's   family   away    frorn    Tobolsk. 


THE  DEPOSITIONS  OF  COLONEL  KOBYLINSKY    205 

Yakovlev  told  the  committee  that  not  only  the  Emperor  but 
the  whole  Family  would  have  to  leave.     In  the  morning  of  the 
12th  (25th)  of  April,  Yakovlev  came  to  me  and  said  that  accord- 
ing to  the  decision  of  the  Central  Executive  Committee  he  was 
going   to  remove  the  Family  from  Tobolsk.       I    asked   him 
'  Why  ?  '  and  I  added,  '  What  will  you  do  with  the  Tsarevich  ? 
He  cannot  travel  as  he  is  ill  ?  '      Yakovlev  answered  :  '  This 
is  the  trouble.     I  have  talked  it  over  with  the  T.S.I.K.  (C.E.C.) 
and  I  have  received  an  order  to  leave  the  Family  in  Tobolsk 
and  only  to  take  the  Emperor  away.'      (Usually  Yakovlev 
called   him  the  '  former  Emperor.')      '  When   can  I  see  the 
Family  ?  '  he  continued.     '  I  intend  to  leave  the  town  to-mor- 
row.'     I  told  him  that  he  could  see  the  Family  after  lunch. 
Then  he  left  me.     I  went  to  the  house  and  asked  (so  far  as  I 
remember)  Tatishchev  to  ask  the  Emperor  at  what  time  he 
would  receive  Yakovlev  and  myself.     The  Emperor  made  an 
appointment   at   two  o'clock,   after  lunch.     At   two   o'clock 
Yakovlev  and  1  entered  the  hall.     The  Emperor  and  Empress 
stood  in  the  middle  of  the  hall,  and  Yakovlev  stopped  a  little 
distance  away  from  them  and  bowed.      Then  he   said  :    '  I 
must  tell  you  '  (he  was  talking  to  the  Emperor  only)  '  that  I 
am  the  Special  Representative  of  the  Moscow  Central  Execu- 
tive Committee,  and  my  mission  is  to  take  all  your  Family 
away  from  Tobolsk,  but,  as  your  son  is  ill,  I  have  received  a 
second  order  which  says  that  you  alone  must  leave.'      The 
Emperor   replied  :      '  I    refuse   to   go.'      Upon    hearing    this 
Yakovlev  said  :   '  I  beg  you  not  to  refuse.      I  am  compelled  to 
execute  the  order.     In  case  of  your  refusal  I  must  take  you 
by  force  or  I  must  resign  my  position.     In  the  latter  case  the 
Committee  would  probably  send  a  far  less  scrupulous  man  to 
replace  me.     Be  calm,  I  am  responsible  with  my  life  for  your 
safety.     If  you  do  not  want  to  go  alone,  you  can  take  with  you 
any  people  you  wish.     Be  ready,  we  are  leaving  to-morrow  at 
four  o'clock.' 


2o6         THE  LAST  DAYS   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

Yakovlev  again  bowed  to  the  Emperor  and  the  Empress 
and  left  their  presence.  At  the  same  time  the  Emperor,  who 
had  not  replied  to  Yakovlev's  last  words,  turned  abruptly  and, 
accompanied  by  the  Empress,  went  out  of  the  hall.  I  followed 
Yakovlev  out.  As  we  were  going  out  the  Emperor  made  a  sign 
for  me  to  remain.  I  went  down  with  Yakovlev  and  then  re- 
turned upstairs.  The  Emperor,  the  Empress,  Tatishchev  and 
Dolgoruky  were  sitting  by  the  round  table  in  the  corner. 
The  Emperor  asked  me  where  they  intended  to  take  him.  I 
replied  that  personally  I  did  not  know,  but  that  from  some 
hints  which  Yakovlev  had  dropped  I  thought  that  he  intended 
to  take  the  Emperor  to  Moscow,  and  that  the  following  rea- 
sons made  me  think  so.  In  the  morning  of  the  12th  (25th) 
of  April,  Yakovlev  told  me  that  he  would  go  on  first  with  the 
Emperor  and  then  return  to  fetch  the  Family.  I  asked  him : 
'  When  do  you  intend  to  come  back  ?  '  and  Yakovlev  answered : 
'  Well,  in  four  or  five  days  we  shall  have  reached  our  destina- 
tion. We  shall  remain  there  for  a  few  days  and  then  I  will 
come  back.  I  shall  be  here  again  in  about  ten  days  or  a  fort- 
night.' I  told  the  Emperor  that  this  made  me  think  that 
Yakovlev  intended  to  take  him  to  Moscow.  The  Emperor 
then  said  :  '  I  suppose  they  want  to  force  me  to  sign  the 
Brest-Litovsk  Treaty,  but  I  would  rather  cut  off  my  right 
hand  than  sign  such  a  treaty.'  '  I  shall  also  go,'  said  the 
Empress,  showing  deep  emotion.  '  If  1  am  not  there,  they 
will  force  him  to  do  something  in  exactly  the  same  way  they 
did  before,'  and  she  added  something  about  Rodzianko. 
Obviously  the  Empress  referred  to  the  Emperor's  abdication. 

Thus  ended  the  conversation,  and  I  went  to  Kornilov's 
house  to  see  Yakovlev.  He  asked  me  who  were  going,  and  he 
repeated  (for  the  second  time)  that  anybody  who  chose  could 
accompany  the  Emperor,  on  condition  they  did  not  take  too 
much  luggage  with  them. 

I  returned  to  the  house  and  asked  Tatishchev  to  let  me  know 


FHE  DEPOSITIONS  OF  COLONEL  KOBYLINSKY    207 

the  persons  who  intended  going  with  the  Emperor.  I  promised 
to  come  back  for  the  names  in  an  hour's  time,  and  when  I 
:ame  back  Tatishchev  told  me  that  the  following  persons  were 
eaving  Tobolsk  :  the  Emperor,  the  Empress,  the  Grand 
Duchess  Maria,  Dr.  Botkin,  Dolgoruky,  Chemodurov,  Sednev 
the  waiter,  and  Demidova  the  maid.  When  I  reported  these 
lames  to  Yakovlev,  he  answered  :  '  It's  all  the  same  to  me.' 
[  suppose  Yakovlev's  one  idea  was  to  get  the  Emperor  out  of 
robolsk  as  soon  as  possible.  When  he  noticed  the  Emperor's 
mwillingness  to  go  alone,  Yakovlev  doubtless  thought : 
Well,  let  him  take  whom  he  Hkes,  so  long  as  I  get  through 
mth  my  orders,'  That  was  the  reason  why  he  kept  on  repeat- 
ng :  'It's  all  the  same  to  me,  let  them  take  anybody  they 
ike.'  But  he  did  not  express  the  second  part  of  his  thought. 
[ie  did  not  mention  this  to  me,  but  all  his  actions  indicated 
:hat  such  was  his  desire.  He  was  evidently  in  a  great  hurry, 
md  for  this  reason  he  gave  orders  to  limit  the  amount  of  lug- 
gage. I  did  not  enter  the  house  any  more  that  day,  as  I 
thought  that  they  would  feel  happier  if  they  were  left  alone, 
rhe  Family  at  this  time  was  preparing  for  the  departure.  Gil- 
lard  told  me  that  the  Empress  was  extremely  downhearted, 
for  although  she  was  a  very  reserved  woman,  she  nevertheless 
worried  about  her  decision  to  go  with  the  Emperor,  as  it  involved 
leaving  her  beloved  son  behind.  If  the  Empress  had  known 
that  they  were  going  to  take  her  to  Ekaterinburg,  why  should 
she  have  been  so  depressed  ?  Ekaterinburg  is  not  far  from 
Tobolsk.  But  the  Empress  felt  from  Yakovlev's  actions 
(and  so  did  everybody  else)  that  he  was  not  taking  them  to 
Ekaterinburg,  but  to  some  distant  place,  probably  to  Moscow. 
She  did  not  believe  that  this  removal  was  in  order  to  ensure 
their  safety,  but  she  thought  it  was  for  some  deeper  motive 
connected  with  the  interests  of  the  State,  and  that  once  in 
Moscow  the  Emperor  would  be  compelled  to  arrive  at  some 
very  serious  decisions.     The  Emperor  shared  her  apprehen- 


2o8         THE   LAST   DAYS   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

sions,  and  he  expressed  them  when  he  spoke  of  the  Brest- 
Litovsk  Treaty. 

I  did  not  sleep  that  night.  According  to  Yakovlev's  orders 
I  assembled  the  soldiers  again  in  the  evening,  and  Yakovlev 
told  the  men  that  he  intended  to  take  the  Emperor  away  from 
Tobolsk,  but  he  did  not  name  the  place,  and  he  asked  the  sol- 
diers to  treat  everything  as  secret. 

From  whom  was  Yakovlev  hiding  his  intentions  ?  I  be- 
lieve that  in  the  Local  Soviet,  which  consisted  of  Pessel,  Disler, 
Kagomitzky,  Pisarevsky  and  his  wife,  there  were  two  opinions — 
the  Siberian,  which  considered  Tobolsk  within  their  sphere 
of  influence,  and  the  Uralian,  which  considered  Tobolsk  to  be 
in  their  region.  Zaslavsky  represented  the  second  opinion. 
^^'hat  was  the  real  reason  for  his  arrival  in  Tobolsk  ?  I  can 
never  explain  why  he  came.  Many  things  are  still  a  mystery 
to  me.  I  don't  know  whether  he  came  to  Tobolsk  simply 
because  we  were  there  or  not.  It  was  perfectly  clear  from 
Yakovlev's  speeches  that  he,  Yakovlev,  represented  a  third 
power,  the  Central  Moscow  authorities ;  but  after  he  came  to 
Tobolsk  he  began  to  fear  opposition  from  the  Tobolsk  Soviet 
to  the  removal  of  the  Imperial  Family,  and  he  soon  settled 
this  matter  with  them.  Zaslavsky  was  opposed  to  the  removal, 
so  I  think  that  Yakovlev  asked  the  soldiers  to  keep  the  depar- 
ture of  the  Imperial  Family  secret,  because  he  feared  that  the 
local  authorities  would  not  allow  them  to  be  taken  away.  I 
am  persuaded  that  Yakovlev,  being  a  representative  of  the 
third  power,  worked  in  accordance  with  its  orders  and  carried 
out  his  instructions  from  Moscow,  and  I  also  believe  it  was 
originally  intended  to  take  the  Imperial  Family  thither. 

The  soldiers  were  confused  and  disturbed  by  Yakovlev's 
anxiety  for  secrecy.  I  noticed  they  were  afraid  lest  some  evil 
might  befall  them  in  consequence  of  all  that  was  going  on. 
They  said  they  must  also  go  with  the  Emperor,  and  they  told 
Yakovlev  this. 


THE  DEPOSITIONS  OF  COLONEL  KOBYLINSKY    209 

Yakovlev  at  first  refused,  saying  that  his  own  detachment 
was  quite  reliable.  But  finally  he  made  a  compromise,  and  a 
small  detachment  of  six  men  from  our  soldiers  was  selected 
to  escort  the  Emperor. 

At  four  o'clock  a.m.  the  Siberian  plaited  carriages  (Koshevy) 
were  in  readiness.  One  carriage  had  a  hood,  but  the  seat  was 
made  of  straw  which  was  tied  with  string  to  the  body  of  the 
carriage.  The  Emperor,  the  Empress  and  all  the  other  per- 
sons then  left  the  house.  The  Emperor  embraced  me  and 
kissed  me.  The  Empress  gave  me  her  hand.  Yakovlev 
seated  himself  in  the  same  carriage  as  the  Emperor,  and  the 
Empress  took  her  seat  with  the  Grand  Duchess  Maria.  Dol- 
goruky  was  with  Botkin,  Chemodurov  with  Sednev.  The 
departing  detachment  was  partly  composed  of  our  soldiers, 
but  they  were  mostly  those  of  Yakovlev.  Two  machine-guns 
went  with  the  detachment.  A  number  of  cavalry  from  Yak- 
ovlev's  detachment  also  accompanied  the  party.  There  were 
also  some  carriages  with  the  luggage.  The  carriages  started 
about  four  o'clock.  After  their  departure  everybody  in  the 
house  had  a  strange  feeling  of  distress  and  sadness.  I  noticed 
that  even  the  soldiers  were  sad,  and  they  began  to  behave  more 
humanely  to  the  Emperor's  children.  Afterwards,  when  I 
was  in  Tiumen,  one  of  the  coachmen  who  accompanied  the 
Imperial  party  told  me  that  as  soon  as  they  reached  the  posting 
stations  the  horses  were  immediately  changed  and  the  journey 
continued  without  any  delay.  Once  the  horses  were  changed 
in  the  village  of  Pokrovskoe,  where  the  posting  station  was 
situated  opposite  a  house  which  once  belonged  to  Rasputin. 
I  was  told  that  his  wife  was  standing  outside  the  house  and 
his  daughter  was  looking  out  of  a  window  and  both  of  them 
made  the  sign  of  the  Cross  to  the  Tsar's  family. 

I  had  asked  two  soldiers,  Lebedev  and  Nabokov  (who  were 
good  sort  of  men) ,  to  telegraph  me  along  the  route  how  things 
were  proceeding.     I  received  a  telegram  from  Lebedev  sent 


210         THE   LAST  DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

from  the  village  of  Ivlevo.  Nabokov  telegraphed  me  from 
Pokrovskoe.  Both  of  their  telegrams  were  very  brief  :  '  Pro- 
ceeding safely.'  One  telegram  was  sent  from  a  railway  sta- 
tion :  '  Proceeding  safely.  God  bless  you  ;  how  is  the  little 
one  ?  Yakovlev.'  Of  course  this  telegram  was  really  sent 
by  the  Emperor  or  the  Empress  with  Yakovlev's  permission. 

On  April  20  (May  3)  the  committee  of  our  detachment 
received  a  telegram  from  Matveiev,  who  informed  it  of  their 
arrival  at  Ekaterinburg.  I  cannot  remember  the  exact  words 
of  the  telegram,  but  we  were  all  greatly  surprised  at  the  con- 
tents, as  we  had  fully  believed  that  the  Emperor  and  Empress 
had  been  taken  to  Moscow  and  not  to  Ekaterinburg.  We  now 
began  to  look  for  the  return  of  the  soldiers  from  the  escorting 
detachment. 

When  Lebedev  and  Nabokov  returned  they  told  me  that 
upon  their  arrival  at  Tiumen,  the  Emperor,  the  Empress  and 
the  other  persons  were  placed  in  a  passenger  compartment 
which  was  guarded  by  our  six  soldiers.  From  Tiumen  they 
proceeded  in  the  direction  of  Ekaterinburg.  At  one  station 
they  were  informed  that  they  woiold  not  be  allowed  to  proceed 
beyond  Ekaterinburg,  where  they  would  be  detained.  Zaslavsky 
had  left  Tobolsk  a  few  hours  before  Yakovlev,  and  had,  I  sup- 
pose, informed  the  Ekaterinburg  Soviet  of  the  departure  of 
the  Imperial  Family  from  Tobolsk.  Upon  hearing  this  news 
Yakovlev  turned  the  train  back  to  Omsk  in  order  to  go  for- 
ward via  Ufa  and  Cheliabinsk,  but  I  understood  from  Nabokov 
that  when  the  train  was  approaching  Omsk,  it  was  again  stopped, 
and  Yakovlev  went  to  find  out  what  was  happening.  He 
then  learnt  that  Ekaterinburg  had  notified  Omsk  that  he  had 
been  declared  an  outlaw  on  account  of  his  intention  to  take 
the  Tsar's  family  to  Japan  !  Yakovlev  went  at  once  to  Omsk 
and  got  into  communication  with  Moscow.  On  his  return  he 
announced:  '  I  have  orders  to  go  to  Ekaterinburg.' 

When   they   arrived   in    Ekaterinburg    the    Emperor,   the 


THE  DEPOSITIONS  OF  COLONEL  KOBYLINSKY    211 

Empress,  the  Grand  Duchess  Maria,  Dr.  Botkin,  Chemo- 
durov,  Sednev  and  Demidova  were  placed  in  Ipatiev's  house, 
Dolgoruky  was  taken  away  to  prison.  All  our  soldiers  were 
kept  on  the  train  and  later  disarmed  and  arrested,  but  they 
were  speedily  released.  Each  arrested  soldier  was  treated 
differently.  Lebedev  and  Nabokov  were  treated  much  worse 
than  the  others.  Matveiev  and  some  of  the  others  a  little 
better.  They  were  all  released  at  different  times.  On  one 
occasion  Matveiev  went  (for  what  purpose  I  do  not  know)  to 
see  Goloshchekin  and  Beloborodov.  When  all  of  the  soldiers 
had  been  released  they  were  placed  in  a  railway  carriage  in 
order  to  return  to  Tobolsk.  Yakovlev  than  came  to  see  them 
and  told  them  that  he  had  resigned  his  position  and  was  going 
back  to  Moscow,  and  he  advised  the  soldiers  to  go  with  him  and 
report  everything  that  had  happened.  It  was  clear  that 
Yakovlev  regarded  the  hold-up  of  the  train  at  Ekaterinburg 
as  an  act  of  insubordination  on  the  part  of  the  Ekaterinburg 
Bolsheviks.  The  soldiers  said  that  Yakovlev  finally  left  them 
and  went  to  Moscow  alone.  I  think  I  can  explain  these  events 
in  this  way.  Ekaterinburg  was  a  centre  of  widespread  Bol- 
shevism, and  it  was  the  capital  of  the  whole  Ural  region — 
'  the  Red  Ekaterinburg.'  I  have  heard  that  Moscow  had 
reproached  the  Ekaterinburg  Bolsheviks  for  spending  too 
much  money  and  threatened  that  they  would  stop  sending 
money  if  it  were  not  expended  more  economically.  Wishing 
therefore  to  safeguard  their  own  interests,  the  Ekaterinburg 
Bolsheviks  detained  the  Imperial  Family  in  Ekaterinburg  as 
hostages,  in  order  to  make  Moscow  more  amenable  to  their 
demands.  Possibly  I  may  be  mistaken,  but  such  is  my  im- 
pression. 

The  telegraph  operator  in  Tobolsk  who  remained  after  Yak- 
ovlev's  departure  received  a  telegram  from  Yakovlev  which 
read  as  follows  :  '  Take  the  detachment  with  you  and  depart. 
I  have  resigned  and  I  am  not  responsible  for  any  consequences.' 


212         THE   LAST  DAYS   OF  THE  ROMANOVS 

A  party  of  Yakovlev's  detachment  still  remained  in  Tobolsk, 
and  that  is  why  Yakovlev  sent  the  telegram.  The  telegraph 
operator,  a  very  young  man,  and  the  soldiers  of  the  detachment 
then  departed.  I  don't  know  where  they  went.  Avdeiev  left 
Tobolsk  before  Yakovlev,  as  he  had  been  sent  by  Yakovlev  to 
prepare  a  train  for  the  Imperial  Family. 

Some  time  elapsed  before  our  committee  received  a  tele- 
gram from  Moscow,  and  when  it  came  it  announced  that 
Yakovlev  had  been  replaced  by  Hohriakov.  Touching  the 
arrival  of  Hohriakov  in  Tobolsk,  I  can  tell  you  the  following  : 
There  were  no  real  Bolsheviks  in  the  Tobolsk  Soviet.  The 
leaders  were  mostly  Socialist-Revolutionaries,  as  at  this  time 
the  Soviets  almost  everywhere  consisted  of  Communists. 
Nikolsky  was  once  temporary  chairman  of  the  Soviet,  and 
later  Dimitriev ;  a  special  '  Commissar  '  came  from  Omsk  to 
Tobolsk  with  the  intention  of  creating  a  Bolshevist  organiza- 
tion. A  special  detachment  of  soldiers  arrived  from  Omsk 
with  him.  At  the  same  time  Ekaterinburg  claimed  that 
Tobolsk  was  within  their  jurisdiction,  so  another  detachment 
arrived  from  Tiumen.  But  Dimitriev,  as  the  representative 
of  Siberian  opinion,  had  the  upper  hand,  and  the  Tiumen  de- 
tachment left.  Having  arranged  the  Bolshevist  organiza- 
tion, Dimitriev  returned  to  Omsk.  During  this  period  of  the 
organization  of  the  Soviet  rule  in  Tobolsk,  Hohriakov  was  the 
first  chairman  of  the  Soviet.  In  those  days  Bolshevist  detach- 
ments arrived  at  Tobolsk  from  different  places.  A  detachment 
of  Letts  was  also  formed  there.  Long  before  the  Imperial 
Family  left  Tobolsk  the  Letts  were  already  there,  and  had 
created  an  unpleasant  impression  by  the  rough  way  in  which 
they  had  searched  the  Baroness  Buxhoevden.  I  do  not  know 
who  was  their  commander,  but  he  apparently  did  not  please 
Hohriakov,  and  so  he  was  relieved  by  Rodionov,  who  came 
from  Ekaterinburg.  A  short  time  after  Hohriakov  took  up 
his  appointment  and  replaced  Yakovlev  as  Commissar,  he 


THE  DEPOSITIONS  OF  COLONEL  KOBYLINSKY    213 

received  a  telegram  from  Moscow  which  instructed  him  to 
remove  all  the  remaining  members  of  the  Family  to  Ekaterin- 
burg. I  must  not  forget  to  mention  that  after  having  been 
appointed  Commissar,  Hohriakov  ordered  Rodionov  to  come 
from  Ekaterinburg  to  Tobolsk  and  take  charge  of  the  Imperial 
Family,  but  not  of  the  Tobolsk  district.  Hohriakov  did  not 
act  as  chairman  of  the  District  Soviet,  but  he  was  a  special 
Commissar  who  supervised  the  life  of  the  Imperial  Family. 
Some  time  after  he  was  appointed  Commissar,  but  before  our 
detachment  was  relieved  by  Letts,  I  went  to  the  Governor's 
house.  Our  soldiers  were  on  sentry  duty,  but  they  did  not 
allow  me  to  enter,  saying  that  this  was  Hohriakov 's  order.  I 
asked  Hohriakov  what  this  meant.  '  They  did  not  under- 
stand me,'  he  answered.  For  several  days  after  this  I  con- 
tinued to  visit  the  house.  But  shortly  after  Rodionov's  arrival 
our  guards  were  relieved  by  the  Letts,  who  occupied  all  the 
sentrj^  posts,  and  I  was  not  allowed  to  enter  the  house.  This 
was  a  few  days  before  the  Family  left.  I  also  remember  that 
upon  his  arrival  Rodionov  came  to  the  Governor's  house  and 
assembled  the  members  of  the  Family  ;  in  fact  it  was  a  regular 
roll-call.  This  surprised  me  very  much.  I  was  afterwards 
told  that  the  Letts  behaved  themselves  most  disgracefully. 

Once  after  divine  service  had  taken  place  in  the  house, 
they  searched  the  priest  and  the  nuns  in  a  very  indecent 
manner  and  touched  everything  in  the  sanctuary.  Rodionov 
placed  one  Lett  on  duty  near  the  sanctuary  to  watch  the 
priest.  This  created  such  unhappiness  that  the  Grand  Duchess 
Olga  wept  and  said  that  if  she  had  known  beforehand  that  this 
sort  of  thing  would  happen  she  would  never  have  made  a 
request  for  divine  service. 

After  I  was  not  allowed  to  enter  the  house  my  nerves  gave 
way  and  I  became  ill  and  had  to  remain  in  bed.  The  Family 
left  Tobolsk  on  May  7  (20).  I  was  unable  to  leave  my 
bed  and  I  could  not  bid  them  farewell.     The  following  per- 


214        THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

sons  went  with  them  to  Ekaterinburg  :  (i)  Tatishchev  ;  (2) 
Derevenko,  (3)  Hendrykova,  (4)  Buxhoevden,  (5)  Schneider, 
(6)  Gillard,  (7)  Gibbes,  (8)  Tegleva,  (9)  Erzberg,  (10)  Tutelberg, 
(11)  Mejantz,  (12)  Katia,  (13)  Masha,  (14)  Volkov,  (15)  Nagorny, 
(16)  Ivanov,  (17)  Tutin,  (18)  Zhuravsky,  (19)  Trupp,  (20)  Hari- 
tonov,  (21)  Kokichev,  and  (22)  Leonid  Sednev. 

Soon  after  we  had  been  transferred  to  Tobolsk  from  Tsar- 
skoe-Selo  two  maids,  Anna  Utkina  and  Anne  Pavlovna  Ro- 
manova,  joined  us,  but  the  soldiers  did  not  allow  them  to 
enter  the  Governor's  house.  They  remained  at  Tobolsk  and 
did  not  go  to  Ekaterinburg.  I  do  not  know  where  Hohriakov 
came  from.  He  was  not  educated  and  his  capacities  were  not 
of  a  very  high  order.  Previously  he  had  been  a  stoker  on  a 
battleship,  the  Alexander  II.  He  usually  wore  a  black 
leather  suit. 

Neither  do  I  know  the  origin  of  Rodionov.  He  was  about 
twenty-eight  or  thirty  years  of  age,  under  medium  height, 
uneducated,  and  he  always  impressed  people  unfavourably. 
He  seemed  to  be  a  cruel  and  cunning  man.  Baroness  Bux- 
hoevden assured  us  that  she  had  seen  him  during  her  travels 
abroad  and  that  she  had  met  him  once  at  a  frontier  station 
wearing  the  uniform  of  a  Russian  gendarme.  We  still  felt  a 
little  of  the  gendarme  in  him,  though  he  was  not  at  all  a  good 
type  of  gendarme ;  he  was,  in  fact,  rather  a  cruel  man  with  the 
manners  of  a  secret  service  agent.  After  his  arrival,  Rodionov 
searched  Nagorny  when  the  latter  returned  to  his  house  from 
the  train.  He  found  a  letter  from  Dr.  Derevenko's  son  to  the 
Tsarevich,  and  he  reported  this  to  Hohriakov,  saying,  '  This 
is  a  nice  sort  of  man  ;  he  told  me  that  he  had  nothing,  but  I 
found  the  letter.'  Then,  addressing  me,  he  added,  '  I  am 
sure  that  during  your  time,  any  quantity  of  things  must  have 
been  smuggled  in.'  Hohriakov  was  quite  pleased  and  said, 
'  I  have  been  watching  this  rascal  for  quite  a  long  time  ;  he  is 
a  disgrace  to  us.'      This  is  what  the  sailor  Hohriakov  said 


THE  DEPOSITIONS  OF  COLONEL  KOBYLINSKY    215 

about  the  sailor  Nagorny.  It  could  not  be  otherwise.  One 
was  '  the  beauty  and  the  pride  of  the  Russian  Revolution,' 
for  so  Trotzky  used  to  call  the  sailors  of  the  Baltic  Fleet  who 
had  murdered  their  officers.  And  the  other  was  a  man  de- 
voted to  the  Imperial  Family,  who  loved  the  Tsarevich  and  who 
was  loved  by  him.  And  for  this  reason  he  perished.  Sednev 
surely  also  perished  for  being  '  a  disgrace,'  as  he  was  also  a 
sailor  and  devoted  to  the  Imperial  Family. 

After  the  departure  of  the  Imperial  Family  I  was  cut  off  from 
all  news  for  a  long  time,  and  nobody  could  tell  me  anything 
about  them.  In  June,  Omsk  was  taken  from  the  Reds.  The 
Omsk  Bolsheviks  escaped  on  steamers  and  came  to  Tobolsk. 
Our  Tobolsk  Bolsheviks  also  fled  with  them.  All  power  in 
Tobolsk  was  in  the  hands  of  the  officers,  but  Tiumen  remained 
in  the  hands  of  the  Bolsheviks.  A  fighting  line  separated  us. 
I  then  heard  news  of  Hohriakov.  He  appears  to  have  been  in 
command  of  something  on  the  river  near  Pokrovskoe,  and  it  is 
said  that  Matveiev  was  also  in  command.  Tegleva  told  me 
afterwards  that  Hohriakov  was  not  allowed  in  Ipatiev's  house 
although  he  was  a  Commissar,  When  Tiumen  was  taken,  most 
of  the  people  who  had  left  Tobolsk  with  the  Imperial  Family 
returned,  except  the  following  :  (i)  Dolgoruky,  (2)  Tatishchev, 
(3)  Derevenko,  (4)  Hendrykova,  (5)  Botkin,  (6)  Schneider, 
(7)  Tegleva,  (8)  Erzberg,  (9)  Tutelberg,  (10)  Volkov,  (ii) 
Nagorny,  (12)  Chemodurov,  (13)  Sednev,  (14)  Trupp,  (15) 
Haritonov,  (16)  Leonid  Sednev,  (17)  Ivanov. 

The  refugees  told  us  that  during  the  journey  to  Ekaterinburg 
they  were  treated  in  a  disgraceful  manner.  Whilst  they  were 
on  the  steamer,  Rodionov  forbade  them  to  lock  the  cabin  doors 
from  the  inside,  but  Nagorny  and  the  Tsarevich  were  locked 
in  from  the  outside.  Nagorny  was  very  angry  at  this  and 
quarrelled  with  Rodionov,  telling  him  that  it  was  inhuman  to 
treat  a  sick  child  in  this  way.  (Even  in  Tobolsk,  Rodionov 
displayed  the  same  attitude  and  would  not  allow  the  Grand 


2i6         THE   LAST  DAYS  OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

Duchess  Olga  to  lock  the  door  of  her  bedroom  or  even  to  shut 
it.) 

When  the  train  arrived  in  Ekaterinburg  the  Tsarevich,  the 
Grand  Duchesses  Olga,  Maria,  Tatiana  and  Anastasia  were 
transferred  to  Ipatiev's  house.  The  Emperor  and  Empress 
had  also  been  transferred  there,  with  the  persons  who  accom- 
panied them,  except  Dolgoruky,  who  was  taken  to  prison. 
When  the  children  came  to  Ekaterinburg,  Tatishchev,  Hendry- 
kova,  Schneider  and  Volkov  were  immediately  arrested.  I 
heard  later  from  Gillard  that  Sednev  and  Nagorny  were  also 
removed  from  the  house.  Gillard  and  Gibbes  both  witnessed 
this.  Derevenko  remained  in  Ekaterinburg.  Tegleva,  Erz- 
berg  and  Ivanov  stayed  in  Tinmen,  and  Tutelburg  at  Kam- 
yshlov.  The  following  persons  remained  in  Ipatiev's  house  with 
the  Imperial  Family  :  Chemodurov,  Sednev  (a  boy),  Trupp, 
Haritonov,  Demidova  and  Botkin. 

Some  time  after  Ekaterinburg  was  taken,  Chemodurov  came 
to  Tobolsk.  I  saw  him  and  talked  with  him.  He  came  to 
Tobolsk  a  destitute,  aged  man,  broken  down  with  mental 
suffering.  He  died  quite  recently.  His  conversation  was 
incoherent.  He  could  only  answer  questions,  and  then  his 
answers  were  sometimes  contradictory.  I  will  tell  you  the 
outstanding  points  of  his  conversation.  It  appeared  that  after 
their  arrival  at  Ipatiev's  house  the  Emperor,  Empress  and  the 
Grand  Duchess  Maria  were  searched  in  a  very  rough  manner. 
The  Emperor  lost  his  temper  and  protested.  He  was  informed 
rudely  that  he  was  a  prisoner,  and  that  he  had  no  right  to  pro- 
test. Chemodurov  noticed  that  Avdeiev  was  the  senior  guard. 
The  meals  were  very  bad.  Dinner  was  brought  from  a  cheap 
restaurant  and  it  was  always  late,  sometimes  at  three  or  four 
o'clock  instead  of  one.  The  Family  dined  with  the  servants. 
The  saucepan  or  baking-dish  was  put  on  the  table.  There  was 
a  lack  of  spoons,  knives  and  forks.  The  Red  soldiers  sometimes 
came  in  during  dinner,  and  a  soldier  would  often  help  himself 


THE  DEPOSITIONS  OF  COLONEL  KOBYLINSKY    217 

to  the  soup,  saying,  '  There  is  enough  for  you,  so  I  will  take 
some  myself.'  The  Grand  Duchesses  slept  on  the  floor,  as 
there  were  no  beds  for  them.  Roll-calls  were  frequently  made. 
When  the  Grand  Duchesses  went  to  the  lavatory  the  Red  sol- 
diers followed  them,  saying  they  did  so  on  purpose  to  guard 
them.  According  to  Chemodurov,  who  was  not  able  to  give 
the  whole  account  as  he  was  so  depressed,  it  was  clear  that  the 
august  Family  was  constantly  subjected  to  the  most  intense 
moral  tortures,  but  Chemodurov  did  not  believe  that  the  Family 
had  been  killed.  He  said  that  Botkin,  Haritonov,  Demidova 
and  Trupp  were  killed,  and  that  the  Family  had  been  taken 
away  ;  he  told  me  that  by  killing  the  aforementioned  people 
the  soldiers  simulated  the  murder  of  the  Family,  and  for  the 
same  reason  the  house  was  dismantled.  Some  of  the  things 
were  burned  and  others  were  thrown  into  the  waste  basket.  I 
remember  he  told  me  that  somebody  had  found  pieces  of  a  Holy 
Image  and  an  Order  of  St.  Vladimir  which  was  always  worn 
by  Dr.  Botkin. 

Shortly  after  this  Volkov  came  to  Tobolsk.  He  said  that 
Hendrykova,  Schneider  and  himself  had  been  taken  from  the 
train  at  Ekaterinburg  and  sent  to  prison.  From  thence  they 
were  transferred  to  a  prison  in  Perm.  Afterwards  they  were 
led  out  to  be  shot,  but  he  escaped  on  the  way.  The  others 
were  all  executed. 

In  Tobolsk  I  heard  for  the  first  time  about  the  murder  of  the 
Imperial  Family.  I  saw  it  in  the  Omsk  newspaper  Zaria,  or 
perhaps  in  a  Tobolsk  newspaper  Narodnoe-Slovo.  The  Bol- 
shevist communication  described  the  '  execution  '  of  '  the 
Emperor  Nicholas  the  Sanguinary.' 

With  regard  to  the  private  life  and  character  of  the  members 
of  the  Imperial  Family,  I  can  state  from  my  personal  know- 
ledge that  the  Emperor  was  a  very  clever,  well-informed  man, 
and  he  was  most  interesting  to  talk  to,  as  he  had  a  remarkable 
memory.     He  was  very  fond  of  physical  labour  and  could  not 


2i8         THE   LAST  DAYS  OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

keep  in  good  health  without  it.  He  was  very  modest  in  his 
requirements.  Even  in  Tsarskoe-Selo  I  saw  him  wearing  old 
trousers  and  worn  boots.  He  drank  very  little,  and  during 
dinner  he  only  drank  one  glass  of  port  or  Madeira.  He  liked 
simple  Russian  dishes  such  as  borshch,  shchi  and  kasha.  I 
remember  one  day  that  he  came  to  the  wine  cellar  and  ordered 
Rojkov  to  give  me  some  cognac,  saying,  '  You  know  I  don't 
drink  cognac  myself. '  I  never  saw  him  drink  anything  except 
port  or  Madeira.  He  was  very  religious.  He  hated  all  Ger- 
mans. His  most  striking  characteristics  were  kindness  and 
clemency.  He  was  exceptionally  kind;  he  never  wished  to 
cause  any  one  pain.  This  always  impressed  people  who,  like 
myself,  found  him  modest  and  frank.  He  always  behaved  in 
a  very  natural  manner.  In  Tobolsk  he  played  '  chequers  ' 
with  the  soldiers,  and  I  am  sure  that  many  of  the  soldiers  were 
well  disposed  towards  the  Imperial  Family.  I  remember  that 
when  the  soldiers  (the  good  ones)  were  leaving  Tobolsk  they 
went  secretly  to  the  Emperor  to  bid  him  farewell.  The  Em- 
peror beheved  that  the  Russian  was  a  mild,  kind-hearted  fellow 
who  did  not  understand  many  things,  but  that  it  was  easy  to 
impress  him  and  influence  him  by  kindness.  The  Tsar  himself 
was  of  this  type.  I  often  pitied  him  for  this  delusion,  as  the 
soldiers  frequently  acted  like  hooligans  in  the  absence  of  the 
Imperial  Family  and  often  made  improper  jokes  about  them. 
But  they  were  afraid  to  do  so  in  their  presence. 

The  Tsar  loved  Russia,  and  more  than  once  I  heard  him 
express  his  fear  lest  he  should  be  sent  away  from  Russia.  He 
did  not  understand  art,  but  he  liked  nature  and  shooting.  It 
was  absolutely  painful  to  him  to  abstain  from  shooting  for  any 
length  of  time,  and  he  disliked  to  be  obliged  to  spend  his  time 
indoors.  His  character  was  weak,  and  therefore  he  was  in- 
fluenced by  his  wife.  I  noticed  that  even  when  he  was  con- 
sulted about  minor  details,  his  usual  answer  was,  '  I  will  ask 
my  wife  ;   her  wishes  are  mine.' 


THE  DEPOSITIONS  OF  COLONEL  KOBYLINSKY    219 

The  Empress  was  very  clever  but  extremely  reserved.  Her 
main  characteristic  was  her  love  of  power.  She  looked  every 
inch  an  Empress.  When  you  spoke  to  the  Emperor  there  were 
moments  when  you  forgot  you  were  speaking  to  the  Tsar,  but 
when  you  spoke  to  the  Empress  the  feeling  that  she  was  one  of 
the  Imperial  Family  never  left  you.  Owing  to  her  character 
she  always  took  the  lead  in  Family  affairs.  The  Empress  felt 
their  humiliating  position  much  more  keenly  than  the  Em- 
peror, and  everybody  noticed  how  rapidly  she  aged.  She  spoke 
and  wrote  Russian  very  correctly,  and  she  also  loved  Russia. 
Like  the  Emperor,  she  dreaded  being  exiled  from  Russia. 
She  had  a  talent  for  painting  and  embroidery.  You  could  not 
discern  much  of  the  German  in  her  ;  in  fact,  you  might  have 
thought  that  she  had  been  born  in  a  very  different  country. 
This  was  explained  by  her  education,  as,  after  her  mother's 
death,  she  had  been  educated  in  England  by  her  grandmother. 
Queen  Victoria.  I  never  heard  her  say  a  single  German  word. 
She  used  to  speak  Russian,  English  and  French.  There  was  no 
doubt  of  her  bad  health,  and  Dr.  Botkin  explained  the  nature 
of  it  to  me.  As  she  was  the  daughter  of  the  Grand  Duke  of 
Hesse,  she  had  inherited  a  family  weakness  of  the  blood  vessels. 
This  malady  sometimes  produced  paralysis,  following  a  fall  from 
which  the  Tsarevich  was  suffering.  The  men  of  the  family 
usually  shook  off  the  hereditary  complaint  at  the  time  of  their 
maturity,  when  this  trouble  entirely  disappeared.  With  the 
women  the  illness  started  after  the  critical  period,  when  they 
often  suffered  from  progressive  hysteria.  It  was  quite  clear 
that  the  Empress  suffered  from  hysteria.  Botkin  explained  to 
me  that  this  was  the  origin  of  her  religious  ecstasy.  All  her 
activities  and  aU  her  thoughts  were  influenced  by  religious 
motives,  and  there  was  always  an  element  of  rehgion  in  her  life. 
Whenever  she  gave  a  present  to  anybody,  it  always  bore  the 
inscription  :  '  God  bless  you  and  protect  you,'  or  something 
similar.    There  is  no  doubt  that  she  loved  her  husband,  but  she 


220         THE   LAST  DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

loved  him  not  as  a  woman  loves  a  man,  but  merely  as  the  father 
of  her  children.  She  loved  all  her  children,  but  she  adored 
her  son. 

The  Grand  Duchess  Olga  was  a  nice-looking  young  blonde  of 
about  twenty-three  ;  her  type  was  Russian.  She  was  fond  of 
reading,  she  was  clever,  well  developed  mentally,  and  she  spoke 
English  well  and  German  badly.  She  had  some  talent  for  art, 
she  played  the  piano  and  sang  (she  learnt  singing  in  Petrograd  ; 
her  voice  was  soprano),  and  she  painted  well.  She  was  very 
modest  and  she  did  not  care  for  luxury. 

Her  clothes  were  simple  and  she  restrained  her  sisters  from 
extravagance  in  dress.  She  gave  me  the  impression  of  a  good, 
generous-hearted  Russian  girl.  It  seemed  as  if  she  had  had 
some  sorrows  in  her  hfe,  and  she  still  bore  traces  of  them.  She 
loved  her  father  more  than  she  loved  her  mother  ;  she  also 
loved  her  brother,  and  called  him  '  the  Little  One  '  or  '  the 
Baby.' 

The  Grand  Duchess  Tatiana  was  about  twenty  years  of  age. 
She  was  quite  different  from  her  sisters.  You  could  recognize 
her  mother  in  her.  You  felt  that  she  was  the  daughter  of  an 
Emperor.  She  had  no  liking  for  art.  When  the  Emperor  and 
Empress  left  Tobolsk  nobody  would  ever  have  thought  that  the 
Grand  Duchess  Olga  was  the  senior  of  the  remaining  members 
of  the  Imperial  Family,  as  if  any  questions  arose  it  was  always 
Tatiana  who  was  appealed  to.  She  was  dearer  to  her  mother 
than  the  other  children,  and  she  loved  her  mother  more  than 
she  did  her  father. 

The  Grand  Duchess  Maria  was  aged  eighteen.  She  was  tall, 
strong,  and  much  better  looking  than  her  sisters.  She  painted 
well  and  she  was  a  most  amiable  girl.  She  always  used  to  talk 
to  the  soldiers  and  knew  the  names  of  their  wives,  the  number 
of  their  children  and  the  amount  of  land  they  owned.  Ail 
intimate  affairs  were  always  known  to  her.  Like  the  Grand 
Duchess  Olga,  she  loved  her  father  more  than  anybody.     On 


THE  DEPOSITIONS  OF  COLONEL  KOBYLINSKY    221 

account  of  her  simplicity  and  her  affabihty  she  was  given  the 
pet  name  of  '  Mashka.'  And  she  was  always  called  '  Mashka ' 
by  her  brother  and  her  sisters. 

The  Grand  Duchess  Anastasia  was  seventeen.  She  was  over- 
developed for  her  age,  short  and  too  stout  in  proportion  to  her 
height.  Her  chief  characteristic  was  seeing  the  weak  points 
in  other  people  and  making  fun  of  them.  She  was  a  born 
comedian  and  always  made  everybody  laugh.  She  preferred 
her  father  to  her  mother,  and  she  loved  Maria  Nikolaievna 
more  than  her  other  sisters. 

All  the  Grand  Duchesses  were  nice,  modest,  innocent  girls. 
There  is  no  doubt  they  were  much  cleaner  in  their  thoughts 
than  the  majority  of  girls  are  nowadays. 

The  Tsarevich  was  the  idol  of  the  whole  family.  He  was 
only  a  child  and  his  character  was  not  developed,  but  he  was 
a  very  clever,  capable  and  lively  boy.  He  spoke  Russian, 
French  and  English,  but  he  did  not  know  a  word  of  German. 

I  can  truthfully  say  that  the  Imperial  Family  all  loved  each 
other  and  were  so  contented  with  their  family  life  that  they 
never  wanted  the  society  of  others.  I  have  never  seen,  and 
I  shall  probably  never  again  see,  such  a  happy  and  united 
family. 

The  time  will  come  when  the  Russian  people  will  realize 
what  terrible  tortures  this  family  was  subjected  to,  from  the 
first  days  of  the  Revolution  when  the  newspapers  published 
scandalous  stories  about  their  private  life.  Take,  for  instance, 
the  story  of  Rasputin.  I  had  many  talks  about  this  with  Dr. 
Botkin,  who  insisted  that  the  Empress  suffered  from  hysteria, 
which  induced  religious  ecstasy.  Besides,  when  her  only  and 
beloved  son  was  ill,  there  seemed  no  one  who  could  help  him 
but  Rasputin,  so  a  mother's  sorrow  and  her  religious  ecstasy 
created  the  cult  of  Rasputin.  Rasputin  was  a  saint  to  her, 
and  as  she  had  great  influence  over  her  husband,  she  converted 
him  to  her  ideas  in  this  matter.     After  I  lived  with  the  Family 


222         THE  LAST  DAYS    OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

and  was  closely  associated  with  them,  I  fully  understood  how 
unjust  the  stories  and  the  insults  were  that  were  heaped  upon 
them.  The  Empress  Alexandra,  as  a  woman,  had  long  ceased 
to  exist.  One  can  imagine  what  she  and  her  children  suffered 
when  they  read  the  Russian  newspapers  ! 

They  were  even  accused  of  treachery  in  favour  of  Germany. 
I  have  already  explained  the  feelings  of  the  Emperor  towards 
the  Germans.  The  Empress  hated  Wilhelm,  She  often  said, 
'  I  am  accused  of  liking  and  of  helping  the  Germans,  but  no- 
body knows  how  I  hate  Wilhelm  for  all  the  evil  he  has  brought 
on  my  country.'  She  had  Germany  and  not  Russia  in  her 
mind  when  she  used  the  word  '  country.'  Tatishchev  told  me 
that  once  when  she  was  talking  to  him  about  the  confusion  in 
Russia,  she  prophesied  that  the  same  thing  would  eventually 
happen  in  Germany.  The  Grand  Duchesses  evinced  the  same 
bad  feeling  towards  the  Emperor  Wilhelm,  and  I  remember 
that  they  gave  to  the  servants  all  the  presents  which  they  had 
received  from  Wilhelm  during  his  visit  to  their  yacht. 

I  cannot  remember  anything  else  except  that  the  Emperor 
used  to  keep  a  diary,  but  I  cannot  say  whether  the  Empress 
kept  one  or  not.  All  the  Grand  Duchesses  used  to  keep 
diaries,  but  before  their  departure  from  Tobolsk,  Maria  and 
Anastasia  destroyed  theirs. 

I  read  in  a  newspaper  that  whilst  the  Emperor  was  in  prison 
in  Ekaterinburg  somebody  came  to  him  and  offered  to  save 
him,  on  certain  conditions.  But  when  the  Emperor  learnt  that 
the  man  had  been  sent  by  the  Emperor  Wilhelm,  he  refused  to 
parley  with  him.  I  cannot  say  from  whence  the  Letts  who 
arrived  at  Tobolsk  came.  But  the  Lett  detachment  which  took 
the  children  from  Tobolsk  never  returned.  Hohriakov  also 
failed  to  return. 

Miss  Hitrovo  visited  Tobolsk.  She  was  quite  a  young  girl, 
and  she  adored  the  Grand  Duchess  Olga.  Her  arrival  created 
a  whole  story  that  was  taken  up  and  exaggerated  by  all  the 


rHE  DEPOSITIONS  OF  COLONEL  KOBYLINSKY    223 

lewspapers.      She  was  searched,  but  nothing  compromising 
vas  discovered  on  her. 
My  testimony  has  been  read  to  me  and  it  is  correct. 

(Signed)  Eugene  Stepanovich  Kobylinsky. 
[Signed)  N.  Sokolov. 


THE  DEPOSITION  OF  M.  GILLARD 

MGILLARD  was  attached  to  the  Imperial  Household 
•  in  the  capacity  of  French  tutor  to  the  Grand  Duchesses 
and  the  Tsarevich.  He  was  with  the  Family  at  Tsarskoe-Selo 
at  the  outbreak  of  the  Revolution,  and  like  other  members 
of  the  Household,  he  elected  to  remain  under  arrest.  M. 
Gillard  especially  mentions  the  Emperor's  love  for  his  country 
and  his  bitterness  of  heart  after  the  Treaty  of  Brest-Litovsk, 
and  he  insists  that  the  attitude  of  the  Emperor  and  the  Empress 
towards  Germany  was  one  of  hatred  and  contempt. 

M.  Gillard's  deposition  is  important  inasmuch  as  it  includes 
a  conversation  which  he  had  with  Chemodm-ov  in  the  latter 
part  of  August,  1918.  Chemodurov  then  believed  that  the 
Imperial  Family  had  not  been  murdered,  but  had  been  removed 
to  an  unknown  destination.  M.  Gillard  did  not,  however, 
place  much  reliance  in  this  statement.  He  describes  his  visit 
to  Ipatiev's  house,  and  relates  a  curious  superstition  of  the 
Empress,  who  seems  to  have  placed  credence  in  the  efhcacy 
of  two  Egyptian  symbols  as  luck  bringers. 

On  March  5,  1919,  the  Investigating  Magistrate  for  Cases 
of  Special  Importance  of  the  Omsk  Tribunal,  in  conformity 
with  Paragraph  443  of  the  Code  of  Criminal  Law  Procedure, 
examined  the  undermentioned  in  the  capacity  of  a  witness, 
notifying  him  that  during  the  investigation  he  might  be 
put  on  his  oath. 

224 


THE  DEPOSITION  OF  M.  GILLARD  225 

Replying  to  the  questions  put  to  him,  the  witness  gave  his 
name  as 

Pierre  Andreievich  Gillard, 
and  said  :  Since  the  year  1905  I  have  given  French  lessons  to 
the  daughters  of  His  Majesty,  and  in  1912  I  began  to  teach 
French  to  the  Grand  Duke  Alexis.  I  began  these  lessons  in 
Spala,  but  shortly  afterwards  they  were  interrupted,  as  the 
Grand  Duke  met  with  an  accident.  I  heard  about  this  from 
the  other  people  who  were  attached  to  the  Emperor's  family. 
It  seemed  that  the  Grand  Duke  Alexis,  whilst  swimming  in  a 
bathing  pool,  slipped  and  hurt  his  stomach.  The  result  of 
thfi  accident  caused  temporary  paralysis  of  the  foot.  He 
was  ill  for  a  very  long  time,  and  in  consequence,  all  his  studies 
were  interrupted.  They  were,  however,  resumed  in  1913,  at 
which  time  I  became  assistant  tutor  to  the  Grand  Duke. 

I  then  lived  in  the  Palace,  where  I  occupied  the  rooms  next 
those  of  the  Tsarevich.  In  1913  he  went  to  the  Crimea,  and 
after  that  we  came  to  Tsarskoe-Selo.  In  the  spring  of  1913 
we  went  to  the  Crimea,  Constance  and  Finland.  From  Fin- 
land we  returned  to  Peterhof,  in  order  to  meet  M.  Poincare, 
the  French  President.  The  Imperial  Family  resided  at  Peter- 
hof at  the  beginning  of  the  war. 

In  1915  we  were  at  Tsarskoe-Selo  until  the  Emperor  assumed 
supreme  command  of  the  Army.  During  this  time  I  often 
went  with  the  Tsarevich  to  the  Stavka  (General  Army  Head- 
quarters) and  to  most  of  the  places  where  the  Emperor  took 
his  son. 

At  the  outbreak  of  the  Revolution  the  Emperor  was  at  the 
Stavka  and  his  Family  were  at  Tsarskoe-Selo.  The  Imperial 
Family  experienced  much  anxiety  during  this  period,  as  the 
:hildren  all  had  the  measles.  At  first  the  Tsarevich  fell  ill, 
•md  later  all  the  Grand  Duchesses  took  the  complaint  in  succes- 
don.  Everybody  was  worried  by  the  uncertainty  of  the 
iituation  and  the  ignorance  of  the  fate  of  the  Emperor.     A 


226         THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

very  unsettled  feeling  existed  amongst  the  Guards  Rifles  whc 
were  quartered  in  Tsarskoe-Selo.  One  night  in  particular  wa; 
most  alarming,  but  fortunately  the  commotion  amongst  th( 
soldiers  was  calmed  by  the  officers. 

The  Emperor's  abdication  on  behalf  of  the  Tsarevich  wai 
notified  the  Imperial  Family  by  the  General  in  Command  o 
the  Svodny  (combined)  Guard  Regiment.  Later  the  Granc 
Duke  Dmitri  Pavlovich  came  to  the  Palace  and  officially 
announced  to  Her  Majesty  the  news  of  the  Emperor's  abdica 
tion. 

General  Kornilov  also  came  to  the  Palace  and  informed  th( 
Empress  that  she  must  consider  herself  under  arrest.  Aftei 
General  Kornilov's  arrival  Her  Majesty  instructed  me  to  saj 
that  every  one  could  leave  the  Palace  except  those  who  carec 
to  stay  of  their  own  free  will,  and  who  would  consequentl} 
have  to  submit  to  the  conditions  imposed  on  those  who  wen 
already  under  arrest.  Nearly  everybod}''  chose  to  remain 
and  so  did  I.  During  this  time  the  Grand  Duchess  Marit 
Nikolaievna  was  taken  ill  with  inflammation  of  the  lungs 
and  a  little  later  the  Emperor  arrived  at  Tsarskoe-Selo. 

The  restrictions  imposed  upon  the  Imperial  Family  con 
sisted  in  certain  limitations  of  their  freedom.  The  Palac< 
was  surrounded  by  sentries.  The  '  prisoners '  were  onl} 
allowed  to  walk  in  the  park  for  a  fixed  time,  and  they  were 
always  accompanied  by  a  sentry.  All  the  mail  passed  througl 
the  hands  of  the  Commandant  of  the  Palace.  Kotsebue  wa; 
the  first  Commandant.  He  was  replaced  by  Korovichenko 
who  in  turn  was  replaced  by  Kobylinsky,  who  was  formerly 
in  command  of  the  garrison. 

Kerensky  came  to  Tsarskoe-Selo  on  several  occasions.  He 
visited  us  in  his  capacity  of  the  Head  of  the  new  Governmeni 
in  order  to  observe  our  conditions  of  life.  His  manners  and 
attitude  towards  the  Emperor  were  cold  and  official.  Hij 
behaviour  gave  me  the  impression  of  the  treatment  of  an 


THE  DEPOSITION  OF  M.  GILLARD  227 

accused  person  by  a  j udge  who  is  convinced  of  his  guilt.  Never- 
theless, I  must  admit  that  Kerensky  was  always  courteous. 
When  addressing  the  Emperor  he  called  His  Majesty  Nicholas 
Alexandrovich.  At  the  same  time  I  noticed  that  Kerensky, 
like  everybody  else,  avoided  calling  the  Emperor  by  his  name ; 
it  seemed  as  though  it  embarrassed  them  to  address  him  as 
Nicholas  Alexandrovich. 

Kerensky  once  came  to  the  Palace  with  Korovichenko  and 
Kobylinsky,  and  confiscated  all  the  Emperor's  private  papers. 
I  am  sure  that  directly  Kerensky  had  gone  through  these 
papers  he  knew  that  the  Emperor  was  innocent  of  wrong  to 
his  country,  and  he  immediately  changed  his  attitude  and  his 
manner  towards  the  Emperor. 

During  the  stay  of  the  Imperial  Family  in  Tsarskoe-Selo 
several  disagreeable  incidents  occurred.  The  first  was  the 
confiscation  of  a  toy  rifle  belonging  to  the  Tsarevich,  which 
was  taken  away  at  the  request  of  the  soldiers.  The  second 
incident  was  the  refusal  of  the  soldiers  to  answer  the  Emperor's 
greeting.  The  Emperor  always  addressed  the  soldiers  with 
some  few  words  of  greeting,  and  even  after  the  Emperor's 
abdication  the  soldiers  used  to  answer,  '  Sdrdstvuite  Gospodin 
Polkovnili '  (Good  day.  Colonel).  But  on  one  occasion,  after 
having  been  spoken  to  by  the  Emperor,  the  soldiers  remained 
silent.  It  appeared,  however,  that  this  was  by  order  of  some 
assistant  commandant  of  the  Palace,  whose  name  I  do  not 
remember. 

Sometimes  the  Imperial  Family  had  to  wait  a  considerable 
time  in  the  semi-circular  hall  where  they  used  to  assemble 
before  taking  the  walk  in  the  park.  But  it  was  the  guards 
who  were  late  and  who  kept  everybody  else  waiting. 

However,  these  incidents  were  mere  trifles  in  comparison 
with  the  sufferings  which  were  inflicted  later  on  the  Imperial 
Family. 

In  the  middle  of  July  it  became  known  (how,  I  cannot  tell) 


228         THE   LAST  DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

that  the  Emperor  and  the  Imperial  Family  were  about  to 
change  their  residence  from  Tsarskoe-Selo  to  some  other 
place.  At  first  it  was  rumoured  that  a  voyage  was  to  be 
taken  to  the  South,  but  later  it  transpired  that  we  were  to 
proceed  to  Tobolsk. 

This  step  was  due  to  the  fears  of  the  Government  for  the 
safety  of  the  Imperial  Family.  At  this  time  the  Government 
intended  taking  a  firm  course  in  handling  the  affairs  of  the 
nation,  but  it  feared  that  such  a  policy  would  create  some 
outburst  amongst  the  population  which  would  have  to  be 
checked  by  armed  force.  Thinking,  therefore,  that  in  the 
course  of  the  coming  struggle  we  might  also  suffer,  the  Govern- 
ment decided  to  send  the  Imperial  Family  to  a  more  tranquil 
environment  than  the  immediate  vicinity  of  Petrograd.  All 
this  was  told  me  by  Her  Majesty,  who  had  been  informed  by 
Kerensky  of  the  Government's  decision. 

The  persons  who  went  to  Tobolsk  with  the  Imperial  Family 
were  Count  Dolgoruky,  M.  Tatishchev,  Dr.  Botkin,  Miss  Schnei- 
der and  myself.  Later  we  were  joined  by  M.  Derevenko,  Mr. 
Gibbes  and  Baroness  Buxhoevden,  who  had  volunteered  to 
stay  with  the  Imperial  Family. 

The  Imperial  Family  lived  in  the  house  of  the  Governor 
of  Tobolsk.  I  also  lived  with  the  Imperial  Family.  The  other 
members  of  the  suite  were  quartered  in  a  house  belonging  to 
M.  Kornilov,  just  opposite  the  Governor's  house.  Life  in 
Tobolsk  was  very  similar  to  what  it  had  been  in  Tsarskoe-Selo, 
and  the  same  restrictions  were  imposed. 

Our  guards  were  composed  of  soldiers  who  were  formerly 
in  the  Tsarskoe-Selo  Rifle  regiments.  Kobylinsky  was,  as 
before,  the  commandant  of  the  house.  We  were  accompanied 
on  our  journey  to  Tobolsk  by  two  representatives  of  the 
Government,  Makarov  and  Vershinin  (the  latter  a  member 
of  the  Duma) .  The  representatives  spent  a  few  days  in  Tobolsk 
and  then  left.     Their  attitude  towards  the  Imperial  Family 


THE  DEPOSITION  OF  M.  GILLARD  229 

was  quite  courteous  and  kindly — this  was  very  noticeable 
with  Makarov,  especially  in  his  manner  towards  the  children. 

In  the  middle  of  October  a  person  named  Pankratov,  a 
Commissar  of  the  Government,  accompanied  by  his  assistant, 
Nikolsky,  arrived  at  Tobolsk.  They  were  directed  to  supervise 
our  life,  and  Kobylinsky  was  made  subordinate  to  them.  As 
to  the  effect  of  the  arrival  of  these  two  men  upon  the  welfare 
of  the  Imperial  Family,  I  cannot  say  that  it  was  productive 
of  harm,  except  that  their  behaviour  towards  the  guards 
unfortunately  demoralized  most  of  the  soldiers. 

So  far  as  we  were  able  to  judge,  the  inhabitants  of  Tobolsk 
were  well  disposed  toward  the  Imperial  Family.  Occasionally 
they  sent  us  bon-bons,  cakes  and  various  sweets,  and  when 
they  passed  the  house  and  noticed  any  members  of  the  Imperial 
Family,  they  always  bowed. 

The  Rifles,  who  composed  our  guard,  were  en  masse  rather 
kindly  men.  There  were  naturally  some  good  men  among 
the  soldiers,  but  most  of  them  were  bad.  Until  the  Bolshevist 
Revolution,  however,  the  latter  did  not  openly  show  their 
evil  tendencies. 

The  Bolshevist  Revolution  brought  misfortune  to  the  Im- 
perial Family  and  the  whole  of  Russia.  The  soldiers  were 
the  first  to  fall  under  its  influence,  and  those  who  were  bad 
and  evilly  disposed  now  became  rough  and  cruel  in  their  ways. 

On  January  25  the  soldiers  turned  out  Pankratov  and 
Nikolsky  and  decided  to  ask  for  a  Bolshevik  Commissar  from 
Moscow.  The  soldiers  now  forbade  the  Baroness  Buxhoevden 
to  live  in  Kornilov's  house. 

The  worst  troubles  happened  after  the  Brest-Litovsk  Treaty, 
when  the  soldiers  began  to  behave  in  a  disgraceful  manner. 
The  Tsarevich  noticed  some  inscriptions  on  the  board  of  the 
swing  used  by  the  Grand  Duchesses,  but  he  did  not  have  time 
to  read  them.  However,  directly  the  Emperor  noticed  them 
he  asked  Dolgoruky  to  remove  the  board,  upon  which  vulgar, 


230         THE   LAST  DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

disgraceful,  and  stupid  words  had  been  cut  by  the   soldiers. 

The  imperial  Family  were  also  forbidden  to  attend  divine 
service.  They  were  only  allowed  to  go  to  church  on  important 
feast  days.  The  soldiers  insisted  upon  the  Emperor  removing 
the  shoulder-straps  from  his  uniform.  Twice  he  refused  to 
do  this,  but  finally,  after  Kobylinsky  had  informed  him  that 
his  refusal  might  result  in  serious  trouble  for  himself  and  his 
family,  the  Emperor  submitted  to  this  demand. 

A  little  hill  had  been  made  in  the  garden  for  the  amusement 
of  the  children,  and  from  its  summit  the  Emperor  and  the 
Empress  once  watched  the  departure  of  a  large  number  of 
the  soldiers  (at  that  time  many  soldiers  left  Tobolsk  on  account 
of  the  demobilization  of  the  army),  but  afterwards  the  soldiers 
who  remained  levelled  the  hill  to  the  ground. 

Things  became  worse  and  worse,  especially  when  all  sources 
of  revenue  were  confiscated  from  the  Imperial  Family.  This 
occurred  on  February  12.  That  same  day  a  telegram  arrived 
from  Moscow.  I  cannot  tell  you  who  sent  it.  In  this  telegram 
a  new  mode  of  life  was  imposed  on  the  Imperial  Family.  Up 
to  this  time  the  Imperial  Family  had  been  maintained  by  the 
Government  Treasury.  Their  conditions  of  life  were  quite 
appropriate  and  ran  on  the  same  lines  as  the  existence  led  by 
the  former  Emperor  and  his  family  at  Tsarskoe-Selo. 

By  the  order  of  the  Bolshevist  authorities  lodging,  heating 
and  lighting  were  to  be  provided  for  the  Imperial  Family, 
but  everything  else  had  to  be  obtained  at  their  own  expense 
or  at  the  expense  of  those  persons  connected  with  them. 
We  were  also  forbidden  to  earn  money.  I  wanted  to  earn 
some  money  by  giving  private  lessons  in  the  town,  but  the 
soldiers  would  not  allow  me  to  do  so,  and  told  me  I  should 
have  to  leave  the  house  altogether  if  I  would  not  adapt  myself 
to  the  conditions  they  imposed. 

By  Bolshevist  orders  the  Imperial  Family  were  forbidden 
to  spend  more  than  four  thousand  two  hundred  roubles  per 


THE  DEPOSITION  OF  M.   GILLARD  231 

month  for  themselves  and  their  servants.  This  state  of 
affairs  soon  affected  our  daily  life.  Coffee,  butter  and  cream 
disappeared  from  the  table.  The  scarcity  of  sugar  was  seri- 
ously felt,  as  sugar  was  distributed  in  an  allowance  of  half 
a  pound  per  person  for  each  month.  Dinner  now  consisted 
of  two  courses,  for  those  who  had  been  accustomed  from  the 
time  of  their  birth  to  an  entirely  different  life,  and  it  was 
far  more  difficult  for  them  to  reconcile  themselves  to  the 
situation  than  for  those  who  were  not  used  to  the  luxuries 
which  the  Imperial  Family  had  always  enjoyed.  The  lack 
of  resources  and  the  necessity  for  economy  made  it  impossible 
to  pay  the  church  choir  for  singing  during  the  divine  services 
held  in  the  house.  The  choristers,  however,  volunteered  to 
sing  free  of  charge,  but  after  that  a  small  remuneration  was 
always  paid  them. 

The  number  of  servants  was  considerably  reduced  and  ten 
of  the  staff  were  discharged. 

At  last  the  attitude  of  the  soldiers  became  so  menacing  that 
Kobylinsky,  after  losing  all  hope  of  retaining  or  of  regaining 
control  over  them,  told  the  Emperor  that  he  wished  to  resign 
his  position.  The  Emperor  begged  him  to  stay,  and  Koby- 
linsky yielded  to  his  request. 

In  order  to  make  life  a  little  more  cheerful,  playlets  were 
staged,  in  which  the  children  took  part.  The  Emperor  tried 
to  find  forgetfulness  in  physical  labour.  He  sawed  wood  with 
Tatishchev  and  Dolgoruky,  his  daughters  or  myself.  He  also 
supervised  the  Tsarevich's  lessons  and  personally  instructed 
him  in  history  and  geography. 

But  all  the  efforts  made  by  the  Emperor  to  conceal  his 
feelings  could  not  hide  his  real  sufferings  from  any  observant 
person,  and  especially  after  the  Brest-Litovsk  Treaty  a  marked 
change  was  noticed  in  him  that  indicated  his  condition  of 
mental  depression.  I  can  honestly  say  that  His  Majesty  was 
overwhelmed  with  grief  at  the  news  of  this  Treaty. 


232         THE   LAST   DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

During  this  time  the  Emperor  discussed  poHtics  with  me 
on  several  occasions — a  thing  which  he  had  never  done  before. 
It  seemed  as  if  his  soul  yearned  for  human  companionship, 
and  hoped  by  such  companionship  to  find  relief  from  the 
intensity  of  his  grief.  I  cannot  state  everything  that  he  told 
me,  but  the  gist  of  his  words  and  thoughts  was  that  up  to 
the  moment  of  the  Brest-Litovsk  Treaty  he  had  believed  in 
the  future  prosperity  of  Russia — but  that  after  the  Treaty  he 
had  completely  lost  faith  in  everything  and  everybody. 

The  Emperor  criticised  Kerensky  and  Guchkov  very  sharply, 
as  he  considered  them  to  be  the  most  guilty  for  the  collapse 
of  the  Army.  The  Emperor  thought  that  by  their  weakness 
and  incapacity  the  Army  had  disintegrated,  with  the  result 
that  it  had  opened  the  way  for  the  Germans  to  corrupt  Russia. 
He  regarded  the  Treaty  of  Brest-Litovsk  as  a  disgrace  and 
treasonable  on  the  part  of  Russia  towards  her  AUies.  He 
said  bitterly:  'And  those  who  dared  accuse  Her  Majesty  of 
treason  have  turned  out  to  be  the  real  traitors.' 

The  Emperor  looked  upon  Lenin  and  Trotzky,  the  leaders 
of  the  Bolshevist  movement,  as  German  agents  who  had  sold 
Russia  for  a  large  sum. 

After  the  Brest-Litovsk  Treaty  the  Emperor  and  Empress 
disdained  both  the  German  Government  and  the  Emperor 
Wilhelra.  They  thought  that  the  German  Government  and 
the  Emperor  Wilhelm  had  disgraced  themselves  by  entering 
into  negotiations  with  the  Bolsheviks,  and  they  condemned 
the  outrageous  methods  of  warfare  to  which  the  Germans 
had  resorted. 

Such  was  the  tenor  of  our  life  during  February  and  March, 
On  March  30  a  delegate,  previously  sent  to  Moscow  by  the 
committee  of  our  soldiers,  returned  to  Tobolsk.  He  brought 
a  written  order  to  Kobylinsky  which  stated  that  our  life  from 
this  time  onwards  must  be  more  rigorously  supervised.  We 
were  all  ordered  to  live  in  the  Governor's  house,  and  a  new 


THE  DEPOSITION  OF  M.  GILLARD  233 

plenipotentiary  Commissar  was  sent  to  Tobolsk  for  the  purpose 
of  enforcing  the  new  restrictions.  On  April  9  (22)  this  Com- 
missar arrived.  His  name  was  Yakovlev.  On  April  10  (23) 
he  came  to  our  house  for  the  first  time  and  was  received  by 
the  Emperor.  On  the  same  day  he  visited  the  Tsarevich, 
who  was  ill  at  the  time.  Yakovlev  came  back  shortly  after- 
wards with  an  assistant  (whose  name  I  do  not  remember) 
and  they  both  went  up  to  see  the  Tsarevich.  On  the  same 
day  Yakovlev  was  received  by  the  Empress.  Yakovlev  made 
quite  a  favourable  impression  on  the  Emperor,  who  told  me 
that  he  believed  him  to  be  an  honest  man. 

The  reason  for  Yakovlev' s  arrival  was  a  mystery  to  us. 
But  the  mystery  was  solved  on  April  12  (25).  On  that  date 
Yakovlev  went  to  the  Emperor  and  announced  that  he  had 
orders  to  take  him  away  from  Tobolsk.  The  Emperor  repUed 
that  he  would  not  leave  Tobolsk,  as  he  would  not  be  separated 
from  his  son,  who  was  ill  (the  Tsarevich  during  this  period  was 
suffering  from  the  same  complaint  that  he  had  in  Spala  in 
1 91 2,  but  now  the  fall  had  involved  paralysis  of  the  right 
foot),  and  therefore  he,  the  Emperor,  did  not  intend  to  leave 
his  family.  Yakovlev  answered  that  he  was  merely  fulfilUng 
his  instructions,  and  if  the  Emperor  refused  to  leave  Tobolsk, 
a  choice  of  two  evils  would  have  to  be  made.  If  the  Emperor 
refused  to  obey  orders,  another  less  scrupulous  Commissar 
would  be  sent ;  or  failing  this  he  would  be  obliged  to  use 
force  to  impose  the  order.  At  the  same  time  Yakovlev  told 
the  Emperor  that  he  might  be  accompanied  by  any  persons 
he  liked.  The  only  thing  was  to  submit  to  Yakovlev's  demands. 
Everything  that  I  have  told  you  in  connection  with  this  I 
heard  direct  from  Her  Majesty. 

Nobody  knew  where  the  Emperor  was  to  be  taken.  His 
Majesty  asked  Yakovlev,  but  the  latter  answered  in  such  a 
way  that  did  not  make  the  destination  clear.  Kobylinsky 
told  us  that  Yakovlev  had  at  first  informed  him  that  the 


234        THE   LAST  DAYS  OF  THE  ROMANOVS 

destination  was  Moscow,   but  said   afterwards  that   he  did 
not  know  where  the  Emperor  was  going  to  be  taken. 

All  this  was  intensely  painful  and  humiliating  for  the  Imperial 
Family,  and  they  suffered  most  acutely.  Her  Majesty  was 
greatly  distressed  by  having  to  decide  whether  she  would 
accompany  the  Emperor  or  stay  with  the  Tsarevich. 

She  made  up  her  mind  that  she  would  go  with  the  Emperor, 
and  it  was  decided  that  the  Grand  Duchess  Maria  Nikolaievna 
should  accompany  them.  The  rest  of  the  family  was  to  stay 
in  Tobolsk  until  the  Tsarevich  had  recovered  from  his  illness. 

Yakovlev  fixed  the  time  of  departure  at  four  o'clock  in  the 
morning  of  April  13  (26).  The  evening  before,  when  we  had 
tea  together,  the  Emperor  and  Empress  wished  us  farewell 
and  thanked  everybody  for  his  services. 

At  three  o'clock  in  the  morning  the  carriages  arrived  at  the 
door.  They  were  wretched-looking  vehicles  with  no  seats 
and  no  springs,  and  one  had  to  seat  oneself  at  the  bottom, 
and  stretch  out  one's  feet.  Only  a  telega  (peasant  cart)  had 
a  capot  (hood).  In  this  we  decided  to  place  Her  Majesty.  As 
the  carriages  were  so  uncomfortable  we  went  to  the  yard 
where  an  employe  by  the  name  of  Kirpichinikov  kept  his  pigs. 
He  had  some  straw  in  stock,  and  we  used  this  to  cover  the 
floor  of  the  hooded  cart,  and,  I  think,  we  put  some  of  the  straw 
inside  the  other  carriages.  We  also  put  a  mattress  inside  the 
covered  cart.  The  Emperor  wished  to  go  with  Her  Majesty 
and  Maria  Nikolaievna,  but  Yakovlev  insisted  that  the  Emperor 
should  ride  in  the  same  cart  as  he  did.  They  left  shortly 
after  four  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  April  13  (26). 

At  this  time  the  following  persons  left  Tobolsk  :  The  Emperor 
and  Empress,  the  Grand  Duchess  Maria  Nikolaievna,  Dr. 
Botkin,  Dolgoruky,  Chemodurov,  Sednev  and  Demidova. 
They  were  escorted  by  six  riflemen  and  two  officers — Matveiev 
and  Nabokov — as  well  as  by  soldiers  of  Yakovlev's  detachment. 

Shortly  after  the  Emperor's  departure  one  of  the  drivers 


THE  DEPOSITION    OF   M.   GILLARD  235 

brought  us  a  short  note  from  Maria  Nikolaievna.  She  said 
that  the  conditions  of  travelHng  were  extremely  hard,  that 
the  road  was  bad  and  that  the  carriage  was  awful ! 

Later  Kobylinsky  received  a  wire  from  Nabokov  announcing 
the  arrival  of  the  party  at  Tiumen.  Greatly  to  the  surprise 
of  every  one  Kobylinsky  suddenly  received  a  telegram  from 
Matveiev,  stating  that  the  Emperor  and  all  the  persons  in 
his  party  had  been  held  up  in  Ekaterinburg.  This  was  quite 
unexpected,  as  we  all  thought  that  the  Emperor  had  been 
taken  to  Moscow. 

On  April  24  (May  7)  a  letter  arrived  from  the  Empress. 
She  said  that  they  were  lodged  in  two  rooms  of  Ipatiev's  house, 
and  that  they  felt  very  much  overcrowded,  and  the  only  place 
where  they  could  walk  was  a  small  dusty  garden.  She  also 
said  that  all  their  belongings  had  been  searched,  even  their 
'  medicines,'  and  in  discreet  language  she  gave  us  to  under- 
stand that  it  would  be  wise  for  us  to  remove  our  valuables  from 
Tobolsk.  As  previously  agreed  between  us  she  used  the  word 
'  medicines '  instead  of  '  jewels.'  Later  Tegleva  received  a 
letter  from  Demidova,  written  by  order  of  Her  Majesty.  In 
this  letter,  in  which  we  were  instructed  how  to  deal  with  the 
jewels,  she  used  the  expression  '  Sednev's  property.' 

On  April  25  the  two  officers  and  the  five  soldiers  who  had 
gone  to  Ekaterinburg  with  the  Emperor  returned  to  Tobolsk 
and  told  us  the  following  story.  Yakovlev  had  first  taken  the 
Emperor  to  Omsk.  But  at  a  distance  of  one  hundred  versts 
from  Omsk  he  took  the  train  and  proceeded  to  Omsk  alone. 
Afterwards  he  returned  and  the  party  proceeded  to  Ekaterin- 
burg. The  Commissars  at  Ekaterinburg  held  up  the  train. 
Dolgoruky  was  arrested  and  taken  to  prison  from  the  station. 
All  the  officers  and  men  were  placed  under  arrest,  and  were 
kept  in  a  cellar  for  two  days,  and  only  liberated  on  the  third 
day  after  some  protest  had  been  made.  The  general  impression 
which  we  gathered  from  their  narrative  was  that  the  detention 


236         THE    LAST  DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

of  the  train  was  unexpected  by  Yakovlev.  The  officers  told 
us  that  he  was  hustUng  around  all  over  the  place,  but  was 
unable  to  accomplish  anything.  We  were  also  told  that 
Yakovlev  proceeded  later  to  Moscow  and  wired  to  Koby- 
linsky  and  Hohriakov  (the  chairman  of  the  Tobolsk  Soviet) 
that  he  had  resigned  his  position  of  Commissar  to  the  Imperial 
Family. 

We  now  commenced  preparations  for  our  own  departure. 
On  April  25  (May  8)  the  chairman  of  the  Local  Soviet,  Hohria- 
kov, visited  our  house  for  the  first  time.  After  that  he  called 
on  us  frequently,  urging  us  to  hurry  our  departure.  I  remember 
that  the  Grand  Duchesses  wanted  to  have  divine  service  on 
May  3  (18),  the  birthday  of  the  Emperor,  but  Hohriakov 
forbade  this,  saying  that  no  time  must  be  wasted.  On  May  7, 
at  eleven  o'clock  in  the  morning,  we  went  to  the  steamer 
Russ,  and  about  three  or  four  o'clock  we  left  Tobolsk.  We 
were  escorted  by  a  detachment  commanded  by  Rodionov, 
which  was  composed  chiefly  of  Letts.  Rodionov  did  not 
behave  at  all  well,  he  locked  the  cabin  in  which  were  the 
Tsarevich  and  Nagorny.  All  the  other  cabins,  including  those 
of  the  Grand  Duchesses,  were  also  locked  by  his  order. 

On  May  9  (22)  we  reached  Tiumen,  and  the  same  day  we 
entrained,  and  arrived  at  Ekaterinburg  on  May  10  (23)  at 
2  a.m.  During  the  night  we  were  going  backwards  and 
forwards  from  one  station  to  another,  and  we  were  transferred 
from  one  track  to  another.  About  nine  o'clock  the  train 
stopped  between  two  stations.  The  weather  was  very  unplea- 
sant and  there  was  a  continuous  drizzling  rain.  Five  isvosh- 
chiks  (cabs)  were  awaiting  us.  Rodionov  and  some  Commissars 
approached  the  car  in  which  the  children  were  seated.  The 
Grand  Duchesses  then  came  out  of  the  car.  Tatiana  Niko- 
laievna  carried  her  pet  dog  under  one  arm,  and  she  also  carried 
a  bag,  the  latter  with  apparent  difficulty,  as  she  dragged  it 
along  the  pavement.     Nagorny  wanted  to  help  her,  but  he 


THE  DEPOSITION   OF  M.   GILLARD  237 

was  roughly  pushed  aside.  I  noticed  that  Nagorny  went 
in  the  same  cab  as  the  Tsarevich.  I  remember  that  there 
was  a  Commissar  or  some  other  Bolshevik  agent  in  every  cab. 
I  wanted  to  leave  the  train  and  wish  them  good-bye,  but  I 
was  held  up  by  a  sentry.  I  never  thought  that  I  was  then 
seeing  them  for  the  last  time  ;  and  I  did  not  even  know  that 
I  was  already  discharged  from  the  service  of  the  Imperial 
Family. 

At  last  our  train  came  into  the  station.  About  three  hours 
later  I  sav/  Tatishchev,  Hendrykova  and  Schneider  taken  out 
of  the  train  escorted  by  soldiers.  A  little  later  Haritonov, 
little  Sedncv,  Volkov  and  Trupp  were  also  taken  away.  I 
had  almost  forgotten  to  say  that  the  children  were  accompanied 
by  Dr.  Derevenko.  In  a  little  while  Rodionov  arrived  and 
told  us  that  we  '  were  not  wanted/  and  that  we  were  '  free.' 
The  Baroness  Buxhoevden  was  then  transferred  to  our  car. 

In  about  three  days  we  received  an  order  from  the  Soviet 
to  leave  the  Perm  district  and  to  return  to  Tobolsk.  We 
could  not  fulfil  this  order  as  the  way  was  then  cut  off  by  the 
advancing  Czechs,  so  we  stayed  in  Ekaterinburg.  During 
this  time  I  visited  the  town  and  had  a  look  at  Ipatiev's  house. 

On  May  14  or  15  (28)  I  witnessed  the  following  sight : 
I  was  walking  in  the  streets  of  Ekaterinburg  with  Dere- 
venko and  Mr.  Gibbes.  When  we  were  passing  Ipatiev's  house 
we  noticed  Sednev,  who  was  sitting  in  a  cab  surrounded  by 
soldiers  with  fixed  bayonets.  Nagorny  was  seated  in  another 
cab.  The  latter  looked  up  when  he  saw  us  and  gazed  at  us 
for  quite  a  long  time,  but  he  did  not  make  a  single  sign  of 
recognition. 

The  cabs,  surrounded  by  cavalry,  drove  away  towards  the 
centre  of  the  town.  We  followed  them  as  fast  as  we  could 
and  finally  saw  them  disappear  in  the  direction  of  the  prison. 

Our  party,  consisting  of  eighteen  persons,  at  last  proceeded 
to  Tinmen.     At  Kamyshlov  the  Soviet  did  not  allow  us  to 


238         THE   LAST   DAYS   OF   THE    ROMANOVS 

go  any  further.  We  stayed  at  Kamyshlov  for  ten  days.  The 
town  was  dirty,  and  the  whole  place  was  full  of  disease.  Finally 
we  were  allowed  to  board  a  train  containing  a  number  of  Serbs, 
and  we  arrived  at  Tiumen. 

We  suffered  very  severely,  but  I  do  not  wish  to  mention 
my  personal  sufferings. 

In  the  latter  part  of  August  I  was  visited  by  Chemodurov. 
His  first  words  were  :  '  Thank  God,  the  Emperor,  Her  Majesty 
and  the  children  are  alive — but  all  the  others  are  killed.' 
He  told  me  that  he  was  in  Ipatiev's  house  when  '  Botkin 
and  the  others  '  were  shot.  He  said  that  he  had  seen  the 
bodies  of  Sednev  and  Nagorny,  whom  he  recognized  by  their 
clothes,  and  he  declared  that  their  bodies  had  been  put  in 
coffins  and  buried.  He  told  me  that  all  the  others  had  been 
obliged  to  put  on  soldiers'  uniforms  and  had  been  taken  away. 
It  was  difficult  to  understand  Chemodurov,  as  he  talked  very 
irrationally. 

Chemodurov  also  said  that  the  life  of  the  Imperial  Family 
in  Ekaterinburg  was  terrible,  that  they  were  very  badly 
oppressed,  and  that  they  were  obliged  to  have  their  meals 
with  the  servants.  The  Commandant,  Avdeiev,  who  also 
had  his  meals  with  the  Imperial  Family,  was  often  drunk,  and 
sometimes  came  into  the  room  where  the  Imperial  Family 
was  seated,  without  his  tunic. 

Chemodurov  declared  that  Avdeiev  often  behaved  in  an 
indecent  and  insulting  manner.  For  example,  during  meals, 
if  he  wanted  to  help  himself  from  the  dish  he  would  reach  in 
front  of  the  Emperor  and  Her  Majesty,  and  in  so  doing  would 
brush  the  Emperor's  face  with  his  elbow. 

The  Grand  Duchesses  slept  on  the  floor  after  their  arrival 
at  Ekaterinburg.  The  Bolsheviks  took  away  a  little  bag 
which  Her  Majesty  always  used  to  carry  in  her  hand,  and  they 
also  took  away  a  gold  chain  by  which  the  Holy  Images  were 
a,ttached  to  the  Tsarevich's  bed, 


THE  DEPOSITION   OF  M.   GILLARD  239 

After  Chemodurov's  arrival  Mr.  Gibbes  and  myself  went 
to  Ekaterinburg  for  the  purpose  of  giving  assistance  to  Ser- 
geiev,  who  was  a  member  of  the  Court,  as  Chemodurov  had 
told  us  that  Sergeiev  was  in  charge  of  the  investigation  of  the 
fate  of  the  Imperial  Family.  Together  with  Sergeiev  we 
visited  Ipatiev's  house  and  inspected  the  room  that  had 
bullet  holes  on  the  wall  and  on  the  floor.  In  this  house  I 
found  two  '  Egyptian  signs  '  which  the  Empress  was  in  the 
habit  of  drawing  on  various  things  for  Good  Luck.  One  of 
those  signs  I  noticed  was  drawn  on  the  wallpaper  of  Her 
Majesty's  room,  the  other  was  drawn  on  the  side  of  the  win- 
dow in  another  room,  and  under  the  Egyptian  signs  (the  swas- 
tika) a  date  was  written  in  pencil :  17/30  April — the  date  of 
Her  Majesty's  arrival  in  Ekaterinburg.  My  attention  was 
also  attracted  to  the  stoves,  which  were  full  of  half-burned 
articles,  I  recognized  a  considerable  number  of  these,  such  as 
tooth  and  hair  brushes,  pins  and  a  number  of  various  things 
bearing  the  initials  'A.  F.'  (Alexandra  Feodorovna). 

I  received  the  impression  that  if  the  Imperial  Family  had 
been  really  removed  from  Ekaterinburg,  they  must  have  been 
taken  away  without  any  of  their  personal  belongings.  All 
the  things  which  they  would  have  required  had  been  burned. 
Nevertheless,  at  the  time  I  left  the  house  I  could  not  believe 
that  the  Imperial  Family  had  really  perished.  There  was  such 
a  small  number  of  bullet  holes  in  the  room  which  I  had  inspected, 
that  I  thought  it  impossible  for  everybody  to  have  been 
executed.  After  I  returned  from  Ekaterinburg  to  Tiumen, 
Volkov  called  on  me,  but  I  did  not  recognize  him,  as  I  had  read 
in  the  newspapers  that  after  the  attempt  on  the  life  of  Lenin, 
Hendrykova,  Schneider  and  Volkov  had  been  shot. 

Volkov  told  me  that  he  had  been  taken  direct  from  the  train 
and  put  in  the  Ekaterinburg  prison.  From  this  prison  he, 
Hendrykova  and  Schneider  had  been  transferred  to  another 
prison  at  Perm.    Tatishchev  was  also  in  prison  in  Ekaterin- 


240         THE   LAST   DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

burg.  He  was  once  taken  out  of  prison  and  was  never  put 
back.  I  could  hardly  understand  from  Volkov  what  had 
actually  happened  to  Tatishchev.  Volkov  said  that  he  had 
seen  a  Bolshevik  order  commanding  Tatishchev  to  leave  the 
Perm  district.  Volkov  was  put  in  a  cell  with  the  valet  of  the 
Grand  Duke  Michael  Alexandrovich,  and  the  valet  told  him 
that  when  the  Grand  Duke  lived  in  Perm  he  was  visited  one 
night  by  four  armed  men,  one  of  whom  aimed  his  pistol  at  the 
valet  and  ordered  him  to  stand  still.  The  others  told  the 
Grand  Duke  to  follow  them.  The  Grand  Duke  refused  to 
obey  and  said  that  he  would  only  obey  the  orders  of  a  member 
of  the  Soviet.  In  reply  to  this,  one  of  the  armed  men  went 
up  to  the  Grand  Duke,  and  took  him  by  the  collar,  saying  : 
'  Here  is  another  of  the  damned  Romanovs.' 

Volkov,  Hendrykova,  Schneider,  and  some  other  people 
were  taken  out  of  prison  into  the  woods.  Volkov  understood 
that  they  were  all  going  to  be  shot,  so  he  tried  to  escape. 
When  he  was  out  of  danger  of  pursuit,  he  stopped  and  heard 
the  sound  of  volleys  coming  from  the  place  where  the  others 
had  been  taken.  He  believed  that  Hendrykova  and  the  rest 
were  murdered.  He  thought  that  the  Bolsheviks  must  have 
considered  him  dead,  because  when  they  fired  at  him  as  he 
was  running  away,  he  tripped  and  fell.  He  then  heard  a  voice 
say  :    '  He's  done  for.' 

Volkov  also  related  the  following  incident  concerning  the 
fate  of  the  Grand  Duke  Michael :  The  Grand  Duke  had  to 
submit  to  force  and  accompany  his  captors.  One  of  the  men 
remained  with  the  valet  to  prevent  him  from  notifying  any- 
body. But  the  valet  escaped  and  told  the  Soviet  everything 
that  had  happened.  A  tumult  occurred  in  the  Soviet,  but 
nevertheless  the  members  were  in  no  hurry  to  start  in  pursuit 
of  the  men.  About  an  hour  later  they  instituted  a  search 
for  the  Grand  Duke.  It  was  very  difficult  to  obtain  any 
definite  information  from  Volkov  as  to  the  ultimate  fate  of 


THE  DEPOSITION   OF  M.   GILLARD  241 

the  Grand  Duke  Michael,  but  it  appeared  that  when  the  Grand 
Duke  followed  the  strangers,  the  valet  said  to  him  :  '  Your 
Highness,  don't  forget  to  take  your  medicine  with  you.  It  is 
on  the  shelf  above  the  stove.' 

I  have  nothing  more  to  declare.     My  statement  has  been 
read  to  me  and  it  is  correct. 

[Signed)  Gillard. 
[Signed)  N.  Sokolov. 


THE  DEPOSITION  OF  MR.  GIBBES 

THE  deposition  of  Mr.  Gibbes  should  prove  interesting  to 
the  pubHc  as  being  that  of  an  EngUshman  who  was 
wholly  and  unselfishly  devoted  to  the  Imperial  Family.  Sidney 
Gibbes  acted  as  tutor  to  the  Tsarevich,  and  after  the  arrest 
of  the  Emperor  and  his  Family,  he  followed  them  to  Tobolsk 
without  a  thought  for  his  own  safety. 

Mr.  Gibbes  knew  the  Emperor  and  the  Empress  intimately 
during  these  days  of  sorrow,  and  his  deposition  shows  that  the 
Tsar  was  genuinely  affected  by  the  Treaty  of  Brest-Litovsk 
and  the  subsequent  Red  Ruin  of  Russia.  These  recollections 
are  absolutely  unbiased,  and  there  is  no  reason  to  doubt  their 
accuracy. 

On  July  I,  1919,  the  Investigating  Magistrate  for  Cases  of 
Special  Importance  of  the  Omsk  Tribunal,  N.  A.  Sokolov, 
questioned  the  undermentioned  in  Ekaterinburg  in  conformity 
with  Paragraph  443  of  the  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure,  in  the 
capacity  of  a  witness,  and  the  witness  stated  : 

My  name  is 

Sidney  Ivanovich  Gibbes. 

Up  to  the  year  1916  I  was  a  visiting  teacher  of  the  English 
language  to  the  Grand  Duchesses  and  the  Tsarevich.  I  began 
my  lessons  with  the  Grand  Duchesses  Olga  Nikolaievna, 
Tatiana  Nikolaievna  and  Maria  Nikolaievna  in  1908.  When 
Anastasia  grew  up  I  gave  her  lessons  also.  I  began  the  in- 
struction of  the  Tsarevich  in  1914,  and  in  1916  I  was  appointed 
tutor  to  the  Tsarevich.     The  same  year  I  took  up  my  resi- 

242 


THE   DEPOSITION   OF  MR.   GIBBES  243 

dence  in  the  Palace.  In  1917  the  duties  of  tutor  to  the  Tsare- 
vich  were  performed  partly  by  myself  and  partly  by  M.  Gillard. 

During  the  early  part  of  the  Revolution  the  Imperial  Family 
resided  in  Tsarskoe-Selo.  The  Empress  and  all  the  children 
were  there.  The  Emperor  was  at  the  Stavka.  At  the  begin- 
ning of  the  Revolution  the  children  were  taken  iU  with  the 
measles.  The  first  to  be  attacked  by  the  disease  was  the 
Tsarevich,  and  after  him  all  the  daughters  had  it  in  succession. 

I  do  not  know  how  the  Empress  received  the  news  of  the 
Revolution  ;  I  was  told  by  some  one  who  was  with  her  at  the 
time  that  she  wept.  From  what  I  personally  know  of  the 
Empress,  my  conviction  is  that  she  did  not  expect  the  Revolu- 
tion. It  seems  to  me  that  the  Empress  thought  that  only  a 
few  concessions  ought  to  have  been  made.  The  Revolution 
was  a  great  blow  to  her  and  she  suffered,  but  owing  to  her  self- 
control  she  did  not  display  much  outward  emotion. 

The  Empress  and  the  Imperial  Family  were  arrested  by 
General  Kornilov.  I  was  not  present  at  the  time  of  the  arrest, 
so  I  cannot  teU  you  what  took  place.  I  know  that  Kornilov 
was  received  by  Her  Majesty  and  told  her  that  she  must  con- 
sider herself  under  arrest.  The  Empress  herself  told  me, 
but  she  did  not  go  into  many  details  ;  she  simply  related  aU 
that  had  occurred  in  a  general  way,  but  she  added  that  she 
received  Kornilov  coldly,  and  did  not  give  him  her  hand  to  kiss. 
After  Kornilov 's  announcement  of  the  arrest  I  was  not  allowed 
to  go  into  the  Palace,  and  my  requests  for  admittance  always 
met  with  a  refusal.  The  Provisional  Government  would  not 
allow  me  to  stay  with  the  Imperial  Family.  I  remember  this 
distinctly  as  I  saw  the  letter  which  stated  this,  and  it  bore  the 
signature  of  five  ministers.  I  do  not  remember  their  names, 
but  I  know  that  I  saw  the  signatures  of  five  ministers.  I  can- 
Qot  tell  you  whether  the  answer  bore  the  signature  of  the 
Minister  of  Public  Education.  Being  an  Englishman,  I  con- 
sidered aU  these  formalities  extremely  strange. 


244         THE   LAST   DAYS   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

This  is  the  reason  why  I  was  not  permitted  to  be  with  the 
Imperial  Family  during  their  stay  in  Tsarskoe-Selo,  and  in 
consequence  I  did  not  see  anything  of  their  life  during  that 
period. 

I  heard  later  in  Tobolsk,  that  some  of  the  soldiers  and  officers 
in  Tsarskoe-Selo  behaved  roughly  to  the  Imperial  Family. 
The  Emperor  himself  told  me  that  on  one  occasion  an  officer 
refused  to  shake  hands  with  him,  saying  that  he  was  on  duty, 
and  therefore  he  was  not  allowed  to  shake  hands.  The 
Emperor  also  mentioned  Kerensky.  He  said  that  Kerensky 
was  very  nervous  when  he  spoke  to  him.  In  fact,  he  was  once 
so  nervous  that  he  took  up  an  ivory  paper-knife  and  began 
bending  it  about  so  much,  that  the  Emperor  was  afraid  he 
would  break  the  knife,  and  took  it  away  from  him.  The 
Emperor  also  told  me  that  Kerensky  believed  that  he  (the 
Emperor)  wanted  to  make  a  separate  peace  with  Germany. 
The  Emperor  denied  that  this  was  so,  but  Kerensky  insisted 
upon  believing  the  contrary.  I  cannot  say  whether  the  private 
papers  of  the  Emperor  were  searched  by  Kerensky  or  not, 
but  the  Emperor  said  that  Kerensky  believed  he  had  certain 
papers  which  indicated  his  desire  to  make  peace  with  Ger- 
many. I  knew  the  Emperor  well,  and  I  quite  understand  the 
feelings  of  disdain  which  he  must  have  had  for  Kerensky. 

Kerensky  was  very  nervous  on  the  day  of  departure  of  the 
Imperial  Family  from  Tsarskoe-Selo.  During  the  night  he 
telephoned  to  the  Minister  of  Communication,  and  told  him  to 
come  to  Tsarskoe-Selo  at  once.  The  Minister  of  Communica- 
tion was  in  bed  at  the  time,  but  this  did  not  weigh  with  Keren- 
sky in  the  least. 

I  cannot  tell  you  anything  else  about  the  life  of  the  Imperial 
Family  at  Tsarskoe-Selo.  As  I  was  devoted  to  the  Family 
and  wanted  to  be  near  them,  I  went  to  Tobolsk  of  my  own  free 
will,  and  I  arrived  there  in  the  beginning  of  October.  From 
Tinmen  I  travelled  with  Klavdia  Mikhailovna  Bitner. 


THE   DEPOSITION   OF  MR.   GIBBES  245 

For  two  days  I  lived  in  Kornilov's  house.  On  the  third 
lay  I  was  sent  for  by  the  Emperor.  He  received  me  in  his 
vorking  room.  The  Empress  and  the  Tsarevich  were  also 
)resent.  I  was  very  glad  to  see  them,  and  they  were  very 
jlad  to  see  me.  At  this  time  the  Empress  had  begun  to 
ealize  that  some  of  the  people  who  were  supposed  to  be 
levoted  to  her  were  not  so  any  longer  ! 

Our  stay  in  Tobolsk  was,  on  the  whole,  very  agreeable.  I 
iid  not  see  anything  objectionable  in  the  conditions  of  our  life, 
"ertainly  there  were  some  disadvantages  compared  with  what 
t  had  been  ;  and  there  were  many  trifles  which  created  friction, 
3ut  one  soon  became  used  to  them. 

We  all  worked  very  hard.  The  Empress  taught  theology  yi, 
:o  the  children  (all  the  children  took  lessons  except  Olga 
Sfikolaievna,  who  had  completed  her  studies  in  1914).  She  |u,  \%Mv«t 
ilso  taught  Tatiana  Nikolaievna  a  little  German.  The  Em-  tf^v(Ai. 
Deror  gave  history  lessons  to  the  Tsarevich.  Klavdia  Mikhai- 
ovna  Bitner  gave  instruction  in  mathematics  and  the  Russian 
language  to  the  Grand  Duchesses  Maria  and  Anastasia,  and 
dso  to  the  Tsarevich.  Hendrykova  gave  history  lessons  to 
ratiana  Nikolaievna.     I  taught  them  English. 

Lessons  were  given  from  9  a.m.  to  eleven  o'clock.  From 
eleven  to  twelve  o'clock  the  children  were  allowed  to  take  a 
walk.  Studies  were  resumed  at  twelve  and  continued  for  an 
hour.  At  I  p.m.  lunch  was  served,  and  after  that,  coffee  was 
served.  According  to  the  doctor's  orders  the  Tsarevich  had 
to  rest  on  the  sofa  after  lunch.  Wliilst  he  was  lying  down 
Sillard  and  I  used  to  read  aloud  to  him.  After  this  Nagorny 
dressed  the  Tsarevich,  and  we  went  for  a  walk  until  four  or  five 
3'clock.  After  we  returned  the  Emperor  gave  the  Tsarevich 
iiis  history  lesson,  and  then  the  Tsarevich  usually  liked  to  play 
one  particular  game  called  '  The  slower  you  ride  the  further 
you  go.'  We  divided  into  two  sides  to  play  this  game.  The 
Tsarevich,   Gillard  or  myself    were  on  one  side,   Dolgoruky 


246         THE   LAST  DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

and  Schneider  on  the  other.  The  Tsarevich  was  extremely 
fond  of  the  game,  and  Sctmeider  used  to  put  all  her  heart  into 
it,  but  she  occasionally  quarrelled  with  Dolgoruky.  This  was 
really  funny.  We  played  the  game  nearly  every  day,  and 
Schneider  always  used  to  say  that  she  would  never  play 
again. 

From  6  to  7  p.m.  the  Tsarevich  took  lessons  with  me  or  with 
Gillard.  From  7  to  8  p.m.  he  prepared  his  lessons  for  the  next 
day.  Dinner  was  served  at  8  p.m.  After  dinner  the  Family 
assembled  upstairs.  Sometimes  we  played  cards,  and  T  often 
played  double  patience  with  Schneider.  Tatishchev,  Olga 
Nikolaievna,  Dr.  Botkin,  Schneider,  Gillard,  and  Dolgoruky 
played  bridge.  The  children  and  the  Emperor  occasionaUy 
played  bezique.     The  Emperor  often  read  aloud. 

Sometimes  the  Grand  Duchesses  Olga,  Maria  and  Anastasia 
would  go  up  to  Demidova's  room,  where  Toutelberg,  Ergberg 
and  Tegleva  had  their  meals.  Occasionally  Gillard,  Dol- 
goruky, the  Tsarevich  or  m3'self  accompanied  them.  We 
always  stayed  some  considerable  time  in  this  room,  where  we 
indulged  in  plenty  of  fun  and  laughter,  and  thoroughly  enjoyed 
ourselves. 

The  Emperor  rose  early.  At  9  a.m.  he  had  tea  in  his  work- 
ing room,  and  then  he  read  until  11  a.m.  He  then  took  a  walk 
in  the  garden,  and  during  the  walk  he  always  went  in  for  some 
kind  of  physical  exercise.  In  Tobolsk  he  frequently  used  to 
saw  logs.  With  some  outside  assistance,  the  Emperor  built 
a  platform  on  the  roof  of  the  orangery,  and  a  staircase,  con- 
structed by  our  united  efforts,  led  up  to  the  platform.  The 
Emperor  liked  to  sit  on  this  platform  when  the  weather  was 
stormy.  The  Emperor  usually  stopped  out  of  doors  until 
noon,  when  he  came  in  and  went  to  his  daughter's  room,  where 
sandwiches  were  served.  Later  he  retired  to  his  own  quarters, 
and  worked  until  it  was  time  for  lunch.  After  lunch  the 
Emperor    walked  or  worked  in  the  garden  till  dusk.       At 


THE   DEPOSITION   OF   MR.   GIBBES  247 

5  p.m.  the  Family  had  tea,  after  which  the  Emperor  used  to 
read  until  supper   time. 

The  Empress  got  up  at  different  times,  sometimes  much 
later  than  others,  but  she  was  often  ready  at  the  same  time  as 
everybody  else.  She  was  never  seen  by  strangers  in  the 
morning.  There  were  times  when  the  Empress  only  appeared 
at  lunch.  In  the  morning  she  worked  or  occupied  herself 
with  her  children.  She  liked  fancy  work  :  embroidery  or 
painting,  and  when  there  was  nobody  in  the  house,  and  she 
was  left  alone,  she  liked  to  play  the  piano. 

Lunch  and  dinner  were  good.  For  lunch  we  used  to  have 
soup,  fish,  meat  and  dessert.  Coffee  was  served  upstairs. 
The  dinner  was  similar  to  the  lunch,  with  the  difference  that 
more  fruit  was  served  with  it. 

If  the  Emperor  was  present  at  dinner  we  used  to  sit  in  the 
following  order  :  The  Emperor  sat  in  the  middle  of  the  table, 
the  Empress  opposite  him,  Hendrykova  sat  at  the  Emperor's 
right,  and  next  to  her  sat  the  Grand  Duchess  Maria.  At  the 
Emperor's  left  sat  Schneider  and  Dolgoruky.  The  Tsarevich 
sat  at  the  Empress's  right,  at  her  left  were  Tatishchev  and  the 
Grand  Duchess  Tatiana.  Gillard  was  seated  at  the  end  01  the 
table,  and  opposite  him  were  the  Grand  Duchess  Anastasia 
and  myself.  If  the  Empress  dined  upstairs  her  place  was 
taken  by  the  Grand  Duchess  Olga. 

Botkin  always  dined  with  the  Imperial  Family,  but  he 
lunched  with  his  own  family.  He  usually  sat  between  the 
Grand  Duchess  Olga  and  the  Tsarevich.  On  Holy  Days,  Dr. 
Derevenko  and  his  own  son,  Kolia,  were  invited  to  dinner. 
Dinner  was  cooked  by  Haritonov.  The  food  was  good,  and 
there  was  plenty  of  everything. 

Besides  dinner  and  lunch,  tea  was  served  twice 
daily. 

In  the  morning  the  Emperor  took  tea  with  the  Grand  Duchess 
Olga  in  his  working  room.     Tea  was  always  served  in  the 


248         THE   LAST  DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

Emperor's  working  room  in  the  evening,  when  only  the  Family 
were  present. 

At  the  time  of  my  arrival  in  Tobolsk,  there  were  two  Com- 
missars, Pankratov  and  Nikolsky  ;  Pankratov  was  not  a  bad 
sort  of  fellow,  but  he  was  weak,  and  did  not  cause  us  any  un- 
easiness. The  Emperor  used  to  talk  to  him,  and  Pankratov 
told  him  many  interesting  things  about  Siberia,  where  he  had 
lived  in  exile,  but  the  Emperor  referred  to  Pankratov  in  rather 
a  sarcastic  manner,  and  always  called  him  '  The  little  man  ' 
(he  was  rather  small  in  stature).  Nikolsky  was  uncouth,  and 
the  Family  did  not  like  him.  I  do  not  remember  if  Nikolsky 
was  ever  discourteous,  or  if  the  Tsarevich  was  known  to  have 
cried  on  account  of  his  rudeness.  During  the  Bolshevik  period 
no  Commissars  were  allowed  to  our  house.  I  believe  that  some 
Commissars  arrived  in  Tobolsk,  but  the}'^  were  not  recognized 
by  the  soldiers.  Yakovlev  was  the  first  Commissar  to  enter 
the  house. 

The  Bolshevist  Revolution  at  first  passed  unnoticed,  and  it 
looked  as  if  we  were  completely  forgotten.  However,  the 
Bolsheviks  suddenl}^  remembered  us,  and  our  allowance  was 
stopped.  We  were  given  a  soldier's  ration  and  ordered  to 
limit  our  necessities  to  150  roubles  per  week.  Several  servants 
were  discharged,  and  we  began  to  get  inferior  food.  Onlj'^ 
two  courses  of  soup  and  meat  were  now  served. 

I  did  not  speak  to  the  Emperor  about  the  Brest-Litovsk 
Treaty,  but  I  noticed  that  he  appeared  to  suffer  greatly  after 
the  Bolshevist  Revolution.  The  Emperor  abdicated  because 
he  thought  it  would  be  better  for  Russia.  It  turned  out  to  be 
worse.  He  did  not  expect  this,  and  he  suffered  dreadful 
remorse  on  account  of  his  action.  After  we  received  the  news 
that  the  state  of  affairs  in  Russia  was  so  bad,  I  saw  the  Em- 
peror looked  very  much  upset,  and  he  was  sileuc  for  a  long 
time.  His  own  situation  did  not  appear  to  disturb  him,  and 
he  endured  it  without  repining. 


THE   DEPOSITION   OF  MR.   GIBBES  249 

Yakovlev  arrived  in  Tobolsk  in  the  beginning  of  April, 
at  the  time  of  the  Tsarevich's  illness.  I  was  sitting  by  the 
Tsarevich's  bed,  when  the  Emperor,  accompanied  by  Yakov- 
lev and  another  man,  entered  the  room.  Yakovlev  looked  at 
the  Tsarevich.  The  Emperor  said  :  '  This  is  my  son,  and  this 
gentleman  is  his  tutor.' 

Yakovlev  did  not  appear  to  be  a  man  of  culture.  He 
looked  more  like  a  sailor.  I  do  not  remember  what  the 
other  man  was  like.  Yakovlev  gazed  attentively  at  the 
Tsarevich,  and  afterwards  left  the  house.  The  Emperor 
and  Yakovlev  then  returned  without  the  third  man.  They 
looked  at  the  Tsarevich,  but  said  nothing.  A  few  days  later 
I  was  again  in  the  Tsarevich's  bedroom  :  he  was  very  ill  and 
suffered  a  great  deal.  The  Empress  had  promised  to  come 
and  see  him  after  lunch,  and  he  waited  and  waited,  but  no 
one  came.  As  he  kept  calling,  '  Mamm.a,  Mamma,'  I  went 
out  of  the  room  hoping  to  see  the  Empress,  and  I  noticed  the 
Emperor,  the  Empress  and  Yakovlev,  who  were  standing  in 
the  middle  of  the  hall,  but  I  did  not  hear  what  they  were 
talking  about.  I  returned  to  the  Tsarevich's  room.  He  began 
to  cry  and  asked,  '  Where  is  Mamma  ?  '  So  I  left  the  room 
once  more.  I  was  told  that  the  Empress  was  very  anxious 
about  something,  and  this  was  the  reason  why  she  had  not 
been  to  see  the  Tsarevich.  I  was  also  told  that  she  was  greatly 
alarmed  because  the  Emperor  was  to  be  taken  away  from 
Tobolsk.  I  then  returned  to  the  bedroom.  Between  four 
and  five  o'clock  the  Empress  came  in.  She  was  quite  calm, 
but  her  face  showed  traces  of  tears.  As  she  was  afraid  of  dis- 
turbing the  Tsarevich,  she  began  to  tell  me  in  an  undertone 
that  the  Emperor  had  been  ordered  to  leave  Tobolsk,  and  that 
she  and  the  Grand  Duchess  Maria  were  to  go  with  him,  and 
that  as  soorfCs  the  Tsarevich  was  better  he  and  the  rest  would 
follow  them.  The  Tsarevich  heard  what  she  said,  but  he  did 
not  ask  her  where  we  were  going,  and  wishing  to  avoid  any 


250         THE   LAST  DAYS  OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

further  embarrassment  I  did  not  ask  her  either.  Soon  after- 
wards I  left  the  room,  as  I  thought  that  during  the  time  they 
were  preparing  for  the  journey,  they  most  probably  would  not 
care  for  the  presence  of  strangers.  That  night  they  dined 
upstairs  alone. 

In  the  evening  we  were  all  invited  to  the  Empress's  boudoir 
(the  green  room),  where  tea  was  served.  The  conversation 
turned  mostly  on  travelling,  and  at  two  o'clock  the  carriages 
arrived ;  only  one  of  them  had  a  hood.  I  \\dshed  the  Family 
good-bye  in  the  hall.  The  Emperor  seated  himself  beside 
Yakovlev ;  the  Empress  and  the  Grand  Duchess  Maria  were 
together.  They  were  accompanied  by  Dr.  Botkin,  Chemod- 
urov,  Dolgoruky,  Demidova  and  Sednev.  We  did  not  know 
the  place  of  their  destination.  None  of  us  had  any  idea  that 
they  were  to  be  taken  to  Ekaterinburg.  We  all  thought  they 
were  going  to  Moscow  or  to  the  East.  The  children  shared  the 
same  opinion.  We  were  all  very  anxious.  We  did  not  know 
what  was  going  to  happen  to  them.  Tatishchev  was  now  the 
senior  member  of  our  party,  and  Tatiana  was  now  looked 
upon  as  the  head  of  the  Family  in  the  place  of  the  Grand 
Duchess  Olga. 

The  Tsarevich  was  gradually  recovering,  although  very 
slowly.  The  first  news  of  the  travellers  was  brought  us  by  the 
isvoshchik,  who  drove  one  of  the  carriages. 

He  told  us  that  the  Family  had  reached  Tinmen  safely. 
Later,  somebody  sent  a  wire  to  say  that  they  were  '  Held  up  ' 
at  Ekaterinburg.     We  were  all  stricken  by  this  news.  I 

Yakovlev  had  told  us  nothing  about  Ekaterinburg,  and  I 
heard  some  one  say  that  Yakovlev  himself  had  been  sent  from 
Moscow,  and  not  from  Ekaterinburg,  and  I  don't  think  there 
is  any  doubt  whatever  about  this. 

After  this  Hohriakov  came  to  the  house.  It  appeared 
that  this  man  had  spent  some  considerable  time  in  Tobolsk, 
but  we  had  never  seen  him  in  the  house  before.     We  thought 


THE   DEPOSITION   OF   MR.   GIBBES  251 

he  had  been  sent  by  Yakovlev.  When  he  arrived  he  asked 
to  see  the  Tsarevich,  as  possibly  he  did  not  beheve  in  his 
illness.  After  he  had  left  him  he  came  back  again,  probably 
expecting  that  the  Tsarevich  would  get  up  after  his  first 
visit.  About  three  days  before  we  left  Tobolsk  our  guards 
were  replaced  by  a  detachment  of  Reds.  The  detachment 
was  under  the  command  of  a  certain  Rodionov,  who  did  not 
impress  me  unfavourably.  We  were  all  very  much  interested 
in  him,  as  Tatishchev  had  met  him  before,  but  could  not  re- 
member who  Rodionov  was,  or  where  he  had  seen  him.  Hen- 
drykova  also  knew  him.  Tatishchev  thought  that  he  had 
seen  Rodionov  in  Berlin,  and  Hendrykova  believed  that  she 
had  seen  him  in  Vershbolovo.  Tatishchev  had  formerly 
been  attached  to  the  Emperor  Wilhelm's  entourage  and  he 
thought  that  he  had  seen  Rodonov  in  the  Russian  Embassy 
in  Berlin.  Tatishchev  once  asked  him  what  had  been  his 
profession  and  Rodionov,  not  wishing  to  give  a  definite  reply, 
answered  :  '  I  have  forgotten.'  When  speaking  of  Rodionov, 
Tatishchev  used  to  describe  him  as  '  My  acquaintance.' 
I  remember  that  in  1916,  when  I  was  in  Petrograd,  I  happened 
to  visit  an  acquaintance  of  mine  by  the  name  of  Ditveiler  who 
was,  I  believe,  a  Jew  and  a  Russian  subject.  He  used  to  work 
in  a  rope  factory.  Diuring  one  of  our  conversations  I  asked 
him  what  he  had  been  doing  lately,  and  he  told  me  that  he 
had  spent  most  of  his  time  with  certain  people.  I  then 
questioned  Ditveiler  about  the  identity  of  one  man,  and  Dit- 
veiler answered  :  '  Probably  he  is  a  German  spy,'  and  he 
added  that  an  officer  by  the  name  of  Rodionov  was  present 
at  one  of  their  meetings.     So  his  name  was  also  familiar  to  me, 

Rodionov  did  not  allow  us  to  lock  the  doors  of  our  bedrooms 
at  night. 

We  left  for  Tinmen  by  steamer.  A  few  days  before  our 
departure  Hohriakov  told  us  that  he  did  not  know  whether  we 
should  be  allowed  to  stay  in  the  house  in  Ekaterinburg  which 


252       THE   LAST   DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

was  occupied  by  the  Emperor,  the  Empress  and  the  Grand 
Duchess  Maria.  Rodionov  informed  us  that  from  now  things 
were  going  to  be  much  worse  for  us  than  they  had  been.  From 
Tiumen  the  children,  Hendrykova,  Schneider,  Tatishchev, 
Buxhoevden,  Nagorny  and  Volkov  travelled  in  a  passenger 
compartment,  but  the  rest  of  us  were  obliged  to  sit  in  a  goods 
van  [teplonshka).  We  arrived  at  Ekaterinburg  during  the 
night  of  May  9(22).  It  was  very  cold.  The  whole  night  we 
were  moving  about  on  different  sidings.  At  7  a.m.  our  com- 
partments were  taken  out  of  the  town.  Some  isvoshchiks 
were  waiting,  and  although  I  watched  the  departure  of  the 
children,  1  was  not  allowed  to  wish  them  good-bye.  At  ten 
o'clock  we  were  moved  up  alongside  a  platform  and  Tatishchev 
and  Schneider  were  removed  from  the  train.  I  cannot  say 
what  became  of  Hendrykova.  After  this  Rodionov  announced 
that  little  Sednev  and  Trupp  must  proceed  to  the  house. 
Nagorny  came  later  and  took  away  some  of  the  luggage  and  the 
children's  beds.  These  beds,  which  were  all  alike,  were  made 
of  iron,  similar  to  the  bed  used  by  the  Emperor  Alexander  II 
during  the  Turkish  war.  The  beds  were  comfortable  and 
light.  After  Nagorny's  departure,  Rodionov  said  to  us : 
'  You  are  free  and  you  can  go  wherever  you  like.' 

I  stayed  in  Ekaterinburg.  Two  or  three  days  later  I  was 
walking  with  Derevenko  and  Gillard  on  the  Vosnesensky 
Prospekt  when  we  suddenly  noticed  that  Nagorny  and  Sed- 
nev, surrounded  by  soldiers,  were  leaving  Ipatiev's  house, 
on  two  isvoshchiks.  We  followed  them  and  saw  that  they 
were  taken  to  prison. 

Some  considerable  time  elapsed  before  the  former  Prime 
Minister.  Prince  George  Evgenievich  Lvov  (who  was  in  prison 
in  Ekaterinburg  with  Nagorny),  told  me  that  Nagorny  often 
had  disputes  with  the  Bolsheviks  on  account  of  their  bad 
treatment  of  the  Tsarevich.  The  Bolsheviks  only  allowed  the 
Tsarevich  to  keep  one  pair  of  boots,     Nagorny  insisted  upon 


THE  DEPOSITION   OF  MR.   GIBBES  253 

wo  pairs  of  shoes  being  left,  and  told  the  Bolsheviks  that  the 
•oy  was  delicate  and,  if  he  were  to  get  his  feet  wet,  he  would 
ladly  need  another  pair  of  shoes.  Some  time  later  the  Bol- 
heviks  took  away  a  long  gold  chain  by  which  the  Holy  Images 
lung  from  the  Tsarevich's  bedside.  Nagorny  had  several 
rguments  with  the  Bosheviks :  '  So  I  quite  understand  why 
le  was  shot,'  added  Prince  Lvov. 

After  the  Bolsheviks  left  Ekaterinburg,  Chemodurov  came 
o  see  me.  His  first  words  were  :  '  Thank  God,  the  children 
re  safe.'  I  did  not  understand  him.  But  afterwards  in  the 
ourse  of  conversation  he  suddenly  asked  me  :  'Do  you  think 
hey  arc  saved  ?  '  About  ten  days  before  his  death  he  sent  me 
,  letter  asking  if  there  were  any  hopes  of  them  being  alive. 

Chemodurov  said  that  the  conditions  of  life  in  Ekaterinburg 
^^ere  very  bad.  It  seems  that  when  the  Family  had  special 
master  cake,  the  Commissar  cut  himself  big  lumps  without 
Lsking  permission,  and  Chemodurov  also  mentioned  rough 
reatment ;  but  it  was  very  difficult  for  me  to  understand  him, 
ls  he  wandered  a  little  in  his  mind,  but  he  distinctly  told  me 
hat  the  Grand  Duchesses  had  no  beds. 

I  have  visited  Ipatiev's  house,  but  I  found  nothing  out  of 
he  ordinary.  The  house  was  very  much  battered.  The 
toves  were  full  of  charred  objects,  such  as  portrait  frames, 
ill  kinds  of  brushes,  and  a  little  basket  in  which  the  Tsarevich 
ised  to  keep  his  hairbrushes.  A  few  things  were  scattered 
ibout,  but  I  did  not  see  many  personal  belongings. 

The  Emperor  used  to  wear  khaki  trousers,  a  soldier's  shirt 
ind  high  boots,  which  had  been  often  patched.  The  Tsarevich 
lIso  wore  khaki  trousers,  a  soldier's  shirt  and  high  boots. 

With  regard  to  the  rubies  which  you  have  shown  me,  I  know 
hat  the  Imperial  Family  had  quite  a  number  of  rubies  in  their 
^7arious  articles  of  jewellery.  The  Grand  Duchess  Olga  had 
L  ruby  brooch  which  had  been  given  her  by  the  late  Queen 
/ictoria. 


254         THE   LAST  DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

The  sapphires  look  very  much  like  fragments  of  the  large 
stone  which  the  Emperor  wore  in  a  ring.  It  was  shaped  in 
much  the  same  way  as  these  pieces,  and  I  think  there  is  a 
complete  resemblance  between  them  and  the  large  stone. 
The  Emperor  wore  this  ring  on  his  wedding  finger,  and  he 
told  me  that  he  could  not  take  it  off. 

My  personal  recollections  of  the  Imperial  Family  are  as 
follows  : — 

The  Grand  Duchess  Olga  Nikolaievna  was  about  twenty- 
three  years  of  age ;  she  was  fair  and  had  the  lightest  hair  ol 
the  Family.  After  her  illness  she  got  much  thinner.  She  had 
beautiful  blue  eyes,  and  her  soul  could  be  seen  in  her  eyes. 
She  was  innocent,  honest,  simple,  sincere  and  kind,  but  she 
was  easily  irritated  and  her  manners  were  a  little  brusque. 
She  was  a  good  musician,  and  she  had  a  real  talent  for  music. 
The  Grand  Duchess  Olga  was  very  modest.  She  liked  sim- 
plicity, and  did  not  pay  much  attention  to  dress  ;  her  mora] 
outlook  reminded  me  of  that  of  her  father.  She  was  verj 
religious,  and  I  think  she  loved  her  father  better  than  anyone 
else. 

The  Grand  Duchess  Tatiana  Nikolaievna  was  very  thin, 
You  could  hardly  meet  anybody  as  thin  as  she  was.  She  was 
twenty-one  years  of  age,  tall, "elegant,  and  of  darker  complexion 
than  the  rest  of  the  Family.  Her  eyes  were  dark  grey  in 
colour,  and  her  expression  was  different  from  that  of  her  sisters, 
who  showed  their  candid  souls  in  their  eyes.  Tatiana  did  not ; 
she  was  reserved,  haughty,  and  not  open-hearted,  but  she  had 
the  most  decided  opinions  of  the  Family.  She,  too,  was  re- 
ligious, but  the  motive  of  her  religion  was  duty  ;  Olga  Niko- 
laievna had  the  love  of  religion  in  her  heart.  Tatiana  was 
always  preoccupied  and  pensive,  and  it  was  impossible  to 
guess  her  thoughts.  She  played  the  piano  better  than  any  one 
of  the  Family,  as  she  had  a  better  technique,  but  she  did  not 
show  any  feeling  when  she  played.     She  also  painted  and 


THE   DEPOSITION   OF   MR.    GIBBES  255 

ibroidered  well.  She  was  her  mother's  favourite,  and  the  one 
whom  the  Empress  reposed  most  confidence  ;  I  think  the 
npress  preferred  Tatiana  to  her  other  daughters.  If  any 
vours  were  required  they  could  only  be  obtained  through 
Ltiana  Nikolaievna.  The  Grand  Duchess  Maria  Niko- 
evna  was  a  broadly-built  girl  ;  she  was  very  strong, 
d  could  easily  lift  me  up  from  the  ground.  Her  hair 
is  lighter  than  Tatiana's,  but  darker  than  Olga's  (Olga 
kolaievna  had  golden-brown  hair,  and  Maria  Nikolaievna 
d  light-brown  hair).  She  had  nice,  light-grey  eyes,  and  she 
IS  very  good-looking,  but  she  became  very  thin  after  her 
less.  She  had  a  great  talent  for  painting,  and  she  was  very 
id  of  drawing.  She  played  the  piano  fairly  well,  but  she 
is  not  such  a  good  musician  as  Olga  or  Tatiana.  She  was 
3dest  and  simple,  and  probably  would  have  made  an  excellent 
fe  and  mother.  She  was  fond  of  children,  but  she  was  a 
tie  inclined  to  be  lazy.  She  liked  Tobolsk  and  told  me  that 
s  could  make  herself  quite  happy  there.  It  is  difficult  for 
5  to  tell  you  whom  she  most  loved — her  father  or  her  mother. 
The  Grand  Duchess  Anastasia  Nikolaievna  was  sixteen  or 
/enteen  years  old  ;  she  was  short  and  stout,  and  in  my 
inion,  she  was  the  only  ungraceful  member  of  the  Family. 
;r  hair  was  of  a  lighter  shade  than  that  of  Maria  Nikolaievna, 
t  it  was  not  soft,  and  lay  flat  on  her  forehead.  Her  eyes 
re  grey  and  beautiful,  and  her  nose  was  straight.  If  she 
d  been  taller  and  slimmer  she  would  have  been  the  prettiest 
the  Family.  She  was  refined  and  very  witty.  She  had  all 
I  talents  of  a  comedian,  and  she  made  everybody  laugh, 
It  she  never  laughed  herself.  It  seemed  as  if  her  mental 
/elopment  had  been  suddenly  arrested,  and  although  she 
yed  the  piano  and  painted,  she  was  only  in  the  first  stage 
both  accomplishments. 

The  Tsarevich,  Alexis  Nikolaievich,  was  not  a  healthy  boy. 
was  tall  for  his  age  and  very  thin.     He  had  suffered 


256         THE   LAST   DAYS   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

greatly  in  his  childhood,  from  a  disease  inherited  from  h 
mother's  family.  He  became  worse  in  Tobolsk,  as  it  wj 
difficult  to  obtain  the  proper  means  to  effect  a  cure.  Tl 
Tsarevich  had  a  kind  heart  and  was  very  fond  of  animal 
but  he  could  be  only  influenced  through  his  emotions,  and  1 
rarely  did  as  he  was  told.  He  only  obeyed  the  Emperor.  I 
was  a  clever  boy  but  he  was  not  fond  of  books.  His  moth 
loved  him  passionately.  She  tried  to  be  strict,  but  she  cou 
not  be  firm  with  him,  and  most  of  his  wishes  were  obtaine 
through  his  mother.  He  bore  unpleasant  things  silentl 
without  grumbling.  He  was  very  kind-hearted,  and  durii 
the  last  days  at  Tobolsk  he  was  the  only  one  of  the  Fami 
who  made  any  presents.  In  Tobolsk,  he  had  some  odd  fanci 
— for  instance,  he  used  to  collect  old  nails,  saying  :  '  Thi 
may  be  useful.' 

The  Grand  Duchesses  spoke  English  and  French  well,  b 
German  badly.     Alexis  Nikolaievich  did  not  speak  German 
all — he  never  had  any  German  lessons.     His  father  spol< 
Russian  to  him,  his  mother  English  or  French. 

The  Empress  used  to  be  very  good-looking  and  gracefi 
but  her  feet  were  large.  I  wels  quite  surprised  when  I  saw  h 
again  in  Tobolsk,  as  she  looked  much  older  and  had  maj 
grey  hairs.  She  had  wonderful  soft  grey  eyes.  She  was  clev( 
but  she  always  seemed  most  clever  to  those  who  knew  her  lea; 
She  was  not  haughty  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  word,  b 
she  never  for  a  moment  forgot  her  position.  She  look 
queenl3^  but  I  was  always  at  ease  in  her  presence,  and  I  lik 
to  be  with  her.  She  was  kind-hearted  and  used  to  perfoi 
many  kind  actions.  She  was  extremely  fond  of  homely  secre 
and  she  liked  to  prepare  a  surprise  for  somebody  and  th 
keep  it  a  secret  until  it  was  ready.  She  had  many  Germ; 
characteristics,  and  she  was  more  economical  than  an  Engli 
woman.  She  loved  Russia  and  considered  herself  a  Russia 
The  thing  which  she  most  dreaded  was  losing.  Russia.     I 


THE  DEPOSITION   OF  MR.   GIBBES  257 

lough  the  Empress  had  often  visited  Germany  during  the 
mperor's  reign,  I  never  heard  her  say  a  single  word  about  the 
mperor  Wilhelm.  She  was  genuinely  religious  in  the  Or- 
lodox  way,  and  she  was  a  true  believer  in  God.  She  was 
lost  devoted  to  her  Family,  but  religion  was  uppermost  to 
er  heart. 

Her  religious  feelings  were  quite  normal,  and  not  the  product 
f  hysteria.  She  had  a  stronger  and  more  aggressive  character 
lan  the  Emperor,  but  she  had  such  a  deep  love  for  him  that 
le  always  shared  his  opinions  and  never  opposed  his  views, 
never  witnessed  a  single  quarrel  between  them.  It  was 
bvious  that  she  was  much  opposed  to  his  abdication,  but  she 
ever  reproached  him.  And  it  was  impossible  to  think  of  her 
3  being  unfaithful  to  the  Emperor.  They  were  an  ideal 
Duple  and  they  were  rarely  separated.  The  Emperor  often 
Dok  Alexis  Nikolaievich  with  him  on  his  trips.  I  suppose  the 
sarevich  in  a  way  served  as  a  substitute  for  the  rest  of  his 
amily. 

The  Emperor  was  very  well  educated.  He  spoke  (and  wrote) 
English  and  French  to  perfection.  I  cannot  speak  as  to  his 
nowledge  of  German.  He  was  very  methodical  in  his  habits, 
nd  he  could  not  bear  anybody  to  touch  his  things.  He  had  an 
xceptionally  good  memory,  but  he  did  not  care  much  for 
ght  reading ;  he  read  many  works  dealing  with  social  questions 
nd  he  was  a  keen  student  of  history.  He  gave  me  the  im- 
ression  of  being  an  extremely  honest  man.  The  Emperor 
'as  very  kind,  and  he  had  a  compassionate  heart.  He  was 
ightly  reserved,  and  disliked  any  kind  of  familiarity.  His 
isposition  was  cheerful,  and  he  was  fond  of  games.  He  was 
Iso  fond  of  conversation  and  sometimes  chatted  with  the 
^Idiers.  He  loved  his  country  devotedly,  and  he  suffered 
•reatly  during  the  Revolution.  After  the  Bolshevik  Revo- 
ition,  we  all  felt  that  his  sufferings  were  not  due  to  his  own 
angerous  situation,  but  that  he  suffered  with  and  for  Russia. 

R 


258         THE   LAST   DAYS   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

The  Emperor  was  a  fine  sportsman,  and  he  was  fond  of  th 
chase. 

The  aides-de-camp  who  were  most  closely  attached  to  th 
Family  were  Dmitri  Pavlovich  (the  Grand  Duke  Dmitri) 
Mordvinov  and  Sablin.  The  Empress  was  very  fond  of  Ann 
Alexandrovna  Vyrubova  and  Julia  Dehn. 

With  regard  to  Rasputin,  the  Empress  believed  in  hi 
holiness  and  his  power  of  healing,  and  she  also  believed  in  th 
efficacy  of  his  prayers.  Rasputin  did  not  visit  the  Palac 
as  frequently  as  has  been  reported,  and  his  visits  were  prin 
cipally  due  to  the  illness  of  the  Tsarevich.  I  looked  upo: 
Rasputin  merely  as  a  clever,  cunning,  and  good-nature^ 
muzhik  (peasant). 

I  have  nothing  to  add  to  the  above  statement.  My  state 
ment  has  been  read  to  me,  and  it  is  correct. 

(Signed)  S.   I.   Gibbes. 
{Signed)  N.  Sokolov. 


Part  II 

(B.)— EKATERINBURG 
APRIL  17  (30)  TO  JULY  4  (17),  1918 

rHE   EXAMINATION   OF   ANATOLY   YAKIMOV 

A  NATOLY  YAKIMOV,  whose  deposition  is  now  given,  was 
LjL  a  workman,  who  became  one  of  the  Senior  Guards  of  the 
mperial  Family  during  their  last  days  in  Ekaterinburg.  His 
tatement  bears  the  impress  of  truth,  and  one  gathers  from  it 
hat  he  possessed  some  education,  and  was  more  enlightened 
md  tolerant  in  his  views  than  were  his  fellows.  Although 
{akimov  never  spoke  to  any  of  the  members  of  the  Imperial 
^amily,  we  are  able  to  see  them  vividly  by  his  crude  descrip- 
ions  of  their  daily  life.  This  workman-guard  denies  that  he 
vas  present  at  the  actual  execution,  but  he  insists  that  he  and 
he  others  to  whom  it  was  related  were  convinced  that  the 
fsar  and  his  family  met  their  deaths  in  the  manner  described 
)y  Medvedev. 

It  is  curious  to  notice  the  respect  with  which  this  peasant- 
vorkman  always  mentioned  the  Imperial  Family.  Avdeiev, 
o  he  says,  referred  to  the  Imperial  Family  as  '  They,'  and 
i^akimov  follows  his  example,  but  it  is  apparent  that  this 
mplies  no  disrespect  on  his  part. 

In  1919,  from  May  7  to  11,  the  Investigating  Magistrate  for 
mportant  Cases  of  the  Omsk  Tribunal  sitting  in  the  town  of 
ikaterinburg,  examined  (with  the  application  of  articles  403- 
l-OQ  of  the  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure)  Anatoly  Alexandrovich 

259 


26o         THE   LAST   DAYS   OF   THE    ROMANOVS 

Yakimov,  a  peasant,  aged  31  years,  married,  and  a  member  oi 
the  Orthodox  Church. 

The  accused  deposed  as  follows  : — 

I  am  a  workman,  and  my  speciality  is  work  on  milling 
machines  ;  my  father  was  also  a  workman.  He  was  born  in 
the  Ugovsk  Factory  of  the  Perm  District.  My  mother's  name 
was  Maria  Nikolaievna.     I  am  her  eldest  son. 

At  the  time  of  my  birth  my  father  worked  at  the  Motoviliha 
Works.  At  the  age  of  eight,  I  began  my  studies  in  a  school 
attached  to  the  ecclesiastical  seminary.  I  went  to  school  foi 
three  years.  I  was  twelve  years  old  when  my  father  died.  Mj 
mother  then  sent  me  to  the  pubhc  school,  but  having  passed 
the  third  grade,  I  left  school,  as  we  had  no  money  to  live  or 
and  at  the  same  time  I  was  not  ambitious  enough  to  study, 
As  I  wanted  to  get  some  occupation  my  mother  sent  me  to  the 
Motoviliha  Works,  where  I  was  accepted  as  a  bell  boy  in  the 
drafting  room.  When  I  was  sixteen  I  was  transferred  to  the 
machine  shop  and  began  to  learn  to  work  the  milling  machines, 
In  1906  I  married  the  daughter  of  a  workman  of  the  Motoviliha 
Factory.  In  1916  I  volunteered  in  the  army  and  enlisted  ir 
the  494th  Vereisky  Regiment  of  the  124th  Division.  Oui 
regiment  was  engaged  on  the  Roumanian  Front.  I  took  part  ii 
several  battles,  but  I  was  never  wounded.  In  July,  1917, 
after  the  Revolution,  I  was  elected  on  the  committee  of  the 
regiment.  You  ask  me  the  reason  why  I  was  chosen  ?  1 
believe  I  was  chosen  to  be  a  member  of  the  regiment's  committee 
because  I  was  better  educated  than  the  rest  of  the  soldiers.  1 
never  joined  any  of  the  political  parties,  but  my  sympathies 
were  with  the  Social  Democrats. 

At  the  beginning  of  November,  1917, 1  obtained  a  position  ic 
Zlokazov's  Factory  in  Ekaterinburg.  The  factory  was  still 
in  the  hands  of  its  owners,  the  Zlokazovs,  but  a  committee  oi 
workmen  existed  and  there  was  also  a  Commissar  of  the  factory. 
The  position  of  Commissar  was  taken  by  Alexander  Dmitriev 


THE   EXAMINATION   OF   ANATOLY   YAKIMOV    261 

Vvdeiev,  a  locksmith  by  trade.  Avdeiev  was  aged  about 
;hirty-four  or  thirty-five,  he  was  taller  than  the  average,  and 
lis  face  was  thin  and  pale. 

In  December  Avdeiev  imprisoned  the  owner  of  the  factory, 
Nicholas  Feodorovich  Zlokazov.  The  actual  owners  of  the 
actory  were  dispossessed  and  their  places  taken  by  an 
Executive  '  Soviet,  This  Soviet  started  to  rule  the  factory, 
\dth  Avdeiev  as  its  head.  The  following  workmen  were  next 
n  importance  to  him  :  The  brothers  Ivan,  Vasily  and  Vladi- 
nir  Loginov  and  Sergius  Ivanov  Luhanov  and  his  son  Valen- 
ine.  The  Loginovs  came  from  the  Kishtym  Works  of  the 
ikaterinburg  District.  Those  people,  who  were  closely  associ- 
Lted  with  Avdeiev,  occupied  the  principal  positions,  were  either 
nembers  of  the  Factory  Committee  and  Executive  Soviet  or 
lad  some  other  '  easy  '  jobs.  Alexander  Mikhailov  Moshkin 
vas  also  on  good  terms  with  Avdeiev.  As  far  as  I  remember 
le  (Moshkin)  was  born  in  Semipalatinsk.  He  was  aged  twenty- 
leven  or  twenty-eight,  and  in  appearance  he  was  short  and 
iturdy  looking.  He  was  a  locksmith.  In  April  it  became  known 
n  the  town  that  the  Tsar  had  been  brought  to  Ekaterinburg, 
rhis,  the  workmen  said,  was  quite  necessary,  as  certain  people 
vanted  to  abduct  the  Tsar  from  Tobolsk,  and  in  order  to  pre- 
/ent  this  they  had  been  obliged  to  transfer  him  to  a  safe  place 
ike  Ekaterinburg.  Such  was  the  talk  amongst  the  workmen, 
[n  the  first  days  of  May,  shortly  after  we  heard  of  the  arrival  of 
;he  Tsar,  we  learned  that  Avdeiev  had  been  appointed  to  take 
:harge  of  the  house  occupied  by  the  Tsar.  At  that  time,  for 
iome  reason,  this  house  was  called  '  The  House  of  Special 
Purpose.'  It  was  said  also  that  Avdeiev  had  been  given 
ibsolute  authority  over  the  inmates  of  the  house. 

Shortly  afterwards  Avdeiev  confirmed  this  news  to  us  at  a 
neeting.  I  cannot  explain  the  reason  for  his  appointment, 
\vdeiev  was  a  real  Bolshevik.  He  considered  that  the  best 
ife  in  the  world  was  that  taught  by  Bolshevism.     On  many 


262         THE   LAST   DAYS   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

occasions  he  said  openly  that  the  Bolsheviks  had  destroyed  the 
rich  bourgeois  class  and  had  taken  all  power  away  from  Nicholas 
the  '  Sanguinary.  '  He  always  associated  with  the  leaders  of 
the  Local  Soviet.  I  believe  that  because  he  was  a  violent 
Bolshevik  he  was  appointed  by  the  Local  Soviet  to  be  com- 
mandant at  the  house  of  '  Special  Purpose.  '  During  the 
meeting  Avdeiev  told  us  that  he  and  Yakovlev  brought  the 
Tsar  from  Tobolsk.  Personally  I  do  not  know  who  this  Yakovlev 
was,  but  Avdeiev  told  us  at  the  meeting  that  he  was  a  work- 
man from  the  town  of  Zlatoust.  Avdeiev  also  said  that 
Yakovlev  wanted  to  take  the  Tsar  out  of  Russia,  and  therefore 
took  him  to  Omsk.  But  somehow  the  Ekaterinburg  Bolsheviks 
had  got  wind  of  his  intentions  and  had  notified  Omsk.  Avdeiev 
lost  control  of  himself  when  he  spoke  of  the  Tsar.  He  vilified 
him  as  much  as  he  possibly  could,  and  even  called  him  '  The 
Blood  Drinker.'  War  was  the  chief  subject  of  his  denuncia- 
tion ;  he  declared  that  the  Tsar  wanted  the  war  and  for  three 
years  had  spilled  the  blood  of  the  '  workmen,'  and  he  also  said 
that  during  the  war  a  great  number  of  strikers  had  been  shot. 
In  general  he  talked  about  the  things  which  were  always 
talked  about  by  the  Bolsheviks.  It  could  be  easily  gathered 
from  what  he  said  that  because  he  had  not  allowed  Yakovlev 
to  take  away  the  Tsar,  he  had  been  appointed  Commandant 
of  the  '  House  of  Special  Purpose.'  It  was  evident  that 
Avdeiev  was  very  proud  of  his  appointment,  as  when  he  ad- 
dressed us  at  the  meeting  he  promised  the  workmen  to  show 
them  the  Tsar,  saying,  '  I  will  take  you  all  to  the  house  and 
then  I  will  show  you  the  Tsar.' 

Judging  by  Avdeiev's  words  at  the  time  when  he  was  ap- 
pointed commandant  of  the  '  House  of  Special  Purpose,'  the 
guards  of  this  house  consisted  of  Magyars.  Avdeiev  spoke  de- 
finitely about  this  and  said  he  intended  to  replace  the  Magyars 
by  Russians.  He  specially  mentioned  Magyar  guards  and  no 
others.      Avdeiev  kept  his  word  to  '  show  the   Tsar   to   the 


THE   EXAMINATION   OF  ANATOLY   YAKIMOV    263 

vorkmen.'  Workmen  used  to  visit  the  house,  but  only  those 
:hosen  by  Avdeiev.  He  used  to  choose  men  who  were  friendly 
vith  him  and  who  did  not  perform  guard  duty  in  the  '  House 
)f  Special  Purpose,'  but  who  only  '  assisted  '  Avdeiev. 
rhese  men  never  came  to  the  house  all  together,  but  in  ones  or 
:wos.  They  did  not  remain  in  the  house  long,  but  only  for  a 
lay  or  two.  I  think  that  their  main  ambition  was  money. 
E^or  being  at  the  house  they  received  a  special  salary  of  four 
lundred  roubles  a  month,  excluding  an  allowance  for  rations, 
rhey  also  were  paid  salaries  at  the  factory,  as  members  of  the 
Factory  Soviet.  These  workmen  derived  many  advantages 
rom  their  association  with  Avdeiev. 

On  May  30  our  Factory  Committee  received  a  letter  from 
Jkraintzev  (the  same  Ukraintzev  who  was  previously  one  of 
)ur  workmen,  but  who  was  now  the  Chief  of  the  Central 
Staff  of  the  Red  Army),  wherein  it  was  requested  to  detail  ten 
nen  to  perform  guard  duty  in  the  '  House  of  Special  Purpose.' 
[  was  selected  as  one  of  their  number. 

When  we  arrived  at  Ipatiev's  house  the  Magyar  guard  had 
ilready  left.  The  guards  that  were  there  were  workmen  from  the 
Sissert's  Factory,  and  workmen  from  the  Makarov's  Factory, 
:he  Isset  Works  and  the  Mint.  After  our  arrival  the  Sissert 
>vorkmen  remained,  but  the  others  left.  Together  with  the 
dissert  workmen  we  took  up  our  quarters  in  the  lower  room  of 
[patiev's  house.     One  could  enter  the  upper  floor  from  the  hall. 

At  the  time  of  our  arrival  at  Ipatiev's  house  we  had  no 
special  leader,  the  parties  were  divided  into  Zlokazov  or  Sissert 
vvorkmen.  During  the  first  week  I  was  the  senior  guard  of  the 
Zlokazov  workmen.  The  senior  guards  of  the  Sissert  workmen 
vvere  Medvedev  and  anotherman.  Medvedev  appeared  to  be 
1  leading  man  amongst  the  Sissert  workmen,  and  he  always 
^ave  them  their  orders  and  always  answered  any  questions  which 
A^ere  addressed  to  him,  but  nevertheless  he  had  no  definite 
power.     Previous  to  this  Nikiforov  had  occupied  his  position. 


264         THE   LAST   DAYS   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

but  he  had  been  taken  ill  and  had  left,  to  be  relieved  by  Med- 
vedev.  Such  was  the  state  of  affairs  during  the  first  days 
after  our  arrival  at  Ipatiev's  house.  About  a  week  later  this 
was  changed  :  we  guards  were  transferred  to  Popov's  house 
and  Medvedev  became  '  Chief  of  All  of  Us.'  Three  senioi 
guards  were  elected  whose  duties  consisted  in  changing  th( 
guard.  I  was  one  of  them  as  well  as  Benjamin  Safonov  anc 
Constantine  Dobrynin.  Shortly  before  the  murder  Safonov 
became  ill  and  he  was  relieved  by  Ivan  Starkov.  Therefort 
until  the  time  of  the  murder  of  the  Imperial  Family,  the  senioi 
guards  were  :  Ivan  Starkov,  Constantine  Dobrynin,  and  myself 

The  following  were  the  duties  of  the  senior  guard  :  W( 
were  eight  hours  on  duty  :  from  six  a.m.  till  two  p.m. ;  fron 
two  p.m.  till  ten  p.m.  ;  and  from  ten  p.m.  till  six  a.m.  Whei 
on  duty  we  changed  the  guards,  and  now  and  then  inspected  th< 
sentries.  We  were  also  obliged  to  stay  in  the  commandant': 
room  and  meet  all  visitors  to  the  house,  the  arrival  of  whon 
was  notified  to  us  by  a  bell  rung  by  the  sentry. 

At  the  time  of  our  arrival  at  Ipatiev's  house  there  wen 
altogether  ten  posts,  which  were  located  as  follows  :— 

Post  number  one  was  situated  in  the  first  room  of  the  uppe: 
floor  adjoining  the  hall. 

Post  number  two  was  in  the  corridor  that  led  to  the  bath 
room  and  lavatory. 

Post  number  three  was  situated  in  the  courtyard,  whicl 
faced  the  street  by  the  fence  gate.  This  gate  was  always  closed 
and  had  a  little  window  made  to  enable  the  sentry  to  see  wh( 
came  to  the  gate. 

When  we  arrived  at  Ipatiev's  house,  the  house  was  already 
surrounded  by  two  fences.  The  first  fence  was  very  close  t( 
the  wall  of  the  house.  It  began  from  the  side  of  the  Vosnesen 
sky  Lane,  right  from  the  wall  of  the  house  and  separated  th( 
house  from  the  Vosnesensky  Lane,  turning  at  an  angle  at  thi 
place  where  the   Lane  crossed  the   Vosnesensky.  Prospekt 


THE   EXAMINATION   OF  ANATOLY   YAKIMOV     265 

after  that  it  separated  the  house  from  the  Vosnesensky  Pros- 
pekt  and  finished  near  the  entrance  leading  to  the  upper  part 
of  the  house.  In  this  way  the  fence  made  a  httle  courtyard 
in  front  of  the  house  which  could  only  be  entered  from  the  main 
entrance  facing  the  Vosnesensky  Lane.  In  this  courtyard, 
near  the  intersection  of  Vosnesensky  Lane  and  Vosnesensky 
Prospekt,  stood  an  old  sentry-box. 

The  second  fence  also  began  from  the  direction  of  the  Vos- 
nesensky Lane.  It  began  at  the  first  fence  but  continued 
further,  turning  at  an  angle  and  separating  the  house  from 
the  Vosnesensky  Prospekt.  It  skirted  the  gate,  and  finally 
joined  the  wall  of  the  house  on  the  side  that  faced  Vosnesensky 
Prospekt.  In  this  manner  the  second  fence  covered  the  main 
entrance  of  the  upper  floor  of  the  house,  as  well  as  the  gate  and 
the  wicket.  This  second  fence  had  two  gates — one  facing  the 
Vosnesensky  Lane,  the  second  in  the  opposite  side  of  the  fence, 
close  to  the  gate  of  the  house. 

Both  gates  were  shut  from  the  inside  of  the  fence. 

At  the  time  we  began  to  perform  guard  duty,  there  was  only 
one  gate  which  was  near  to  the  entrance  of  the  house,  the  gates 
that  faced  Vosnesensky  Lane  did  not  yet  exist.  They  were 
built  when  we  were  there,  as  it  was  found  that  automobiles 
had  great  difficulty  in  leaving  through  the  first  entrance  on 
account  of  the  steep  hill.  This  was  the  reason  why  the  gates 
facing  the  Vosnesensky  Lane  were  constructed.  The  motor- 
cars entered  through  both  gates,  but  left  by  the  gate  facing  the 
Vosnesensky  Lane. 

The  fence  close  to  the  gate,  which  was  built  before  our 
arrival,  had  a  wicket  with  a  little  window  in  it. 

Sentry-boxes  were  constructed  on  both  angles  of  the  exterior 
fence. 

Post  number  four  was  situated  outside  the  outer  fence  by 
the  wicket  of  the  gates  which  were  first  constructed. 

Post  number  five  was  situated  by  the  sentry-box,  close  to 


a66         THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

those  gates,  and  was  placed  in  such  a  way  as  to  enable  the 
sentry  to  observe  the  whole  Vosnesensky  Prospekt. 

Post  number  six  was  situated  at  the  other  sentry-box,  which 
was  outside  the  fence  at  the  intersection  of  Vosnesensky  Lane 
and  Vosnesensky  Prospekt  just  by  the  chapel.  ■ 

Post  number  seven  was  situated  by  the  old  sentry-box  in  the 
outer  yard,  between  the  walls  of  the  house  and  the  first 
fence. 

Post  number  eight  was  in  the  garden.  The  sentry  had  to 
walk  round  the  whole  garden. 

Post  number  nine  was  on  the  terrace  where  a  machine-gun 
was  mounted. 

Post  number  ten  was  situated  in  a  room  on  the  lower  floor. 

At  the  time  when  we  arrived  at  Ipatiev's  house  there  were 
altogether  ten  posts. 

At  our  request  we  were  transferred  to  Popov's  house.  The 
Sissert  workmen  were  especially  insistent  upon  it.  The  houses 
were  far  away  from  the  town,  so  they  were  visited  by  their 
wives,  but  no  strangers  were  allowed  to  stay  in  Ipatiev's  house— 
the  wives  could  not  stop  there.  For  this  particular  reason  we 
were  all  transferred  to  Popov's  house. 

Up  to  the  second  half  of  June  we— Zlokazov's  and  Sissert 's 
workmen — performed  guard  duty  on  all  the  ten  posts.  From 
the  second  part  of  June  a  certain  change  took  place.  The 
reason  for  this  was  because  a  feeling  of  discontent  towards 
Avdeiev  had  arisen  amongst  Zlokazov's  workmen,  and  he  was 
dismissed  from  his  position  of  Commissar  to  the  factory.  He 
still  remained  Commandant  of  Ipatiev's  house,  but  his  following 
were  dismissed  from  all  the  positions  which  they  occupied. 
After  that,  Avdeiev  took  them  all  with  him  to  Ipatiev's  house. 
These  persons  were  the  three  brothers  Loginov,  Mishkevich, 
Solo  vie  V,  Gonchkevich,  Koriakin,  Kracheninnikov,  Sidorov, 
Ukraintzev,  Komendantov,  Labushev,  Valentine  Luhanov 
and  Skorohodov,  and  all  of  them  (with  the  exception  of  Skoro- 


THE   EXAMINATION   OF   ANATOLY  YAKIMOV    267 

lodov,  who  fell  ill  and  was  removed  to  an  hospital)  took  up  their 
)laces  in  the  Commandant's  room  and  the  hall. 

From  the  date  of  their  arrival  at  Ipatiev's  house  they  began 
o  perform  duty  on  posts  one  and  two.  They  were  quartered 
n  the  Commandant's  room  and  the  hall,  and  they  slept  on  the 
loor,  for  which  purpose  they  were  given  two  or  three  mattresses 
:rom  the  store -room. 

In  this  way  we  performed  our  duty  up  to  the  first  day  of 
[uly,  or  approximately,  up  to  the  third  or  fourth  of  July,  the 
ime  when  Avdeiev,  Moshkin  and  the  others  were  finally  dis- 
nissed. 

This  happened  in  the  following  way  : — 

Avdeiev  was  a  drunkard.  He  liked  drinking  and  he  never 
nissed  an  opportunity  of  drinking.  He  drank  a  sort  of  yeast 
)aste  which  he  obtained  at  the  Zlokazov  Factory.  He  and  his 
bllowers  drank  in  Ipatiev's  house,  and  no  sooner  did  the  latter 
nove  to  the  Ipatiev  house  than  they  began  stealing  the 
imperor's  belongings.  They  often  used  to  take  various  things 
)ut  of  the  store-room  in  sacks  or  bags.  The  bags  were  removed 
)y  motor-car,  or  on  horseback,  to  their  houses  or  flats.  The  fact 
)f  these  thefts  soon  became  the  subject  of  conversation.  Our 
piards  also  began  to  mention  the  stealing  which  was  going  on, 
md  Paul  Medvedev  constantly  spoke  about  it.  It  was  also 
iiscussed  in  the  Zlokazov  Factory,  and  the  thieves  were  pointed 
)ut  as  Avdeiev  and  Luhanov.  This  was  certainly  correct,  as 
Vvdeiev  and  his  gang  got  themselves  in  touch  with  the 
vorkmen  at  the  time  when  they  were  in  the  factory.  Even 
it  this  time  all  of  them  stuck  to  their  easy  jobs  in  the  Committee 
)f  Business  Soviet,  and  money  and  drink  were  plentiful.  They 
•ontinued  this  behaviour  after  they  went  to  the  Ipatiev  house. 

About  July  3  or  4,  at  the  time  when  I  was  on  duty,  Avdeiev 
[eft  the  house.  I  suppose  he  was  summoned  by  telephone  to 
ihe  District  Soviet.  Shortly  afterwards  Moshkin  also  left.  I 
mow  now  that  he  went  to  the  District  Soviet,  where  he  also 


268         THE   LAST   DAYS   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

was  summoned  by  phone.  Vasily  Loginov  took  the  place  o 
Avdeiev.  Some  time  after  Avdeiev  and  Moshkin  had  left 
Beloborodov,  Safarov,  Yurovsk}^  Nikulin  and  two  other  mei 
entered  the  house.  Beloborodov  asked  us  who  had  taken  th( 
place  of  Avdeiev.  Vasily  Loginov  told  him  that  he  wa! 
acting  in  the  place  of  Avdeiev.  Beloborodov  explained  to  u 
that  Avdeiev  was  no  longer  a  commandant  and  that  he  am 
Moshkin  had  been  arrested.  The  reason  for  their  arrest  wa: 
not  explained  to  us  by  Beloborodov.  As  far  as  I  remember 
the  same  thing  was  told  by  Beloborodov  to  Medvedev,  wh( 
at  this  time  also  came  from  the  Popov  house.  Beloborodov 
explained  to  us  that  Yurovsky  was  to  be  the  new  commandan 
and  Nikulin  his  assistant.  From  this  moment  Yurovsky  begai 
to  give  orders  in  the  capacity  of  a  commandant,  and  Loginov 
and  others  of  Avdeiev's  party  (I  can't  remember  who  of  them 
at  this  moment,  were  in  the  house)  were  told  to  leave  instantly 

Beloborodov,  Safarov,  Nikulin,  Yurovsky  and  two  mer 
unknown  to  me,  visited  all  the  rooms  of  the  house  ;  they  ha( 
been  in  those  actually  occupied  by  the  Tsar  and  his  family 
but  I  did  not  accompany  them.  They  did  not  stay  long, 
believe  that  Beloborodov  informed  '  Them  '  of  the  appoint 
ment  of  Yurovsky  and  Nikulin.  At  that  time  Yurovsky  ques 
tioned  Medvedev  about  the  man  who  performed  guard  duty  oi 
the  first  and  second  posts  (inside  the  house).  After  he  learne( 
that  those  posts  were  in  charge  of  special  persons  of  Avdeiev'i 
party,  Yurovsky  said,  '  In  the  meantime  you  will  have  t( 
perform  duty  on  those  posts ;  later  I  will  request  the  Extra 
ordinary  Committee  to  send  men  to  guard  those  posts.' 

In  a  few  days  those  men  sent  by  the  Extraordinary  Investi 
gation  Committee  arrived  at  the  Ipatiev  house.  They  wer< 
ten  in  number.  Their  baggage  was  brought  on  a  horse.  J 
could  not  teU  where  the  horse  or  the  coachman  came  from,  bu" 
everybody  knew  that  the  men  came  from  the  Chresvychaikj 
(the  Institution  of  Secret  Political  Police)  at  the  Hotel  America 


THE   EXAMINATION   OF   ANATOLY   YAKIMOV    269 

I  cannot  explain  the  reason,  but  we  used  to  call  those  men 
*  Letts.'  But  whether  or  no  they  were  actually  '  Letts/ 
nobody  knew.  It  is  quite  possible  that  they  were  not  Letts, 
but  Magyars. 

These  men  took  up  their  quarters  in  the  lower  floor  of  the 
house,  and  had  their  meals  in  the  Commandant's  room.  They 
occupied  a  privileged  position,  in  comparison  with  the  rest  of 
us.  I  think  it  is  right  to  say  that  we  had  three  parties  :  the 
so-called  Letts,  and  the  Zlokazov  and  Sissert  workmen. 
Yurovsky  treated  the  Letts  on  an  equality  with  himself.  He 
treated  Sissert's  workmen  a  little  better  than  us,  and  he  treated 
us  worse  than  any  one.  I  think  he  looked  upon  us  as  mere 
workmen  from  the  Zlokazov  Factory  who  had  been  dismissed 
at  the  same  time  as  Avdeiev.  Medvedev  also  influenced  his 
attitude  towards  us.  He  ingratiated  himself  in  Yurovsky's 
good  graces  and  those  of  Nikulin,  and  tried  to  make  himself 
very  affable.  That  is  why  special  favour  was  shown  to  the 
Sissert  workmen. 

At  the  beginning,  Yurovsky  increased  the  number  of  posts. 
He  mounted  another  machine-gun  in  the  attic  of  the  house  and 
also  established  a  post  in  the  rear  yard.  This  post  was  known 
as  number  ten,  and  the  post  by  the  machine-gun  number 
eleven,  and  the  post  in  the  attic  number  twelve.  All  duties 
on  posts  one,  two  and  twelve,  after  the  arrival  of  Yurovsky, 
were  performed  exclusively  by  Letts. 

You  ask  me  why  I  volunteered  to  guard  the  Tsar  ?  I  did 
not  see  at  that  time  that  there  was  anything  wrong  in  doing  so. 
As  I  told  you  before,  I  had  read  various  books.  I  had  read 
Party  pamphlets,  and  so  I  had  an  idea  about  the  views  of  the 
different  Parties.  For  example,  I  know  the  difference  between 
the  ideas  of  the  Socialist-Revolutionaries  and  the  Bolsheviks. 
The  former  believe  that  the  peasants  are  a  working  class,  but 
the  latter  consider  them  as  bourgeoisie  and  believe  that  only 
workmen   are    the   real   proletarians.     My   sympathies   were 


270         THE   LAST  DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

with  the  Bolsheviks,  but  I  did  not  beUeve  that  the  Bolsheviks 
could  rebuild  Russia  by  their  methods  of  violence,  which  they 
call  the  '  good  '  and  '  just  '  life.  I  believe  that  a  '  good  '  and 
'  just  '  life  will  only  exist  when  there  are  not  as  many  rich  and 
as  many  poor  people  as  there  are  at  present,  and  this  will 
only  come  about  when  the  population  is  sufficiently  educated 
to  understand  that  the  life  which  they  are  leading  at  present 
is  not  the  true  one.  I  believed  the  Tsar  to  be  one  of  the  capital- 
ists who  always  play  into  the  hands  of  capital  and  not  into 
those  of  the  workmen.  For  this  reason  I  did  not  want  a  Tsar, 
and  I  thought  that  it  was  right  that  he  should  be  kept  under 
guard,  or  at  least  imprisoned  until  such  time  when  he  would  be 
judged  by  the  nation,  and  when  the  nation  should  punish 
him  according  to  his  crimes,  after  having  decided  '  Was  he 
guilty  in  the  eyes  of  his  people  or  not  ?  '  I  thought  the  Tsar's 
imprisonment  was  necessary  for  the  safety  of  the  Revolution, 
but  if  I  had  known  that  he  would  have  been  killed  in  the  way 
that  he  was,  I  would  have  never  gone  to  guard  him.  I  believe 
that  he  ought  only  to  have  been  judged  by  the  whole  of  Russia, 
as  he  was  the  Tsar  of  the  entire  Russian  nation.  All  that 
happened  I  consider  unjust  and  cruel.  The  murder  of  the  rest 
of  his  family  I  consider  still  worse.  For  what  reason  were  his 
children  murdered  ?  I  must  also  state  that  I  joined  the  guard  as 
I  wanted  to  earn  money.  At  the  time  I  was  not  in  good  hea,lth, 
and  so  I  joined  the  guard  because  I  thought  it  was  an  easy  job. 

In  this  way  we  guarded  the  Tsar  Nicholas  Alexandrovich  and 
his  family.  They  all  lived  in  Ipatiev's  house — by  '  all  '  I 
mean  the  Tsar  Nicholas  Alexandrovich,  his  wife,  Alexandra 
Feodorovna,  his  son  Alexis  and  his  daughters  Olga,  Tatiana, 
Maria  and  Anastasia. 

The  others  who  lived  with  them  were  Dr.  Botkin,  Demi- 
dova  ('  Freylina,'  we  used  to  call  her),  Haritonov,  the  cook, 
and  Trupp,  the  waiter.  The  name  of  the  waiter  I  remember 
distinctly  because  the  names  of  all  the  people  who  lived  in 


1 


THE   EXAMINATION   OF   ANATOLY   YAKIMOV    271 

)atiev's  house  were  written  on  a  list  which  was  hung  up  in 
le  Commandant's  room. 

Dr.  Botkin  was  an  old,  stout,  tall,  grey-haired  man.  He 
iually  wore  a  blue  suit,  a  stiff  shirt  and  tie,  and  he  always 
ore  shoes. 

Demidova  was  a  tall  and  stout  blonde,  aged  from  thirty 
I  thirty-five  ;  she  dressed  herself  very  neatly,  not  at  all  like  a 
rvant,  and  her  figure  showed  that  she  was  very  tightly  laced. 
The  cook  was  aged  about  fifty  ;  he  was  a  small,  stalwart 
an  with  brown  hair. 

The  waiter  was  aged  about  sixty  ;  he  was  tall  and  thin. 
There  also  lived  with  the  Imperial  Family  a  bo}^  aged  about 
urteen,  whose  name  I  don't  know.     He  was  tall  for  his  age, 
id  his  face  was  pale.     He  usually  wore  a  dark  grey  jacket  and 
high  collar. 

I  cannot  tell  you  how  the  Imperial  Family  lived  or  how  they 
>ent  their  time.  I  never  entered  the  rooms  where  they  lived, 
id  I  could  not  see  anything,  as  the  door  from  the  hall  leading 
•  their  room  was  always  kept  shut. 

Dinner  was  brought  to  the  Imperial  Family  by  some  women 
om  the  Soviet  dining-room  situated  at  the  junction  of  the 
osnesensky  and  Glavny  Prospekts,  in  the  place  occupied  now 
/  the  cinema  and  the  Cafe  Lorange.  But,  in  Avdeiev's  time, 
;rmission  was  given  to  them  to  have  their  dinner  prepared  in 
.e  house.  For  this  purpose  the  provisions  were  brought  from 
.6  District  Soviet  by  some  special  messenger.     Nuns  also  used 

bring  milk,  eggs  and  bread  from  the  convent.  The  only 
ing  that  I  personally  observed  in  the  life  of  the  Imperial 
imily  was  their  singing.  I  heard  them  sometimes  singing 
cred  songs  ;  I  especially  remember  the  '  Heruvimskaia  ' 
herubim's)  Song.  But  they  sang  also  a  secular  song.  I  could 
it  hear  the  words,  but  the  tune  was  very  sad.  This  was  the 
ne  of  the  song,   '  A  Man  Died  in  a  Soldiers'  Hospital.'     I 

ver  heard  men's  voices  singing — only  women's. 


272         THE   LAST   DAYS   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

Divine  service  was  performed  in  the  house,  but  during  tl: 
whole  time  I  was  there  divine  service  was  performed  only  thre 
times.  Twice  the  priest  Storozhev  officiated  at  the  servic 
and  once  the  priest  Meledin.  But  there  were  services  befoi 
our  arrival.  I  know  this  because  I  had  to  get  a  priest  to  official 
at  the  service.  The  first  time  Avdeiev  sent  me  to  fetch 
priest,  and  named  the  church  from  which  the  priest  was  to  I 
asked.  He  did  not  tell  me  the  name  of  the  priest.  In  tl 
church  I  learned  that  a  priest  named  Meledin  officiated, 
wanted  to  get  him,  but  at  this  time  he  was  busy  and  would  m 
come.  After  this  I  went  in  search  of  Storozhev,  and  I  al< 
sought  him  a  second  time.  When  I  was  looking  for  a  priest 
used  to  talk  to  the  churchwarden,  who  stood  near  the  cand 
box.  I  cannot  tell  you  who  he  was.  But  once  he  asked  me 
he  couldn't  officiate  instead  of  a  priest,  sajdng,  '  I  would  lil 
so  much  to  see  the  Tsar.'  In  Avdeiev's  time,  when  I  was  : 
the  house,  two  services  were  held.  During  the  time  of  Yuro^ 
sky,  only  one  was  held.  I  was  never  present  at  divine  servic 
We  were  not  allowed  to  go  into  the  room,  but  Avdeiev  ar 
Yurovsky  were  present  at  the  service.  I  heard  men  ar 
women's  voices  during  the  service  :  probably  they  sung  then 
selves.  I  have  seen  all  the  members  of  the  Imperial  Famil 
as  well  as  all  the  people  who  lived  with  them. 

I  used  to  see  them  in  the  house  when  they  passed  by  ar 
went  for  a  walk  in  the  garden,  as  well  as  during  the  walk  itseJ 
They  passed  close  to  the  Commandant's  room  and  close  • 
post  number  one  when  they  went  to  the  lavatory.  They  cou 
also  go  to  the  '  toilet '  room  through  the  kitchen,  but  th( 
never  did.  If  the  heir  went  with  them,  they  used  to  go  f( 
their  walk  by  the  staircase  which  led  down  from  the  toil 
room,  and  then  through  the  lobby  that  led  into  the  yard,  ar 
from  the  yard  to  the  garden.  If  the  heir  went  with  them  i 
take  a  walk,  they  went  through  the  main  entrance  to  the  hou: 
to  the  street,  then  again  through  the  gate  (not  the  wicket)  ■ 


THE  EXAMINATION   OF   ANATOLY   YAKIMOV    273 

he  3^ard,  and  from  thence  to  the  garden.  The  heir  was  ill  and 
e  was  carried  out  to  his  wheeled  chair,  which  was  brought  up 
0  the  main  entrance.     The  Tsar  used  always  to  carry  him. 

have  never  seen  the  heir  carried  by  anyone  else. 

Personally,  I  could  not  see  the  attitude  of  people  towards  the 
Emperor  and  his  family,  although  I  watched  Avdeiev,  who  of 
ourse  had  to  deal  with  them.  Avdeiev  was  a  rough  and 
ncouth  man.  He  was  also  a  drunkard  ;  his  disposition  was 
ot  kind.  If  on  any  occasion  during  the  absence  of  Avdeiev 
ny  member  of  the  Imperial  Family  asked  a  favour  of  Moshkin, 
e  always  said  they  would  have  to  wait  the  return  of  Avdeiev. 
Vhen  Avdeiev  returned  and  their  request  was  mentioned,  his 
nswer  was  '  Let  them  go  to  hell.'  Sometimes  when 
Lvdeiev  returned  from  the  Imperial  Family's  rooms,  he  used 

0  say  that  they  had  asked  him  for  something  or  other,  but  that 
e  had  refused.  Apparently  the  process  of  refusal  gave  him 
luch  pleasure,  as  he  always  spoke  about  it  and  looked  very 
appy.  For  example,  I  remember  that  he  was  once  asked 
permission  to  open  the  windows,  but  he  told  us  that  he  had 
Drbidden  it.     I  could  not  tell  how  he  addressed  the  Tsar,  but 

1  the  Commandant's  room  he  referred  to  the  Imperial  Family 
s  '  they  '  and  he  used  to  call  the  Tsar  '  Nikolashka.'  I 
ave  already  told  you  that  as  soon  as  he  got  into  the  house  he 
legan  to  bring  in  his  favourite  workmen,  who  moved  into  the 
ouse  altogether  after  being  dismissed  from  the  Committee 
nd  the  Soviet.  All  these  people  had  a  merry  time  with 
i.vdeiev  in  the  Ipatiev  house  ;  they  were  often  drunk,  and 
hey  stole  the  Emperor's  belongings.  Once  Avdeiev  was  so 
.runk  that  he  fell  down  incapable  in  one  of  the  lower  rooms  of 
he  house,  and  at  the  same  time  Beloborodov  arrived  and 
sked  for  him.  Some  of  Avdeiev's  favourites  lied  to  Belo- 
borodov and  told  him  that  Avdeiev  had  gone  out  of  the  house, 
t  appeared  that  he  fell  down  drunk  in  the  lower  floor  imme- 
iately  after  he  had  visited  the  Imperial  Family,  whom  he 


274         THE  LAST  DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

actually  went  to  see  in  this  state.  The  drunkards  made 
dreadful  noise  in  the  Commandant's  room  ;  they  shouted,  the 
slept  huddled  up  to  one  another,  and  their  habits  were  ver 
dirty.  The  songs  they  chose  could  not  have  been  agreeable  t 
the  Tsar.  They  sang  '  You  Fell  as  a  Victim  in  the  Struggle 
'  Let  us  Forget  the  Old  World,'  '  Get  Cheerfully  in  Stej 
Comrades.'  Ukraintzev  used  to  play  the  piano  in  the  Con 
mandant's  room  and  accompany  the  singers.  As  Avdeiev  wa 
a  Bolshevik  and  a  harsh  man,  I  believe  that  he  treated  th 
Imperial  Family  very  badly.  He  could  not  have  possibl 
treated  them  well,  as  it  would  be  against  his  nature  and  b( 
haviour.  After  I  watched  him  in  the  Commandant's  room, 
believe  he  constantly  insulted  the  Imperial  Family.  I  als 
remember  that  Avdeiev  talked  to  his  friends  about  Rasputir 
He  said  much  the  same  that  other  people  had  said  and  whic 
had  been  published  in  the  newspapers. 

Not  once  did  I  speak  to  the  Tsar  or  to  any  of  his  family, 
met   them   only  occasionally,   and  we  never  spoke.     I   one 
heard  the  Tsar  speak  to  Moshkin.     They  were  in  the  garder 
Moshkin  was  sitting  on  a  bench  in  the  garden.     The  Tsa 
approached  and  said  something  to  him  about  the  weather. 

Although  I  never  spoke  when  I  met  them,  I  have  still  a; 
impression  of  them  that  will  always  remain  in  my  soul.  Th 
Tsar  was  no  longer  young,  his  beard  was  getting  grey.  I  hav 
seen  him  wearing  a  '  gimnasterka  '  (soldier's  shirt),  with  a: 
officer's  belt  fastened  by  a  buckle  round  his  waist.  The  buckl 
was  yellow  and  the  belt  was  yellow,  not  a  light  yellow,  but 
darker  shade.  The  gimnasterka  was  khaki  colour,  the  sam 
colour  as  his  trousers  and  his  old  worn-out  boots.  His  eye 
were  kind  and  he  had  altogether  a  kind  expression.  I  got  th 
impression  that  he  was  a  kind,  simple,  frank  and  talkative  per 
son.  Sometimes  I  felt  that  he  was  going  to  speak  to  me.  H 
looked  as  if  he  would  like  to  talk  to  us. 

The  Tsaritza  was  not  a  bit  like  him.    She  was  severe  lookinj 


THE   EXAMINATION   OF   ANATOLY   YAKIMOV    275 

id  she  had  the  appearance  and  manners  of  a  haughty,  grave 
Oman.  Sometimes  we  used  to  discuss  them  amongst  our- 
Ives,  and  we  decided  that  Nicholas  Alexandrovich  was  a 
odest  man,  but  that  she  was  different  and  looked  exactly  like 
Tsaritza.  She  seemed  older  than  the  Tsar.  Grey  hair  was 
ainly  visible  on  her  temples  and  her  face  was  not  the  face  of  a 
Dung  woman.  He  looked  much  younger  when  you  saw  them 
igether.  I  positively  cannot  describe  the  way  she  used  to  dress. 
Tatiana  was  like  the  Tsaritza.  She  had  the  same  serious 
id  haughty  look  as  her  mother.  The  other  daughters,  Olga, 
aria  and  Anastasia,  had  no  haughtiness  about  them.  One 
id  the  impression  that  they  were  modest  and  kind.  I  also 
,nnot  describe  the  way  they  dressed,  as  I  never  noticed  it. 
The  Tsarevich  was  aihng  all  the  time.  I  can  tell  you  nothing 
)out  him.  The  Tsar  used  to  carry  him  to  his  wheeled  chair, 
id  there  he  used  to  lie,  covered  with  a  blanket.  I  cannot 
ascribe  his  clothes. 

AU  my  evil  thoughts  about  the  Tsar  disappeared  after  I  had 
ayed  a  certain  time  amongst  the  guards.  After  I  had  seen 
lem  several  times  I  began  to  feel  entirely  different  towards 
lem  ;  I  began  to  pity  them.  I  pitied  them  as  human  beings, 
im  telling  you  the  entire  truth.  You  may  or  may  not  believe 
e,  but  I  kept  on  saying  to  myself,  '  Let  them  escape,  or  do 
mething  to  allow  them  to  escape.'  I  did  not  tell  anybody 
)out  this  feeling,  but  I  wanted  to  confide  in  Dr.  Derevenko, 
hio  visited  them  about  that  time,  but  I  was  doubtful  of  him. 
cannot  tell  you  the  reason,  but  I  said,  '  I  don't  know  what 
nd  of  a  man  he  is.'  When  he  left  them  his  face  did  not 
:press  anything,  and  he  never  said  a  single  word  about  them, 
im  stating  the  whole  truth.  I  actually  wished  them  to  escape. 
Tien  I  first  entered  the  guards  I  had  not  seen  them  and 
did  not  know  them,  so  when  Avdeiev  and  the  '  Tovar- 
ichi  '  (Comrades)  used  to  sing  the  revolutionary  songs,  I  also 
ied  to  join  in  the  chorus;  but  after  I  learned  how  matters  really 


276         THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

stood,  I  stopped  singing,  and  a  great  number  of  us  condemn( 
Avdeiev  for  his  behaviour  to  the  Imperial  Family. 

Under  Yurovsky's  rule  we  were  not  allowed  to  go  into  tl 
house.  I  never  used  to  stay  longer  than  was  necessary 
the  Commandant's  room,  as  after  a  bell  rang  (an  electric  b( 
was  connected  with  the  Commandant's  room  and  Popo\ 
house)  we  used  to  enter  the  Commandant's  room,  receive  o 
orders  and  retire  immediately.  We  seniors  did  not  go  to  t! 
Commandant's  room  unless  the  bell  rang.  Medvedev  alwa 
went  and  we  were  cisked  for  through  him.  Yurovsky  w 
always  with  Nikulin,  and  Medvedev  made  great  efforts  to 
in  their  company ;  the  Letts  from  the  Chresvychaika  we 
also  always  near  them.  That  is  why  I  cannot  tell  you  he 
Yurovsky  felt  about  the  Tsar.  Avdeiev  was  more  of  our  o\ 
class,  as  he  was  a  workman  like  ourselves,  and  he  lived  with  i 
Yurovsky  behaved  himself  like  one  in  command,  and  did  n 
allow  us  to  go  into  the  house. 

I  can  only  state  the  fact  that  immediately  after  he  tO' 
command  of  the  house  he  mounted  a  machine-gun  in  the  ati 
and  established  a  new  post  on  the  rear  yard.  He  stopped  : 
drunkenness,  and  I  never  saw  him  drunk  or  intoxicated.  Nik 
lin  was  visited  by  a  girl  whose  name  was  '  Seveleva,'  but  s 
was  never  allowed  into  the  Commandant's  room.  But  Yurc 
sky  either  diminished  or  forbade  altogether  the  donations 
the  nuns  to  the  I  mperial  Family  ;  and  he  also  did  somethi 
that  made  the  position  of  the  Imperial  Family  much  won 
but  what  this  was  I  do  not  remember.  Something  that 
could  not  understand  also  happened  with  regard  to  the  prie 
At  the  time  of  Yurovsky  there  was  only  one  divine  servi( 
I  was  sent  for  once  by  Yurovsky,  who  ordered  me  to  get  ai 
kind  of  priest !  At  first  he  asked  me  the  names  of  the  pries 
who  had  officiated.  I  told  him  they  were  Father  Meledin  a: 
Fathers  tor  ozhev.  He  then  ordered  me  to  fetch  one  of  thei 
As  Father  Meledin  happened  to  be  the  nearest,  I  went  to  s 


rHE   EXAMINATION   OF  ANATOLY   YAKIMOV     277 

m  the  same  day.  In  the  evening  I  told  Yurovsky  that  I 
d  asked  Father  Meledin  to  come.  The  next  morning  Yu- 
vsky  sent  for  me  and  again  asked  me  the  name  of  the  priest 
10m  I  had  told  to  come.  I  answered  that  I  had  asked 
Lther  Meledin.  Upon  hearing  this  Yurovsky  said,  '  Is 
at  the  one  who  Hves  on  the  Vodochnaia,  where  Doctor 
lernavin  lives  ?  '  I  answered  that  it  was  the  same  one, 
^er  which  Yurovsky  sent  me  to  tell  Father  Meledin  not  to 
me.  '  Go  and  tell  Father  Meledin  that  there  won't  be  any 
■vice,'  he  said.  '  Service  is  postponed.  And  if  he  should 
k:  you  who  has  postponed  the  service,  say  that  they  did  it, 
d  not  myself.  Instead  of  Father  Meledin,  fetch  Father  Stor- 
tiev.'  I  went  to  Meledin  and  told  him  that  there  would  be 
service.  He  asked  me  '  Why  ?  '  I  answered  as  Yurovsky 
d  told  me,  that  '  they  '  had  postponed  it.  Directly  after- 
Lrds  I  went  to  Father  Storozhev  and  asked  him  to  come, 
hy  Yurovsky  preferred  Storozhev  to  Meledin,  I  don't  know. 
>  always  did  as  he  liked,  and  ignored  the  wishes  of  the  men. 
I  July  12  the  men  elected  me  instead  of  Medvedev  to  be 
ik  chief,  but  on  Sunday,  July  14,  I  returned  home  later 
m  I  was  allowed  to,  so  Yurovsky  at  once  dismissed  me  and 
pointed  Medvedev  to  take  my  place. 

rhe  last  time  I  saw  the  Tsar  and  his  daughters  was  on  July 
They  were  walking  in  the  garden  at  about  four  o'clock  in 
I  afternoon.  I  don't  remember  whether  I  saw  the  heir, 
lid  not  see  the  Tsaritza  as  she  was  not  with  them. 
3n  Monday,  July  15.  the  boy  who  hved  with  the  Imperial 
mily  and  used  to  push  the  wheeled  chair,  appeared  in  our 
arters  in  Popov's  house.  My  attention  was  drawn  to  this 
t,  and  probably  the  other  guards  also  noticed  it.  But 
body  knew  why  the  boy  had  been  transferred  to  our  house, 
ere  is  no  doubt  that  it  was  done  acting  on  Yurovsky's 
lers.  I  was  on  duty  on  July  16.  My  hours  at  that  time 
re  from  2  p.m.  to  10  p.m.     At  ten  o'clock  I  placed  sentries 


278         THE   LAST  DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

on  all  the  eight  posts  (duties  on  posts  number  one,  two,  elev 
and  twelve  were  not  performed  by  us).  The  sentries  I  plac 
on  duty  at  lo  p.m.  had  to  be  relieved  at  2  a.m.  by  the  ne 
senior,  Constantin  Dobrynin,  to  whom  I  transferred  my  duti 
After  I  had  transferred  my  duties,  I  went  to  our  quarters, 
remember  that  I  had  tea,  and  afterwards,  at  about  elev 
o'clock,  I  went  to  bed.  Kleshcheiev,  Romanov  and  Osol 
were  in  the  same  room  as  myself.  At  about  4  a.m.,  when 
was  beginning  to  get  light,  I  was  awakened  by  Kleshcheie 
voice.  Romanov  and  the  other  man,  Osokin,  who  slept 
the  same  room  as  I  did,  were  also  awakened.  Kleshchei 
said  in  a  frightened  tone,  '  Get  up,  you  fellows,  I  will  t 
you  the  news  ;  but  get  out  into  the  other  room.'  We  got 
and  followed  him  into  the  next  room  where  there  were  some  m( 
men,  and  when  we  were  all  assembled,  Kleshcheiev  announci 
'  The  Tsar  was  shot  to-day  !  '  We  all  started  to  interrog< 
them  as  to  how  it  happened,  and  he  and  Deriabin  told  us  1 
following  story,  each  completing  the  other's  narrative. 

At  2  a.m.  Medvedev  and  Dobrynin  notified  them  when  th 
were  standing  at  their  posts,  that  they  would  have  to  perfo: 
their  duty  longer  than  two  o'clock  a.m.,  as  during  the  ni§ 
the  Tsar  was  going  to  be  shot.  After  receiving  this  ore 
Kleshcheiev  and  Deriabin  approached  the  windows  :  Kles 
cheiev  came  to  the  window  of  the  lobby  on  the  lower  tie 
opposite  the  door  which  led  to  the  room  where  the  mure 
took  place,  and  Deriabin  came  to  the  window  of  the  room  whi 
faced  the  Vosnesensky  Lane.  Shortly  afterwards  (they  s 
it  was  at  one  o'clock  a.m.  by  the  Old  Time,  or  a  little  past  t 
by  the  New  Time  that  had  been  instituted  by  the  BolshevL 
who  changed  the  time  two  hours  ahead)  some  persons  enter 
the  lower  room  and  proceeded  to  the  room  where  the  mure 
took  place.  Kleshcheiev  saw  the  procession  quite  w( 
Yurovsky  and  Nikulin  came  in  first  and  were  followed  by  t 
Emperor,  the  Empress  and  her  daughters  Olga,  Tatiana,  Ma: 


THE   EXAMINATION   OF   ANATOLY   YAKIMOV    279 

d  Anastasia;  then  came  Dr.  Botkin,  Demidova,  Trupp, 
d  Haritonov  the  cook.  The  heir  was  carried  by  the  Em- 
ror.     Behind  them  walked  Medvedev  and  the  Letts    (the 

1  men  who  Hved  in  the  lower  room  who  had  been  sent  from 

2  Chresvychaika).  Two  out  of  their  number  carried  rifles, 
tien  the  Imperial  Family  came  into  the  room,  they  placed 
smselves  as  follows  :  In  the  middle  of  the  room  stood  the 
ar  ;  the  heir  was  seated  on  a  chair  to  the  right  of  the 
ar  ;  to  the  right  of  the  heir  stood  Doctor  Botkin.  Behind 
jm,  against  the  wall,  stood  the  Empress  with  her  daughters ; 

one  side  of  the  Empress  stood  the  cook  and  the  waiter, 

the  other  side,  Demidova. 

rhe  following  people  were  also  in  the  room,  Yurovsky, 
kulin  and  the  Letts.  Behind  the  Letts  stood  Medvedev. 
Deriabin  could  not  hear  the  words  with  which  Yurovsky 
dressed  the  Family,  but  Kleshcheiev  positively  affirms  that  he 
ird  Yurovsky  s  words,  and  that  Yurovsky  said  to  the  Tsar  : 
icholas  Alexandrovich,  your  relatives  are  trying  to  save 
1,  therefore  we  are  compelled  to  shoot  you.'  The  same 
nute  several  shots  were  heard.  All  the  revolvers  were  fired. 
\  woman's  scream,  followed  by  the  loud  screams  of  several 
tmen  were  heard  after  the  first  shots  had  been  fired.  They 
icuted  the  victims  one  after  the  other.  The  Emperor  fell 
it ;  after  him  fell  the  heir.  Demidova  was  tossing  about  in 
)ny  and  she  was  finally  dispatched  by  bayonets.  After 
2y  fell  they  were  examined,  and  those  who  showed  signs  of 
I  were  again  shot  and  then  bayoneted.  Out  of  the  mem- 
s  of  the  Imperial  Family  they  said  Anastasia  was  the  most 
reed  by  the  bayonets.     After  this  they  proceeded  to  search 

dead  ;  and  they  unbuttoned  their  clothes,  looking  for 
'ellery.  Yurovsky  took  away  all  the  things  which  were 
nd  on  the  dead  persons,  and  carried  them  upstairs.  Some- 
iy  brought  a  few  sheets  from  upstairs,  and  the  dead  were 
ipped  in  these  and  carried  out  into  the  yard  through  the 


28o         THE   LAST   DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

same  rooms  that  they  had  been  led  to  their  execution.  Froi 
the  yard  they  were  carried  to  a  motor  lorry  which  was  stanc 
ing  behind  the  gate  of  the  house.  All  of  them  were  put  o 
this  lorry  and  some  cloth  was  taken  from  the  store-room  an 
spread  on  it ;  the  bodies  were  covered  with  the  same  clotl 
Sergius  Luhanov  was  the  driver.  The  lorry  with  the  bodi( 
was  driven  by  Luhanov  through  the  gates  that  open  on  tl 
Vosnesensky  Lane.  Yurovsky  and  three  of  the  Letts  wei 
with  the  bodies.  After  the  bodies  were  taken  out  of  the  hou< 
two  Letts  began  to  mop  up  the  blood  and  wash  it  away  wit 
water  and  sawdust. 

The  narratives  of  Kleshcheiev  and  Deriabin  seemed  so  muc 
like  the  truth,  as  they  both  were  so  excited  by  everything  the 
had  seen,  that  nobody  doubted  their  words.  Deriabin  fe 
especially  upset ;  he  swore  and  called  the  soldiers '  murderers 
and  '  butchers,'  and  spoke  about  them  with  profound  disgusi 
On  one  of  the  following  days,  either  Medvedev  or  someboc 
who  had  it  from  Medvedev  told  me  that  Luhanov  took  tl 
bodies  to  the  Verkh-Isetsky  Works.  The  lorry  passed  \ 
wooded  country,  and  then  the  ground  began  to  get  soft  ai 
swampy.  The  lorry  proceeded  with  great  difficulty,  as  i 
wheels  sank  into  the  mud.  At  last  the  lorry  arrived  at  i 
destination,  where  a  hole  was  already  dug.  All  the  bodi 
were  laid  in  this  hole  and  covered  with  earth. 

What  I  am  telling  you  is  the  truth.  Neither  myself  nor  ai 
other  of  our  Zlokazov  workmen  knew  anything  in  the  eve 
ing  about  the  intended  murder.  From  that  evening  Medved' 
never  came  to  our  quarters,  and  did  not  explain  anything  to  i 
I  admit  that  some  of  the  Sissert  workmen  may  have  kno\ 
about  it  through  Medvedev,  but  the  Sissert  workmen  ke 
themselves  aloof  from  us,  and  we  from  them.  Amongst  t 
Sissert  workmen  there  was  a  greater  number  of  Bolsheviks  th 
amongst  our  men. 

Respecting   the   weapons   which   were  used,   I   know   th 


THE   EXAMINATION   OF  ANATOLY   YAKIMOV    281 

'urovsky  had  two  revolvers,  one  of  them  a  big  Mauser  and 
tie  other  a  Nagan.  Besides  these,!  have  seen  a  big  revolver 
1  the  Commandant's  room,  and  it  is  possible  that  it  was  a 
olt.  All  the  Letts  had  revolvers,  and  judging  by  the  holsters 
hey  were  Nagans.  Besides  which  a  few  more  revolvers  were 
rought  from  some  place  at  the  time  when  Yurovsky  was 
ommandant. 

The  description  of  the  murder  of  the  Tsar  and  his  family 
npressed  me  very  much.     I  sat  and  trembled,  I  did  not  go 

0  bed,  and  at  eight  o'clock  in  the  morning  I  went  to  see  my 
ister,  Kapitolina,  with  whom  I  was  on  very  good  terms.     So 

went  to  share  my  feelings  with  her  :  I  was  deeply  pained  in 
ly  soul.     I  found  my  sister  alone  :   her  husband  was  working 

1  the  commissariat  of  justice.  When  my  sister  saw  how  dis- 
ressed  I  was,  she  asked  me  :  '  What  is  the  matter  ?  '  I 
nswered :  '  The  Tsar  is  shot.'  My  sister  said  :  '  Is  it  possible 
hat  you  were  there  ?  '  I  told  her  what  I  have  just  told  you, 
nly  not  in  such  detail.  I  told  her  that  the  Imperial  Family 
lad  been  shot  by  order  of  the  '  District  Soviet  of  Workmen 
)eputies '  ;  I  have  the  same  opinion  now :  it  is  impossible  that 
li'urovsky  did  it  on  his  own  responsibility  as  at  this  time  all 
>ower  was  in  the  hands  of  the  District  Soviet.  I  believe  that 
he  murder  was  done  by  order  of  the  Soviet. 

Some  time  previously  the  following  conversations  took 
)lace  amongst  the  Red  Guards  :  '  What  will  happen  if  the 
'zechs  enter  the  town  ?  '  '  What  will  they  do  to  the  Imperial 
^amily  ?  '  Suggestions  were  made  that  they  would  execute 
he  Imperial  Family. 

I  remember  also  that  Deriabin  said  :  '  Demidova  had  about 
hirty  bayonet  wounds.'     I  told  this  to  my  sister. 

At  about  ten  o'clock  in  the  morning  I  returned  from  my 
lister's  to  the  Popov  house.  1  do  not  remember  what  I  did 
ip  to  2  p.m.,  when  my  duty  commenced.  I  placed  the  guards 
it  all  the  posts,  and  then  I  entered  the  Commandant's  room. 


i82         THE   LAST   DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

There  I  met  Nikulin,  two  Letts  and  Medvedev.  They  were 
not  in  good  spirits,  and  they  all  looked  preoccupied  and  de- 
pressed. None  of  them  spoke.  A  large  number  of  valuable 
things  were  lying  on  the  table.  These  consisted  of  pins,  stones, 
ear-rings,  beads  and  all  sorts  of  jewels.  Part  lay  in  boxes, 
which  were  open.  The  door  from  the  hall  leading  to  the 
rooms  used  by  the  Imperial  Family  was  closed  as  before,  but 
there  was  nobody  in  the  rooms  :  not  a  single  sound  was  heard. 
Formerly  sounds  of  life  were  always  heard  in  these  rooms. 
There  was  not  any  life  there  now.  Only  their  little  dog  was 
standing  near  the  door,  waiting  to  be  let  into  those  rooms.  I 
remember  this  so  well  because  I  thought,  '  You  are  waiting 
in  vain.'?.  Before  the  murder  there  was  a  bed  and  a  couch  in 
the  Commandant's  room,  but  at  two  o'clock  on  July  17, 
when  I  came  to  the  Commandant's  room,  1  noticed  two  more 
beds.  On  one  of  these  a  Lett  was  lying.  Later  Medvedev 
told  us  that  the  Letts  would  not  live  any  longer  in  the  room 
where  the  murder  took  place  (they  used  to  occupy  that  room). 
Obviously  this  was  the  reason  why  the  two  beds  had  been 
transferred  to  the  Commandant's  room. 

From  two  o'clock  p.m.  up  to  ten  o'clock  p.m.  on  July  17 
I  was  on  duty.  But  on  this  day  I  did  not  see  Yurovsky  in 
the  house. 

On  the  same  day  Medvedev  told  us  that  we  were  to  be  sent 
to  the  Front.  So,  on  the  morning  of  July  18  I  went  to  the 
Zlokazov  Factory  to  draw  the  money  that  was  due  me.  At 
two  o'clock  I  went  on  duty.  On  this  day  the  Tsar's  per- 
sonal belongings  were  taken  out  from  the  Ipatiev  house  and 
put  on  an  automobile.  Beloborodov  was  sitting  in  the  auto- 
mobile. A  number  of  other  things  were  also  taken  away 
in  carriages. 

On  July  18  I  saw  Yurovsky  in  the  house  at  about  six  o'clock 
in  the  evening  ;  he  was  constantly  coming  and  going.  At 
about  eight  o  clock  in  the  evening  he  called  Medvedev  and  gave 


THE  EXAMINATION   OF  ANATOLY   YAKIMOV    283 

Slim  the  money  for  our  pay.  On  July  18  all  the  things  had 
Deen  taken  out  of  the  house. 

During  the  night  of  July  20,  I  and  the  other  guards  were 
>ent  to  the  station  at  Ekaterinburg.  A  part  of  the  guard 
■emained  in  the  Ipatiev  house. 

At  the  end  of  July  we  arrived  at  Perm,  and  about  a  week 
ifter  our  arrival  we  were  joined  by  the  remainder  of  the  guards 
rom  the  Ipatiev  house.  All  of  them  had  been  assigned  to  the 
iisposal  of  Gorbunov,  the  commissary  of  supplies  of  the  Third 
Vrmy,  and  they  were  taken  by  steamer  to  Levshino.  Klesh- 
;heiev  did  not  go  with  them  to  Levshino  as  he  had  to  remain 
it  Perm  on  account  of  being  ill  with  venereal  disease. 

For  a  month  I  guarded  Gorbunov's  steamer  and  'the  train 
:ars.  On  November  i,  by  my  own  wish,  I  went  to  Motoviliha 
ind  remained  there.  After  the  place  came  under  the  rule  of 
he  Supreme  Ruler  I  was  mobilized,  I  participated  in  battles 
vith  the  Reds,  and  I  was  finally  arrested. 

I  remember  another  fact  about  the  life  of  the  Emperor. 
)nce  when  I  entered  the  Commandant's  room,  Nikulin  and 
^^abanov  were  there,  and  I  heard  Nikulin  ask  Kabanov  what 
le  had  said  to  the  Tsar  during  his  walk.  Kabanov  replied 
hat  the  Emperor  had  asked  him  if  he  had  not  been  in  a  certain 
luirassier  regiment.  Kabanov  answered  that  he  had  been, 
md  added  that  once,  during  the  time  he  was  in  the  regiment, 
t  had  been  reviewed  by  the  Tsar.  We  were  all  surprised  at 
he  Tsar's  memory. 

I  could  not  tell  what  became  of  the  boy  who  stayed  with 
he  Imperial  Family.  On  one  of  the  days  following  the  mur- 
ler  I  saw  the  boy  in  the  distance  :  he  was  sitting  in  the  room 
vhere  the  Sissert  workmen  were  dining,  and  he  was  weeping 
o  bitterly  that  his  sobs  were  heard  by  me.  I  did  not  go  near 
lim,  nor  did  I  ask  him  any  questions.  I  was  told  that  when 
he  boy  heard  about  the  murder  of  the  Imperial  Family  he 
)egan  to  cry. 


284       THE   LAST  DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

On  July  17,  after  I  became  calmer  in  my  mind,  I  went  to 
Medvedev's  room.  In  this  room  I  met  another  man  who 
had  previously  obtained  supplies  for  the  Imperial  Family 
and  the  guard.  I  began  to  question  Medvedev  about  the 
murder.  Medvedev  told  me  that  shortly  after  twelve  in  the 
night  Yurovsky  roused,  the  Imperial  Family  and  said  to  the 
Tsar  :  '  An  attack  is  about  to  be  made  on  the  house,  so  I 
must  transfer  you  all  to  the  lower  rooms.'  They  all  came 
down.  In  reply  to  my  question  who  actually  did  the  shooting, 
Medvedev  answered  that  it  was  the  Letts.  When  I  asked 
where  the  bodies  had  been  taken,  he  told  me  that  the  bodies 
were  taken  by  Yurovsky  and  the  Letts  on  an  automobile  to 
the  Verkh-Isetsky  Works  and  from  there  to  a  wooded  place 
by  the  swamp,  where  the  bodies  were  put  in  one  hole  and 
covered  with  earth.  I  remember  he  said  that  the  automobile 
kept  on  sinking  in  the  swampy  ground,  and  only  arrived  at 
the  grave  with  great  difficulty. 

I  know  that  Avdeiev,  before  he  was  appointed  Commandant 
of  Ipatiev's  house,  went  to  Tobolsk  to  fetch  the  Tsar  and  his 
family.  He  was  accompanied  by  Hohriakov,  who  was  after- 
wards killed  at  the  Front  and  buried  with  great  ceremony  in 
Perm  by  the  Bolsheviks. 

I  also  remember  that  when  I  went  to  Ekaterinburg  I  heard 
two  workmen  saying  that  the  Tsar  had  left  Ekaterinburg. 
All  of  us  began  to  tell  them  that  the  Tsar  had  been  shot. 

I  can't  explain  anything  else.  My  testimony  has  been 
read  to  me,  and  is  correct. 

{Signed)  Anatoly  Alexandrovich  Yakimov. 
{Signed)  N.  Sokolov. 


HE    EXAMINATION    OF    PAVEL    MEDVEDEV 

rHE  deposition  of  Pavel  Medvedev,  the  former  workman 
at  the  Sissert  Factory,  reveals  a  more  hardened  char- 
ter than  that  of  Yakimov.  He  regards  events  in  the  cold 
ht  of  reason,  and  offers  no  comments  either  of  pity  or  of  dis- 
;e.  As  he  informed  the  Member  of  the  District  Court,  the 
:e  of  the  Tsar  and  his  family  did  not  '  interest  '  him.  But 
is  worthy  of  notice  that  this  unemotional  workman  insists 
at  he  took  no  part  whatever  in  the  actual  murder,  which 
plies  that  the  tragedy  was  repugnant  even  to  a  man  of  his 
pe. 

His  account  also  bears  the  imprint  of  truth.  It  is  evident 
)m  it  that  Medvedev  possessed  no  imagination,  and  he  des- 
.bes  the  blood-stained  room,  and  the  throbbing  corpses 
actly  as  every-day  occurrences.  There  is  no  attempt  to 
ipress  his  interrogator.  His  standpoint  is  :  '  I  saw  these 
ings ;  this  is  how  they  happened.     I  have  nothing  more  to 

y-' 

His  account  of  the  disposal  of  the  corpses  differs  from  that 
Yakimov.  It  agrees,  however,  that  the  route  taken  by  the 
Dtor  lorry  was  in  the  direction  of  the  Verkh-Isetsky  Works. 
On  February  21,  1919,  in  the  town  of  Ekaterinburg,  the 
ember  of  Ekaterinburg  District  Court,  J.  Sergeiev,  examined 
e  under-mentioned  person  in  the  capacity  of  an  accused,  with 
e  apphcation  of  Articles  403-409  of  the  Code  of  Criminal 
•ocedure.  The  accused  deposed  as  follows  :^ 
My  name  is 

Pavel  Spiridonovich  Medvedev. 
I  am  thirty-one  years  of   age,  a  member  of  the  Orthodox 

285 


286        THE  LAST  DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

Church.  I  am  by  birth  a  peasant.  I  worked  at  the  Sissei 
Works  of  the  Ekaterinburg  District.  I  have  a  house  whic 
belongs  to  me  at  the  works. 

In  September,  1914,  I  was  mobilized  and  assigned  to  tl: 
Opolchenskaia  Druzhina  (33rd  Territorial  Battalion),  locate 
in  the  town  of  Verkhoturie.  I  stayed  with  the  battalion  fc 
two  months.  I  was  then  discharged  and  exempted  froi 
military  service  on  account,  1  believe,  of  having  been  employe 
as  a  munition  worker. 

After  the  February  Revolution,  in  April,  1917,  I  joined  th 
Bolshevist  Party,  and  the  majority  of  the  workmen  in  01 
works  did  the  same.  During  three  months  I  paid  to  the  Part 
treasury  one  per  cent,  of  my  wages.  Then  I  ceased  to  pa 
because  I  was  no  longer  willing  to  participate  in  the  activiti( 
of  the  Party. 

After  the  October  Revolution,  in  January,  1918,  I  enliste 
in  the  Red  Army,  and  in  February  they  sent  me  to  the  Fror 
to  fight  against  Dutov.  Commissar  Sergei  Mrachkovsky  ws 
in  command  of  my  detachment.  We  were  then  fighting  i 
the  vicinity  of  Troitzk,  but  our  fighting  was  unsuccessful,  £ 
we  did  more  wandering  about  the  steppes  than  actual  fighting 
In  April  I  came  home  on  leave  and  spent  three  weeks  then 
In  the  second  half  of  May  the  above-mentioned  Commissa 
Mrachkovsky  came  to  our  works  and  began  to  recruit  wort 
men  for  a  special  detachment  assigned  to  guard  the  hous 
where  the  former  Emperor,  Nicholas  II,  and  his  family  livec 
The  conditions  attracted  me,  and  I  enlisted.  Altogether  som 
thirty  workmen  were  enlisted. 

On  May  19,  1918,  the  detachment  recruited  by  Commissa 
Mrachkovsky  arrived  in  Ekaterinburg  and  was  quartered  i 
the  Novy  Gostiny  Dvor  (new  market  house),  where  we  live' 
until  May  24.  According  to  the  order  of  the  Ural  Distric 
Soviet,  we  elected  from  amongst  our  number  two  senior  guards 
Alexis  Nikiforov  and  myself  were  elected.     On  May  24  ou 


THE   EXAMINATION   OF   PAVEL   MEDVEDEV      287 

tachment  was  transferred  to  new  quarters  on  the  ground 
or  of  the  Ipatiev  house.  The  same  day  the  former  Emperor 
th  his  family  arrived.  They  were  placed  in  the  upper  floor 
this  house.  The  whole  of  the  upper  floor  of  the  house  was 
their  disposal,  except  one  room  (to  the  left  from  the  entrance) 
lich  was  occupied  by  the  Commandant  of  the  house  and  his 
dstant.  Alexander  Avdeiev,  a  former  workman  in  the  Zloka- 
V  Factory,  was  Commandant,  and  Moshkin  (I  don't  remember 
;  Christian  name)  was  his  assistant.  Two  other  men  were 
.0  quartered  in  the  Commandant's  room.  I  do  not  know 
;ir  names,  but  I  know  they  were  workmen  from  the  Zlokazov 
ctory. 

A.S  soon  as  our  party  had  arrived  at  the  Ipatiev  house  the 
mmandant  ordered  me  (as  I  was  senior  guard)  to  receive  the 
^soners.  Together  with  Avdeiev  and  Moshkin  I  entered  the 
:ner  room  (the  Tsar's  bedroom).  The  following  persons 
re  there  :  The  Emperor,  his  wife,  his  son,  his  four  daugh- 
s.  Doctor  Botkin,  the  cook,  the  waiter  and  a  boy.  (I  do  not 
ow  their  names.)  After  having  counted  the  party  and  find- 
!^  that  they  were  twelve  in  number,  we  left,  without  having 
Dken  to  them.  The  Tsar's  four  daughters  were  placed  in 
3  room  adjoining  the  Tsar's  bedroom.  At  first  there  were 
beds  for  them,  but  after  two  or  three  days  beds  were  put 
the  room.  The  Commandant  was  in  charge  of  the  internal 
?  in  the  house  ;  the  guards  only  performed  sentry  duty.  At 
it  the  guards  were  on  duty  in  three  relays,  but  later  in  four. 
e  stayed  in  Ipatiev's  house  for  two  or  three  weeks,  after 
lich  we  were  transferred  to  Popov's  house,  which  was  exactly 
posite.  A  few  days  after  this  the  guard  was  augmented  by 
irteen  more  workmen  from  the  Zlokazov  Factory,  which  is 
uated  in  Ekaterinburg.  Those  Zlokazov  workmen  also  elected 
2ir  senior  guard,  a  workman  by  the  name  of  Yakimov. 
lere  were  altogether  eleven  sentry  posts  ;  two  were  inside  the 
use,  two  by  the  machine-guns,  and  four  outside  the  house. 


288         THE  LAST  DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

Every  day  the  Tsar's  family  used  to  walk  in  the  garde 
The  heir  was  ailing  all  the  time,  and  the  Emperor  carried  hi 
to  his  wheeled  chair.  At  the  beginning,  the  dinner  for  tl 
Imperial  Family  was  brought  from  the  Soviet's  dining-roon 
but  afterwards  they  were  allowed  to  prepare  their  own  dinn 
in  the  kitchen  on  the  upper  floor.  The  duties  of  the  Senioi 
who  were  captains  of  the  Guard,  were  to  take  charge  of  t] 
food  and  supplies  of  the  guards,  to  change  the  sentries,  ai 
to  supervise  them.  When  on  duty  the  Senior  Guard  had 
stay  in  the  commandant's  room.  At  first  the  Senior  Gua: 
took  turns  every  twelve  hours  in  performing  their  dutie 
Then  a  third  Senior  Guard,  Constantin  Dobrynin,  was  electe 
and  after  this  we  did  duty  in  eight-hour  shifts.  At  the  ei 
of  June  or  at  the  beginning  of  July  (I  don't  rememb 
exactly),  the  Commandant  Avdeiev  and  his  assistant,  Moshki 
were  dismissed  (it  seems  that  they  were  suspected  of  stealh 
the  Tsar's  belongings),  and  a  new  commandant  was  assignc 
named  Yurovsky.  The  new  commandant's  assistant  arrive 
with  him,  but  I  positively  do  not  remember  his  name.  1 
the  evening  of  July  i6,  between  7  and  8  p.m.,  when  the  tin 
for  my  duty  had  just  begun,  Commandant  Yurovsky  orden 
me  to  take  all  the  Nagan  revolvers  from  the  guards  and  1 
bring  them  to  him.  I  took  twelve  revolvers  from  the  sentri' 
as  well  as  from  some  other  of  the  guards,  and  brought  them  1 
the  commandant's  office.  Yurovsky  said  to  me  :  '  We  mu; 
shoot  tJicui  all  to-night,  so  notify  the  guards  not  to  be  alarmt 
if  they  hear  shots.'  I  understood,  therefore,  that  Yurovsl< 
had  it  in  his  mind  to  shoot  the  whole  of  the  Tsar's  family,  ; 
well  as  the  doctor  and  the  servants  who  lived  with  them,  bi 
I  did  not  ask  him  where  or  by  whom  the  decision  had  bee 
made.  I  must  tell  you  that  in  accordance  with  Yurovsky 
order  the  boy  who  assisted  the  cook  was  transferred  in  tl 
morning  to  the  guard -room  (in  the  Popov  house).  The  lowi 
floor  of  Ipatiev's  house  was  occupied  by  the  Letts  from  tl 


THE   EXAMINATION   OF   PAVEL   MEDVEDEV     289 

tts  Commune,  who  had  taken  up  their  quarters  there  after 
irovsky  was  made  commandant.     They  were  ten  in  number. 

about  ten  o'clock  in  the  evening,  in  accordance  with  Yurov- 
y^'s  order,  I  informed  the  guards  not  to  be  alarmed  if  they 
Duld  hear  firing.  About  midnight,  Yurovsky  woke  up  the 
ar's  family.  I  do  not  know  if  he  told  them  the  reason  they 
d  been  awakened  and  where  they  were  to  be  taken,  but  I 
sitively  affirm  that  it  was  Yurovsky  who  entered  the  rooms 
:upied  by  the  Tsar's  family.  Yurovsky  had  not  ordered 
;  or  Dobrynin  to  awaken  the  Family.  In  about  an  hour  the 
lole  of  the  Family,  the  doctor,  the  maid,  and  the  two  waiters 
t  up,  washed  and  dressed  themselves.  Just  before  Yurov- 
/  went  to  awaken  the  Family,  two  members  of  the  Extra- 
iinary  Commission  arrived  at  Ipatiev's  house.  Shortly  after 
e  o'clock  a.m.,  the  Tsar,  the  Tsaritsa,  their  four  daughters, 
3  maid,  the  doctor,  the  cook  and  the  waiter  left  their  rooms. 
e  Tsar  carried  the  heir  in  his  arms.  The  Emperor  and  the 
ir  were  dressed  in  '  gimnasterkas  '  (soldiers'  shirts)  and 
ire  caps.  The  Empress  and  her  daughters  were  dressed, 
t  their  heads  were  uncovered.  The  Emperor,  carrying  the 
ir,  preceded  them.  The  Empress,  her  daughters  and  the 
lers  followed  him.  Yurovsky,  his  assistant  and  the  two 
ove-mentioned  members  of  the  Extraordinary  Commission 
:ompanied  them.  I  was  also  present.  During  my  presence 
ne  of  the  Tsar's  family  asked  any  questions.  They  did  not 
ep  or  cry.  Having  descended  the  stairs  to  the  first  floor, 
:  went  out  into  the  court,  and  from  there  by  the  second  door 
)unting  from  the  gate)  we  entered  the  ground  floor  of  the 
use.  When  the  room  (which  adjoins  the  store-room  with  a 
ded  door)  was  reached,  Yurovsky  ordered  chairs  to  be 
Dught,  and  his  assistant  brought  three  chairs.  One  chair 
ls  given  to  the  Emperor,  one  to  the  Empress,  and  the  third 

the  heir.  The  Empress  sat  by  the  wall  by  the  window, 
ar  the  back  pillar  of  the  arch.     Behind  her  stood  three  of 


290         THE  LAST  DAYS  OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

her  daughters  (I  knew  their  faces  very  well,  because  I  had  see 
them  every  day  when  they  walked  in  the  garden,  but  I  don 
know  their  names).  The  heir  and  the  Emperor  sat  side  t 
side  almost  in  the  middle  of  the  room.  Doctor  Botkin  stoc 
behind  the  heir.  The  maid,  a  very  tall  woman,  stood  at  tl 
left  of  the  door  leading  to  the  store-room  ;  by  her  side  stoc 
one  of  the  Tsar"s  daughters  (the  fourth).  Two  servants  sto( 
against  the  wall  on  the  left  from  the  entrance  of  the  room. 

The  maid  carried  a  pillow.  The  Tsar's  daughters  al 
brought  small  pillows  with  them.  One  pillow  was  put  on  t] 
Empress's  chair  ;  another  on  the  heir's  chair.  It  seemed 
if  all  of  them  guessed  their  fate,  but  not  one  of  them  utter 
a  single  sound.  At  this  moment  eleven  men  entered  the  roon 
Yurovsky,  his  assistant,  two  members  of  the  Extraordina 
Commission,  and  seven  Letts.  Yurovsky  ordered  me  to  lea^ 
saj'ing  :  '  Go  into  the  street,  see  if  there  is  anybody  there,  a] 
wait  and  see  whether  the  shots  have  been  heard.'  I  we 
out  to  the  court,  which  was  enclosed  by  a  fence,  but  before 
got  to  the  street  I  heard  the  firing.  I  returned  to  the  hou 
immediately  (only  two  or  three  minutes  having  elapsed),  a; 
upon  entering  the  room  where  the  execution  had  taken  plac 
I  saw  that  all  the  members  of  the  Tsar's  family  were  lying 
the  floor  with  many  wounds  in  their  bodies.  The  blood  Vi 
running  in  streams.  The  doctor,  the  maid  and  two  waitf 
had  also  been  shot.  When  I  entered  the  heir  was  still  ali 
and  moaned  a  little.  Yurovsky  went  up  and  fired  two  or  thi 
more  times  at  him.     Then  the  heir  was  still. 

The  sight  of  the  murder  and  the  smell  of  blood  made  ] 
sick.  Before  the  assassination,  when  Yurovsky  distributed  t 
revolvers,  he  gave  me  one,  but,  as  I  said  before,  T  did  not  ta 
any  part  in  the  murder.  After  the  assassination  Yurovsky  t( 
me  to  bring  some  guards  to  wash  away  the  blood  in  the  roc 
On  the  way  to  Popov's  house  I  met  two  of  the  Senior  Guar 
Ivan  Starkov  and  Constan+in  Dobrynin.     They  were  runnj 


THE   EXAMINATION   OF   PAVEL   MEDVEDEV      291 

the  direction  of  Ipatiev's  house.  Dobrynin  asked  me  : 
ias  Nicholas  II  been  sliot  ?  '  1  answered  that  Nicholas  II 
id  the  whole  of  his  family  had  been  shot.     I  brousfht  twelve 

fifteen  guards  back  with  me  to  the  house.  These  men 
Tried  the  dead  bodies  out  to  the  motor-lorry  that  waited  near 
e  entrance,  and  the  bodies  were  placed  on  stretchers  made 
5m  bedsheets  and  shafts  of  sledges  taken  from  the  yard, 
hen  they  were  loaded  on  the  truck  they  were  wrapped  in 
Idiers'  clothing.  The  driver's  name  was  Luhanov,  a  Zlokazov 
Drkman.  The  members  of  the  Extraordinary  Commission 
t  on  the  lorry  and  the  truck  drove  off.  I  do  not  know  in 
tiat  direction  the  lorry  went,  neither  do  I  know  where  the 
)dies  were  taken. 

The  blood  in  the  room  was  washed  away  and  everything 
as  put  in  order.  At  three  o'clock  in  the  morning  all  was 
nished,  Yurovsky  went  to  his  room  and  I  went  back  to  the 
lard-room. 

I  woke  up  shortly  after  eight  o'clock  and  went  to  the  com- 
andant's  room.  1  met  there  Beloborodov,  the  President  of 
le  District  Soviet,  Commissar  Goloshchekin,  and  Ivan  Starkov ; 
le  last-named  was  on  duty  (he  was  selected  as  Senior  Guard 
vo  or  three  weeks  before).  All  the  rooms  in  the  house  were 
I  disorder.  Things  were  scattered  about  ever5rwhere.  Suit- 
ises  and  trunks  were  open.  Piles  of  gold  and  silver  articles 
ere  lying  on  the  tables  in  the  commandant's  room.  Objects 
:  jewellery  which  had  been  taken  away  from  the  members  of 
le  Tsar's  family  just  before  the  murder,  were  also  there  ;  as 
ell  as  things  that  were  found  on  them  after  their  death,  such 
3  bracelets,  ear-rings  and  watches.  The  valuables  were  put 
I  trunks  brought  from  the  coach-house.  The  assistant  com- 
landant  was  present.  In  one  of  the  rooms  1  found  six  ten- 
)uble  bank-notes  under  the  Holy  Bible  and  I  appropriated 
lem.     I  also  took  several  silver  rings  and  a  few  other  trifles. 

On  the  morning  of  the  i8th  my  wife  arrived  and  I  went 


292         THE  LAST   DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

with  her  to  the  Sissert  Works.  I  was  instructed  to  distribu 
wages  to  the  families  of  the  guards.  On  July  21  I  returned  1 
Ekaterinburg.  All  the  Tsar's  belongings  had  been  alreac 
removed  from  the  house,  and  the  guards  had  been  relieve 
On  July  21  I  left  Ekaterinburg  with  Mrachkovsky,  the  Con 
missar.  In  Perm  Commissar  Goloshchekin  assigned  me  to  tl 
party  in  charge  of  guarding  our  preparations  for  the  destru 
tion  of  the  stone  bridge  in  case  of  the  appearance  of  the  Whi 
troops.  I  had  not  time  to  blow  up  the  bridge  according 
my  instructions,  but  I  did  not  really  wish  to  do  it,  as  I  wishe 
to  surrender  voluntarily.  I  received  the  order  to  blow  i 
the  bridge  when  it  was  under  fire  of  the  Siberian  troops,  ar 
I  surrendered  voluntarily. 

In  answer  to  your  question  as  to  where  the  bodies  of  tl 
Imperial  Family  were  taken,  I  can  only  state  the  following 
On  the  way  from  Ekaterinburg  railway  station  to  Alapaievs 
I  met  Peter  Ermakov  and  asked  him  where  the  bodies  had  be( 
carried  to.  Ermakov  explained  that  the  bodies  had  be( 
thrown  down  the  shaft  of  a  mine  near  the  Verkh-Isetsk  Wort 
and  that  the  shaft  had  afterwards  been  destroyed  by  boml 
or  explosives  in  order  to  fill  it  up.  I  do  not  know,  and  I  nev 
heard  anything  concerning  the  wood  piles  that  were  burn( 
near  the  shaft.  I  do  not  know  anything  more  about  the  wher 
abouts  of  the  bodies.  It  did  not  interest  me  who  were  respo: 
sible  for  the  fate  of  the  Tsar's  Family  and  who  had  the  rig] 
to  dispose  of  their  lives.  I  only  carried  out  the  orders  of  the 
in  whose  service  I  was. 

The  above  is  all  that  I  can  tell  in  reference  to  the  accusatic 
made  against  me.  I  cannot  say  more.  My  testimony  h 
been  read  to  me  and  it  is  taken  correctly. 

{Signed)  Medvedev. 

The  Member  of  the  Ekaterinburg  Tribunal, 
{Signed)  J.  Sergeiev. 


THE  EXAMINATION   OF   PAVEL  MEDVEDEV    293 

Resolution. 
On  February  22,  1919,  in  the  town  of  Ekaterinburg,  the 
ember  of  the  District  Tribunal,  Sergeiev,  having  questioned 
e  peasant,  Pavel  Medvedev,  prosecuted  in  the  capacity  of 
ing  an  accomplice  in  the  assassination  of  the  former  Emperor 
id  the  members  of  his  family,  and  having  adopted  measures 
prevent  his  escape  from  further  inquiry,  has  found  : — 
(i)  That  he  is  indicted  for  a  crime  and  is  liable  to  a  very 
rious  penalty. 

(2)  That  Medvedev  before  having  been  arrested,  was  in 
ding  with  the  Red  Army ;  and  previous  to  that,  he  escaped 
Dm  Ekaterinburg  just  before  the  said  town  was  taken  by 
Dvernment  troops.  On  these  counts  it  was  resolved  to  put 
ivel  Medvedev,  aged  thirty-one  years,  under  arrest  in  the 
katerinburg  prison. 

The  Member  of  the  Ekaterinburg  District  Court, 

{Signed)  J.  Sergeiev. 


THE  EXAMINATION  OF  PHILIP  PROSKURIAKO^ 

THE  deposition  of  Philip  Proskuriakov  possesses  a  certai 
amount  of  psychological  interest  as  the  testimony  c 
a  lad  of  seventeen  who  was  suddenly  confronted  with  deat 
in  one  of  its  most  violent  and  terrible  forms.  Proskuriako 
appears  to  have  been  a  clever,  restless  youth  with  a  distast 
for  settled  employment,  who  probably  enlisted  in  the  Worli 
men  Guards  solely  in  the  spirit  of  adventure. 

His  story  of  the  murder  of  the  Imperial  Family  is  mor 
horrible  than  the  accounts  given  by  the  older  men.  Pros 
kuriakov's  love  of  the  morbid  and  his  slightly  decadent  men 
tality  are  plainly  shown  in  his  account  of  the  events  of  the  nigh1 
when  he  was  awakened  from  a  drunken  sleep  and  ordered  t 
proceed  to  that  sinister  buUet-riddled  room  on  the  grouni 
floor  of  Ipatiev's  house  where  the  blood  of  Innocence  cried  t 
Heaven.  But  his  minute  attention  to  many  of  the  ghastl; 
and  often  irrelevant  details  is  valuable  as  documentary  evi 
dence,  as  it  goes  to  prove  most  conclusively  that  these  thing 
actually  happened,  and  were  retained  as  they  happened  in  th 
mind  of  a  person  whose  neurotic  temperament  enabled  hin 
to  remember  them  accurately  and  vividly. 

From  the  first  to  the  third  day  of  April,  1919,  the  Investigat 
ing  Magistrate  for  Cases  of  Special  Importance  of  the  Omsl 
Tribunal,  N.  A.  Sokoloff,  in  conformity  with  Paragraph: 
403-409  of  the  Code  of  Criminal  Procedure,  examined  the  under 
mentioned  man,  in  the  town  of  Ekaterinburg,  in  the  capacit) 
of  an  accused  person,  who  deposed  : — 

294 


HE  EXAMINATION  OF  PHILIP  PROSKURIAKOV  295 

My  name  is 

Philip  Poliektov  Proskuriakov. 

At  the  time  when  the  crime  was  committed  I  was  seventeen 
jars  of  age  ;  I  am  a  Russian  peasant,  I  belong  to  the  Ortho- 
)x  Church,  and  I  am  unmarried.  For  three  years  I  attended 
le  Sissert  Five  Class  School.  My  speciality  is  electrical  fit- 
ngs.  In  answer  to  your  questions,  I  reply  as  follows  : — 
For  many  years  my  father  acted  as  a  foreman  in  the  Iron 
'^orks,  and  resided  all  the  time  in  the  Sissert  Iron  Works. 
hiis  was  my  birthplace.  I  did  not  complete  my  studies  in 
le  Sissert  School,  but  only  studied  there  for  three  years. 

was  very  difficult  for  me  to  learn  anything,  as  my  father 
11  ill  and  took  me  away  from  school.     At  first  he  placed  me 

the  blacksmith's  shop  at  the  factory,  to  learn  the  trade, 
hich  I  was  taught  by  Vasily  Afanasevich  Belonosov.  I  left 
ter  I  had  worked  for  about  a  year  in  the  shop,  as  I  found 
lis  kind  of  work  was  too  hard  for  me.  My  eldest  brother 
)tained  a  situation  for  me  in  the  Palais  Royal  Theatre, 
here  I  began  to  fit  myself  for  the  position  of  electrician.  I 
ayed  there  about  a  year,  and  as,  by  that  time,  I  had  learned 
mething  about  electricity,  I  started  in  business  for  myself, 
iter  I  obtained  a  position  in  the  Central  Electric  Plant  in 
katerinburg.  I  worked  there  for  about  a  month,  and  just 
;fore  Easter,  1918,  I  went  home. 

I  remember  quite  well  that  on  May  9  I  met  a  friend  of 
ine,  Ivan  Semenov  Talapov,  in  the  Bazaar.  He  told  me  that 
certain  Commissar,  named  Mrachkovsky,  had  started  recruit- 
g  amongst  our  workmen  for  a  special  detachment  to  guard 
e  Tsar.  Personally,  I  did  not  see  Mrachkovsky.  I  only 
lard  that  he  was  in  command  of  some  troops  fighting  against 
atov — from  whence  he  had  come  here.  I  told  my  father 
lat  Talapov  had  said,  but  both  my  father  and  my  mother 
L vised  me  not  to  enlist.      My  father's  words  were  :  '  Philip, 


296         THE   LAST   DAYS   OF   THE    ROMANOVS        | 

don't  go;  think  it  well  over.'  But  I  was  anxious  to  see  th 
Tsar,  so  I  ignored  my  father's  advice  and  the  next  day  I  enlistee 
My  enlistment  took  place  in  the  house  of  Vasily  Erkov,  whic^ 
is  on  the  Tzerkovnaia  Street,  close  to  the  Soviet,  and  was  cor 
firmed  by  one  of  our  Sissert  workmen,  Paul  Spiridonov  Med 
vedev,  who  told  me  that  we  were  to  be  paid  four  hundred  rouble 
per  month  to  perform  sentry  duty,  but  that  we  should  not  b 
allowed  to  go  to  sleep  whilst  doing  so  !  Such  were  the  condi 
tions  explained  to  me,  and  I  enlisted  at  once. 

I  heard  at  the  time  that  thirty  of  the  Sissert  workmen  ha* 
enlisted.  Later,  some  of  them  withdrew,  but  the  number  c 
those  who  did  so  was  small,  and  they  were  replaced  by  othe 
workmen  from  our  factory. 

Eleven  of  the  first  thirty  men,  so  I  was  told,  belonged  t 
the  Bolshevik  Communist  Party. 

In  the  second  half  of  May  we  arrived  at  Ekaterinburg 
At  first  we  were  all  quartered  in  the  new  '  Gostiny-Dvor 
(Bazaar  House),  where  the  soldiers  of  the  Red  Army  were  als 
located.  We  stayed  there  a  few  days  without  doing  any  worl 
At  the  end  of  May  we  were  transferred  to  the  Ipatiev  hous 
where  the  Tsar's  family  lived.  We  were  placed  in  rooms  o 
the  ground  floor. 

Alexander  Moshkin,  formerly  a  workman  of  the  Zlokaza 
Factory,  was  in  charge  of  the  house,  and  our  detachment  wa 
under  his  orders.  Medvedev  was  Senior  Guard  in  our  part} 
He  was  our  Chief.  Nobody  had  elected  him,  but  he  had  bee 
in  charge  of  our  party  from  the  beginning,  and  he  gave  us  on 
pay  and  changed  the  sentries.  Our  pay  was  four  hundre 
roubles  per  month,  but  Medvedev  received  six  hundrec 
Avdeiev  remained  in  the  house  all  the  time  and  occupied  th 
commandant's  room.  He  usually  arrived  at  nine  o'cloc 
a.m.  and  left  at  nine  o'clock  p.m.  Moshkin  always  stayed  i 
the  commandant's  room.  Medvedev  also  stayed  in  the  sam 
room  with  these  two  men  and  spent  the  night  there. 


E  EXAMINATION  OF  PHILIP  PROSKURIAKOV  297 

'he  sentry  posts  were  as  follows  :  (i)  The  sentry-box  near 
gate.  (2)  The  sentry-box  near  the  chapel  (shrine).  (3) 
;  post  between  two  fences,  by  the  window  of  the  house. 
A  post  in  the  front  court,  near  the  entrance  to  the  house. 
A  post  in  the  back  court.  (6)  A  post  in  the  garden.  (7)  A 
t  at  the  entrance  room  of  the  upper  floor,  by  the  comman- 
it's  room.  (8)  A  post  near  the  lavatory,  where  the  lavatory 
[  the  bath-room  were  located.  Besides  these  there  were 
se  sentry  posts  with  machine-guns.  (9)  A  post  beside  the 
.c  window.  (10)  A  post  on  the  terrace  facing  the  garden, 
)  A  post  in  the  middle  room  on  the  ground  floor. 
Ve  had  performed  our  duties  about  a  week  when  Avdeiev 
ught  up  about  fifteen  more  men — all  workmen  of  the  Zloka- 
Factory.  I  suppose  he  did  this  because  he  thought  we 
e  overworked,  as  we  were  obliged  to  be  on  duty  four  hours 
I  time ;  it  was  generally  raining,  and  we  were  not  accustomed 
this  sort  of  duty. 

rhe  Zlokazov  workmen  lived  with  us  in  the  upper  floor, 
sre  were  not  any  women  in  our  detachment,  we  had  our  own 
le  cooks,  who  prepared  our  food.  At  first  Ivan  Kategov 
3  the  cook,  but  later  he  was  replaced  by  Andrew  Starkov. 
\.i  the  end  of  June,  or  maybe  at  the  beginning  of  July, 
shkin  was  arrested  by  Avdeiev,  as  he  was  suspected  of 
aling  a  small  gold  cross  belonging  to  the  Tsar.  At  the  same 
le  Avdeiev  was  also  dismissed  and  replaced  by  Yurovsky. 
<ulin  was  appointed  as  his  assistant. 

[  do  not  know  who  Yurovsky  and  Nikulin  were.  Both  of 
;m  arrived  at  the  house  together.  They  always  remained 
the  commandant's  room.  Yurovsky  arrived  in  the  morn- 
[  at  eight  or  nine  o'clock  and  left  at  five  or  six  in  the  after- 
on.  Nikulin  practically  lived  in  the  commandant's  room, 
d  spent  the  night  there.  Medvedev  also  continued  to  spend 
3  night  in  the  same  room. 
About  a  week  after  Yurovsky  and  Nikulin  had  taken  up 


298         THE   LAST  DAYS  OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

their  duties,  the  Sissert  and  Zlokazov  workmen  were  transferre 
to  the  Popov  (or  Obukov)  house,  which  was  opposite  the  Ip; 
tiev  house.  The  lower  floor  of  the  Ipatiev  house  was  the 
occupied  by  Letts,  who  were  about  ten  in  number. 

Before  the  arrival  of  the  Letts  all  sentry  duties  were  pe 
formed  exclusively  by  the  Sissert  workmen.  After  the 
arrival  all  the  posts  on  the  upper  floor  (where  the  Tsar 
family  lived)  were  taken  by  Letts.  We  Russian  workmc 
were  not  allowed  to  go  near  the  upper  floor.  Such  were  tl 
orders  of  Yurovsky. 

The  machine-gun  teams,  who  performed  no  other  duty  tha 
that  connected  with  the  machine-guns,  were  composed  of  oi 
own  Sissert  workmen. 

At  the  time  when  Avdeiev  was  Chief,  all  the  other  pos 
were  occupied  by  the  rest  of  the  workmen.  But  after  tl 
arrival  of  Yurovsky  and  the  Letts,  we  began  only  to  occup 
the  posts  outside  the  house.  All  posts  inside  the  house  we: 
assigned  to  the  Letts.  Before  the  arrival  of  the  Letts  I  carrie 
out  my  sentry  duties  inside  the  house  for  about  six  time 
keeping  guard  by  the  commandant's  room  and  the  lavator 
I  performed  this  duty  in  the  morning,  during  the  day,  and  i 
the  evening,  and  the  night.  I  saw  all  the  Imperial  FamiJ 
when  I  was  on  duty.  I  was  able  to  see  them  quite  closely  whe 
they  went  for  a  walk  or  passed  from  one  room  to  anothe 
They  all  used  to  walk  in  the  garden,  with  the  exception  of  tl 
Empress,  who  I  never  saw  in  the  garden.  The  Tsarevich 
only  saw  once,  when  he  was  being  carried  by  Olga,  the  olde: 
daughter  of  the  Emperor.     The  Tsarevich  was  ill  all  the  tim* 

I  can  tell  you  something  about  the  way  in  which  they  spei 
their  time  from  what  Medvedev  told  me,  as  he  saw  them  more  fn 
quently  than  I  did.  They  got  up  at  about  eight  or  nine  o'cloc 
in  the  morning,  and  then  they  all  assembled  in  one  room  fc 
family  prayers.  They  had  dinner  at  three  o'clock.  They  a 
dined  in  one  room  ;    but  by  this  I  mean  to  say  they  dine 


E  EXAMINATION  OF  PHILIP  PROSKURIAKOV  299 

h  the  servants  who  had  remained  with  them.  At  nine 
ock  in  the  evening  they  had  supper  and  tea,  after  that 
y  went  to  bed.  According  to  the  words  of  Medvedev, 
y  occupied  themselves  in  the  following  way  :  The  Emperor 
i,  the  Empress  also  read,  or  else  she  and  her  daughters 
)roidered  or  knitted.  The  Tsarevich  (when  he  was  able) 
ie  little  wire  chains  for  his  toy  ship.     They  walked  every 

for  about  an  hour,  or  an  hour  and  a  half.  They  were  not 
wed  to  take  any  other  physical  exercise.  I  remember 
:  Pashka  Medvedev  once  told  me  that  the  Tsar  Nicholas 
*candrovich  asked  Yurovsky's  permission  to  work  in  the 
ien  ;  but  Yurovsky  forbade  him  to  do  it. 
heard  them  singing  several  times,  but  they  only  sang  sacred 
js.  On  Sundays  they  had  divine  service,  which  was  per- 
led  by  a  priest  and  a  deacon,  who  I  think  came  from  the 
tme-Vosnesensky  Church. 

t  first  the  food  was  brought  for  them  by  two  women  from 
oviet  dining-room.  Their  cook  heated  it.  Later,  they 
i  allowed  to  have  their  food  prepared  in  the  house, 
esides  the  Imperial  Family  there  lived  with  them  in  the 
sr  floor  the  following  persons,  all  of  whom  I  have  seen, 
re  was  the  doctor,  a  stout  man,  with  grey  hair,  aged  about 
-five.     He  wore  spectacles,  with,  so  far  as  I  can  remember, 

rims.  There  was  a  waiter,  aged  about  thirty-five,  tall, 
,  and  dark.  A  cook  also  stayed  with  them.  He  was  aged 
/,  short,  thin,  and  a  little  bald  ;  his  hair  was  black  and  he 
a  black  moustache.  There  was  also  a  maid,  aged  about 
I,  tall,  thin,  and  dark  ;  I  did  not  see  the  colour  of  her  hair, 
use  she  always  tied  a  handkerchief  over  her  head.  There 
also  a  boy  aged  about  fifteen,  his  hair  was  black,  and  he 
!  it  parted,  his  nose  was  long,  and  his  eyes  were  black, 
vo  other  men  stayed  with  the  Imperial  Family,  but,  as 
vedev  explained  to  me,  they  were  servants.  One  of  them 
a  tall,  thin  man  aged  about  thirty-five,  with  light,  red 


300         THE  LAST  DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 


I 


hair,  who  wore  no  beard,  but  who  trimmed  his  moustacl 
neatly  ;  his  nose  was  medium  size  and  straight ;  I  don 
remember  any  other  distinguishing  marks,  but  his  skin  was  ; 
clear  and  delicate  as  a  woman's.  The  other  man  was  aL 
tall,  his  age  was  about  thirty,  and  his  hair  was  black.  He  w; 
clean  shaven.  The  first  man  wore  a  black  jacket,  trouse 
and  shoes.  The  second  man  wore  a  jacket,  a  stiff  shirt  wii 
a  tie,  trousers  and  shoes.  I  only  saw  these  men  once  wh( 
I  was  on  guard  in  the  house  during  the  first  days.  After  th 
I  did  not  see  them  again.  Medvedev  told  me  that  both 
them  had  been  taken  to  Number  Two  Prison,  but  I  was  n 
told  the  reason,  and  I  was  not  interested  in  knowing  it.  ( 
several  occasions  I  have  seen  the  Bolshevik  Beloborodov,  w] 
came  to  the  house  to  watch  the  doings  of  the  Imperial  Fami] 
Anyhow,  I  was  told  by  Medvedev  that  this  was  the  reason 
his  visits.  I  observed  Beloborodov  very  distinctly.  He  look 
about  twenty-five,  he  was  of  medium  height,  thin,  and  his  fa 
was  pale.  Beloborodov  visited  the  house  while  Avdeiev  w 
on  duty  as  weU  as  when  Yurovsky  took  his  place. 

Regarding  the  restrictions  and  treatment  of  the  Empei 
and  his  family  by  the  executives  and  guards,  I  can  conscie 
tiously  depose  as  follows  :  Avdeiev  was  a  workman  of  pc 
mental  development  who  often  was  in  a  state  of  intoxicatio 
but  neither  he  nor  the  guards  persecuted  or  wronged  t 
Imperial  Family.  Yurovsky  and  Nikulin  behaved  very  d 
ferently.  During  their  time  the  Imperial  Family  suffered  mo 
They  both  used  to  drink  to  excess  in  the  commandant's  roo 
and  they  sang  horrible  songs  whilst  in  a  state  of  intoxicati( 
Nikulin  played  the  piano  (that  was  in  the  commandan 
room),  and  sometimes  when  Nikulin  was  playing  and  Yurc 
sky's  eyes  were  bleared  with  drink,  they  both  started  yelli 
out  songs,  such  as  '  Let  us  Forget  the  Old  World  ;  Let 
Shake  its  Dust  from  our  Feet,'  '  We  do  not  Need  a  Gold 
Idol,'  '  We  abhor  the  Tsar's  Palace,'  and  so  on.     Occasi( 


I  EXAMINATION  OF  PHILIP  PROSKURIAKOV  301 

they  sang,  '  You  Died  as  the  Victim  of  a  Struggle.' 
hkin  also  sang  these  songs,  but  only  in  the  absence  of 
eiev,  who  knew  nothing  about  their  doings,  but  the  first 
men  took  life  easily.  In  Avdeiev's  time  women  never 
:red  the  house,  but  Nikuhn  had  a  mistress  who  came  to 
him  and  stayed  with  him  after  Yurovsky's  departure.  She 
a  blonde,  aged  about  twenty,  and  she  was  short  and  stout ; 
eyes  were  brown  and  her  nose  was  small  and  straight.  I 
Lot  know  her  name.  I  don't  know  where  she  lived  or  from 
nee  she  came.  Medvedev  told  nothing  about  her.  At 
time  of  Yurovsky,  divine  service  was  performed  less  fre- 
itly. 

he  behaviour  of  the  guards  under  Yurovsky  became  much 
■>e.  Faika  Safonov,  in  particular,  behaved  most  indecently, 
re  was  only  one  lavatory  for  the  Imperial  Family,  and 
the  walls  near  this  lavatory  Faika  Safonov  scribbled  all 
3  of  bad  words,  which  were  very  much  out  of  place.  He  was 
seen  scribbling  those  words  on  the  walls  near  the  lavatory 
A.lexeiev,  who  was  on  duty  on  the  upper  floor  with  him 
ka  occupied  the  post  near  the  lavatory  and  Alexeiev  that 
•  the  commandant's  room).  When  Alexeiev  came  off 
/  he  told  us  everything  about  it.  Once  Faika  climbed  the 
e  which  was  quite  close  to  the  windows  of  the  Emperor's 
ns  and  began  to  shout  out  all  sorts  of  low  songs, 
ndrew  Strekotin  drew  indecent  pictures  on  the  walls  of 
lower  room.  Belomoin  participated  in  the  drawing  and 
aughed  and  taught  Strekotin  how  to  draw  more  indecen- 
(I  have  personally  seen  Strekotin  drawing  those  things.) 
nee  when  I  was  walking  near  the  house  I  saw  Anastasia, 
youngest  daughter  of  the  Emperor,  looking  out  of  the  win- 
.  When  the  sentry  on  duty  noticed  her  he  fired  his  rifle, 
bullet  missed  her  and  lodged  in  the  woodwork  of  the  win- 
'  frame. 

II  these  things  were  known  to  Yurovsky,  but  when  Med- 


302         THE   LAST   DAYS   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

vedev    reported    Podkorytov    (the    sentry),    Yurovsky    c 
answered  :    '  They  must  not  look  out  of  the  window.' 

As  I  said  before,  from  the  time  the  Letts  joined  the  gua: 
they  hved  in  the  ground  floor  of  the  Ipatiev  house,  and 
workmen  were  all  transferred  to  the  house  opposite,  wl 
belonged  to  Popov  (or  Obukov).  In  this  house  we  occuj 
all  the  rooms  on  the  upper  floor ;  the  ground  floor  was  ta 
up  by  tenants. 

The  Zlokazov  workmen  were  placed  in  the  same  room! 
ourselves. 

The  last  time  I  saw  the  Imperial  Family  (except  the  Empe 
was  a  few  days  before  they  were  murdered.  On  that 
they  all  with  the  exception  of  the  Empress  went  for  a  v 
in  the  garden.  1  saw  the  Emperor,  his  son,  and  his  daugh 
Olga,  Maria,  Tatiana  and  Anastasia ;  there  were  also 
doctor,  the  waiter,  the  cook,  the  maid  and  the  boy.  I  not 
that  the  heir  wore  a  shirt  and  had  a  black  leather  belt  faste 
with  a  small  metal  buckle  round  his  waist.  I  saw  him  -< 
distinctly,  because  the  Grand  Duchess  Olga  carried  him  c 
by  where  1  was  standing.  The  heir  was  ill  and  the 
pushed  his  wheeled  chair.  I  cannot  tell  you  the  exact  ( 
when  I  saw  them  walking  in  the  garden.  But  it  was  not  ] 
before  their  death.  The  murder  took  place  in  the  n 
between  Tuesday  and  Wednesday,  but  I  do  not  remen 
the  date.  I  know  that  we  received  our  wages  on  Mom 
so  it  must  have  been  July  15,  reckoning  by  the  New  S1 
At  ten  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  July  16,  the  day  after 
received  our  pay,  I  was  standing  on  duty  by  the  sen 
box  near  to  the  Vosnesensky  Prospekt  and  the  Vosnesei 
Lane.  Egor  Stolov,  with  whom  I  shared  a  room,  was  on  ( 
in  the  lower  rooms  of  the  house.  After  we  had  finished 
shift  we  went  with  Stolov  to  get  some  drinks  at  85  Vodoch 
Street. 

We  returned  at  dusk,  as  we  had  to  go  on  duty  at  five  o'cl 


E  EXAMINATION  OF  PHILIP  PROSKURIAKOV  303 

Ivedev  saw  that  we  were  drunk,  and  put  us  under  arrest 
he  bath-house,  which  was  situated  in  the  yard  of  Popov's 
se.  We  soon  fell  asleep,  and  slept  until  3  a.m.  At  three 
ock  we  were  awakened  by  Medvedev,  who  said,  '  Get 
and  follow  me.'  We  asked  him  why  and  where  to,  but 
)nly  answered,  '  They  have  sent  for  you,  so  you  must  go.' 
n  sure  that  it  was  three  o'clock,  because  Stolov  had  a  watch, 
[  when  I  looked  at  this  it  was  exactly  three  o'clock.  We 
up  at  once  and  followed  Medvedev,  who  took  us  to  the 
and  floor  of  the  Ipatiev  house.  All  the  guards  were  pre- 
t,  except  those  who  were  on  duty.  There  was  a  cloud  of 
k^der  smoke  in  the  room,  which  smelt  strongly  of  gunpowder, 
the  back  room  with  the  barred  window,  close  to  the  store- 
m,  the  walls  and  floor  were  pierced  by  bullets.  In  one  wall 
re  was  a  large  number  of  bullet  holes,  and  there  were  also 
ew  bullet  marks  in  the  others.  There  were  no  m.arks  of 
^onet  strokes  on  the  walls.  In  the  places  where  the  walls 
I  the  floor  showed  the  marks  of  bullets,  there  was  also 
od,  and  there  were  splashes  and  spots  of  blood  on  the  walls 
I  pools  of  blood  on  the  floor.  There  were  drops  and  splashes 
Dlood  in  the  other  rooms  which  we  had  to  pass  on  the  way 
;k  to  the  courtyard.  It  was  obvious  that  just  before  our 
ival  a  large  number  of  people  had  been  shot  in  the  room 
h  the  barred  window.  After  I  had  seen  these  things  I 
jan  to  question  Medvedev  and  Strekotin.  They  told  me 
±  a  few  moments  before,  all  the  Imperial  Family  and  the 
)ple  attached  to  them  (except  the  boy)  had  been  shot, 
kledvedev  then  ordered  us  to  clean  up  the  rooms.  We 
jan  to  wash  the  floor,  and  it  was  necessary  to  use  several 
ps  in  order  to  wash  away  all  the  blood.  I  cannot  say  who 
)ught  the  mops,  and  Medvedev  also  ordered  some  sawdust 
be  brought.  We  washed  the  floor  with  cold  water  and 
vdust,  which  removed  the  blood-stains,  and  we  washed  off 
I  blood  on  the  walls  with  wet  rags.     All  the  workmen  took 


304         THE  LAST  DAYS  OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

part  in  the  cleaning,  except  those  who  were  on  duty.  A  numl 
of  men  did  the  cleaning  in  the  room  where  the  Imperial  Fam 
was  killed.  Amongst  others  I  saw  Medvedev  and  two  Lei 
I  also  helped  to  clean  this  room,  and  we  washed  the  blood  fr 
the  pavement  of  the  courtyard.  I  did  not  find  any  bulle 
I  do  not  know  whether  any  bullets  were  found  by  other  peo| 

When  Stolov  and  myself  came  down  to  the  lower   ro 
we  found  nobody  there  except  a  few  Letts.     Medvedev  2 
our  workmen  were  absent.     Nikulin  at  that  time,  accord 
to  Medvedev,  was  in  the  upper  room,  but  the  door  which 
to  the  lower  rooms  was  locked  from  the  inside. 

I  saw  no  gold  or  any  valuable  articles  which  had  been  tal 
from  the  bodies  of  the  murdered  people. 

But  I  have  suddenly  remembered  that,  on  the  Tuesc 
morning,  when  I  was  on  sentry  duty,  I  saw  Yurovsky  cc 
into  the  house  at  eight  o'clock  in  the  morning.  Some  ti 
after  his  arrival  Beloborodov  also  entered  the  house.  I  '. 
my  post  at  ten  o'clock  in  the  morning  ;  but  Medvedev  told 
afterwards  that  Yurovsky  and  Beloborodov  went  out  in 
automobile.  At  this  time  Nikulin  remained  in  the  hoi 
Yurovsky  and  Beloborodov  returned  before  evening.  Dur 
the  evening  Yurovsky  told  Medvedev  that  the  Imperial  Fan 
were  to  be  shot  during  the  night,  and  ordered  him  to  no1 
the  workmen  and  to  take  the  revolvers  from  the  sentries, 
had  almost  forgotten  to  tell  you  this. 

Matters  were  not  clear  to  me.  I  couldn't  tell  if  it  was 
true,  as  I  did  not  think  of  questioning  any  of  the  workni 
Personally  I  don't  understand  why  it  was  necessary  to  t; 
all  the  revolvers,  as,  according  to  Medvedev,  the  Impe 
Family  was  shot  by  the  Letts,  who  had  Nagan  revolv 
At  this  time  I  did  not  know  that  Yurovsky  was  a  Jew.  As 
was  the  instigator  of  the  crime,  he  may  have  selected  the  L< 
to  do  the  actual  killing,  having  more  confidence  in  them  tl 
in  us  Russians.     Perhaps  for  this  reason  he  wanted  to  disa 


I  EXAMINATION  OF  PHILIP  PROSKURIAKOV  305 

Russian  workmen  on  duty.  Medvedev  carried  out  Yu- 
ky's  order  and  took  the  revolvers  away  from  the  sentries, 
:h  he  gave  to  Yurovsky,  and  at  eleven  o'clock  in  the  evening 
lotified  the  workmen  that  the  Imperial  Family  was  going 
be  shot.  At  midnight  Yurovsky  awoke  the  Imperial 
lily,  and  requested  them  to  dress  and  go  down  to  the  lower 
n.  According  to  Medvedev,  Yurovsky  explained  to  the 
lerial  Family  that  there  might  be  danger  during  the  night, 
that  in  case  firing  were  to  take  place  in  the  streets,  it  would 
langerous  to  remain  in  the  upper  floors.  So  as  he  insisted 
n  everybody  coming  down,  they  fulfilled  his  request  and 
;ended  to  the  lower  room,  accompanied  by  Yurovsky, 
ulin  and  Beloborodov.  These  persons  were  the  Emperor, 
Empress,  the  heir,  the  four  daughters,  the  doctor,  the 
ter,  the  maid,  and  the  cook.   The  boy,  by  order  of  Yurovsky, 

been  transferred  to  the  rooms  where  we  were  quartered, 

I  saw  him  there  before  the  murder.  All  the  prisoners 
e  brought  into  the  room  which  bore  the  marks  of  bullets. 
y  stood  in  two  rows.  Yurovsky  commenced  to  read  a 
er.  The  Emperor  did  not  hear  very  well,  and  asked, 
hat  does  this  mean  ?  '  According  to  the  words  of  Medvedev, 
■ovsky  lifted  his  hand  with  the  revolver,  and  showing  it  to 

Emperor,  he  savagely  answered  '  This  ! '  '  Your  race 
it  cease  to  live,'  he  added. 

remember  that  when  Medvedev  told  me  about  the  paper 
ch  Yurovsky  read  to  the  Emperor,  he  called  it  a '  protocol.' 
ls  soon  as  Yurovsky  had  finished  speaking,  he,  Beloborodov, 
:ulin,  Medvedev  and  all  the  Letts  fired  at  the  Emperor  and 
n  began  to  shoot  at  everybody  else.  The  prisoners  all  fell 
d  or  wounded  on  the  floor.  Medvedev  told  me  himself  that 
shot  two  or  three  times  at  the  Emperor  and  several  of  the 
er  persons  whom  they  were  executing, 
dl  of  them  were  shot.  Alexander  Strekotin  told  me  himself 
,t  he  stripped  the  bodies  of  valuables,  but  his  spoil  was 


3o6         THE   LAST  DAYS  OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

taken  away  from  him  by  Yurovsky.  After  this  the  bod 
were  thrown  on  a  motor  lorry  and  taken  away  somewhe 
Yurovsky,  Belobodorov  and  a  number  of  Letts  ro4e  on  1 
lorry.     None  of  our  workmen  went  with  them. 

After  we  had  finished  cleaning  the  rooms  we  went  into  to 
with  Stolov,  and  sauntered  about  until  evening.  We  did  i 
meet  any  of  our  acquaintances,  and  we  did  not  tell  anybc 
about  the  murder.  In  the  evening  we  came  back  to  ( 
quarters  and  had  some  food,  and  then  slept.  At  six  o'clock 
the  morning  of  Thursday,  July  i8,  Medvedev  ordered  me 
duty  to  a  post  inside  the  house  by  the  Commandant's  roc 
Ever  since  the  arrival  of  the  Letts  not  a  single  workman  t 
ever  been  allowed  to  do  sentry  duty  inside  the  house  whilst  i 
Imperial  Family  was  still  alive,  but  now,  after  they  had  b( 
killed,  we  were  again  ordered  on  duty  inside  the  house. 

There  was  no  sentry  near  the  lavatory.  Yurovsky,  NikuJ 
Medvedev  and  the  Letts  were  already  in  the  house  whei 
took  up  my  post.  There  were  none  of  our  workmen  and  n< 
of  Zlokazov's.  I  well  remember  that  when  I  came  to  my  p 
Yurovsky  was  in  the  house.  Probably  he  had  spent  the  nij 
there.  They  were  ransacking  the  Emperor's  belongings  h 
great  hurry  and  they  were  packing  up  all  the  things  t. 
could  possibly  be  packed.  I  could  not  hear  the  conversat 
between  Yurovsky,  Nikulin  and  Medvedev.  They  were 
calm,  but  I  had  the  impression  that  Yurovsky  and  Niki 
were  slightly  intoxicated. 

During  the  day  nothing  was  taken  away,  and  only  the  pa 
ing  went  on. 

After  I  left  my  post  I  went  to  the  guard-room  where  I  sle 
and  ate,  and  then  I  went  to  see  my  brother  Alexander  \ 
was  in  the  militia.  I  did  not  tell  my  brother  anything  ab 
the  murder.  I  sauntered  around  the  town  until  the  even 
and  then  I  returned  to  our  quarters.  In  the  guard-rc 
Medvedev  told  us  that  we  were  to  leave  Ekaterinburg. 


E  EXAMINATION  OF  PHILIP  PROSKURIAKOV  307 

n  July  19  we  were  sent  to  the  station  at  Ekaterinburg. 

party  was  told  off  to  guard  the  staff  of  the  Third  Red 
ly.  The  staff  was  quartered  in  railway-cars  and  we  were 
ioned  by  them.  At  this  time  I  saw  the  Emperor's  property 
ed  on  trucks  and  shipped  to  the  station ;  it  was  the  same 
age  that  had  been  previously  packed  in  handbags  and 
iks. 

also  saw  Yurovsky's  departure.  He  left  during  the  night 
uly  21,  and  proceeded  towards  Perm.  His  family  and 
alin  accompanied  him.  All  the  Letts  who  had  lived  in  the 
iev  house  and  who  had  killed  the  Imperial  Family  left 
I  Yurovsky.  We  went  away  from  Ekaterinburg  with  the 
■  of  the  Third  Army,  when  the  town  was  already  occupied  by 
Siberian  forces.  We  then  went  to  Perm,  but  when  General 
sliaiev's  troops  were  about  to  take  Perm,  the  staff  of  the 
d  Army  and  all  our  workmen  left  Perm  and  proceeded 
irds  Viatka.  But  I  remained  in  Perm,  and  afterwards  I 
rned  to  Ekaterinburg  and  stopped  with  my  brother 
:ander.     The  secret  service  learned  of  my  presence,  and  I 

ordered  to  report  myself  at  the  police-station,  where  an 
rly  ofificial  began  to  question  me.  I  was  very  much  afraid 
I  began  to  lie,  saying  that  I  had  never  been  amongst  the 
ds  of  the  Imperial  Family.  Afterwards,  I  confessed  that 
s  one  of  the  guards,  but  I  denied  all  knowledge  of  anything 
Now  I  have  told  you  everything  that  I  know  about  this 
ter. 

fully  realize  how  wrong  I  was  not  to  follow  the  advice 
ly  father  and  mother,  and  to  have  enlisted  in  the  guards. 
'  I  realize  what  a  wicked  action  it  was  to  kill  the  Imperial 
ily,  and  I  understand  that  I  was  wrong  in  washing  out  the 
d-stains.  I  am  not  a  Bolshevik,  and  I  never  was  one. 
chat  I  did,  I  did  because  of  my  youth  and  stupidity.  If 
lid  help  to  find  the  people  who  committed  the  murder,  I 
Id  spare  no  efforts  to  do  so. 


3o8       THE  LAST  DAYS   OF  THE  ROMANOVS 

All  the  workmen  on  duty  had  Nagan  revolvers,  which  1 
been  distributed  by  Medvedev  a  few  days  before  the  mure 
Yurovsky  carried  a  Browning  pistol,  Medvedev  a  Xa§ 
revolver. 

I  don't  know  what  happened  to  the  boy  who  waited  on 
Imperial  Family,  and  who  was  transferred  to  our  quart 
before  the  murder.  He  slept  on  my  bed  and  I  spoke  to  h: 
I  don't  know  if  he  knew  about  the  murder  of  the  Impei 
Family.  He  did  not  cry  and  we  did  not  talk  to  him  about 
murder.  He  told  me  that  the  Commandant  intended  to  se 
him  home,  and  he  mentioned  some  district  or  other,  but  1  hj 
forgotten  the  name.  At  the  time  he  complained  that  Yurovs 
had  taken  away  his  clothes.  I  cannot  name  any  particu 
man  out  of  the  Letts. 

When  I  was  on  duty  inside  the  house,  I  never  saw  the  E 
press  enter  the  Commandant's  room.  I  think  she  never  wi 
inside  it,  as  Yurovsky  treated  them  so  badly.  H  the  Emprei 
rosary  was  found  in  the  Commandant's  room,  it  was  m 
probably  left  there  and  forgotten  at  the  time  of  packing. 

The  Emperor  usually  wore  a  grey  or  black  jacket  witl 
stand-up  collar.  He  always  wore  boots  and  his  beard  was  g 
ting  very  grey.  When  the  Grand  Duchesses  walked  in  ■ 
garden  they  wore  summer  clothes,  chiefly  blouses  and  ski 
of  various  colours. 

I  cannot  remember  anything  more.  My  statement  has  b( 
read  to  me  and  it  is  correct. 

(Signed)  Philip  Proskuriakov. 
(Signed)    N,  Sokolov, 

Present  at  the  examination 
(Signed)  Yordansky,  Public  Prosecutor 


Appendix 


IE  MEMBERS  OF  THE  IMPERIAL  FAMILY  AT  THE 
OUTBREAK  OF  THE  REVOLUTION 

1.  Nicholas  II,  Alexandre vich,  Emperor  of  Russia,  eldest  son 
of  the  Emperor  Alexander  III,  bom  in  Gachino  (near  Peters- 
burg) on  May  6  (19),  1867.  Ascended  to  the  throne  on  October 
20,  1894.  Married  Princess  Alice  of  Hesse  on  November  14, 
1894.  At  the  outbreak  of  the  Revolution  he  was  forty-nine 
years  of  age. 

2.  Empress  Alexandra  (Princess  Alice)  Feodorovna,  the  wife 
of  the  Emperor  Nicholas  II,  bom  Princess  Alexandra  of  Hesse 
on  May  25,  1872.  At  the  outbreak  of  the  Revolution  she  was 
forty-four  years  of  age. 

3.  The  Grand  Duchess  Olga  Nikolaievna,  the  Emperor's 
oldest  daughter,  born  on  November  3,  1895. 

4.  The  Grand  Duchess  Tatiana  Nikolaievna,  the  Emperor's 
second  daughter,  born  on  May  29,  1897. 

5.  The  Grand  Duchess  Maria  Nikolaievna,  the  Emperor's 
third  daughter,  born  June  14,  1899. 

6.  The  Grand  Duchess  Anastasia  Nikolaievna,  the  Emperor's 
youngest  daughter,  bom  on  June  5,  1901. 

7.  The  Grand  Duke  Alexis  Nikolaievich,  the  Emperor's  only 
son  and  heir  to  the  crown,  born  July  30,  1904. 

8.  The  Grand  Duke  Michael  Alexandrovich,  the  Emperor's 
brother,  who  was  considered  the  heir  to  the  throne  before 
the  birth  of  Alexis  Nikolaievich.     Born  November  22,  1872. 

CHRONOLOGY  OF  THE  DOCUMENTS 

1917 

ch  (2)  15.  The  Emperor  Nicholas  II  signed  the  act  of  abdica- 
tion, assigned  the  throne  to  the  Grand  Duke  Michael  Alex- 
androvich. 

ch  (3)  16.  The  Grand  Duke  Michael  Alexandrovich  refused 
the  succession  before  the  decision  of  the  Constituent  Assembly 
had  been  arrived  at. 

309 


310  APPENDIX 

March  (4)  17.     Arrival  of  the  deposed  Emperor  at  General  Head 

quarters. 
March  (7)  20.     General  Kornilov,  fulfilling  the  order  of  the  Gounci 

of  Ministers,  arrested  the  Empress  in  the  palace  of  Tsarskoe 

Selo. 
March  (8)   21.     Arrest  of  the  Emperor  by  a  Commissar  of  th 

Provisional  Government. 
March  (9)  22.     Arrival  of  the  Emperor  at  Tsarskoe-Selo. 
{July  31)  August  13.     Departure  of  the  Imperial  Family  for  Tobolsk 

according  to  the  orders  of  the  Provisional  Government,  unde: 

the  supervision  of  members  of  the  Petrograd  Soviet. 
August  (6)  19.     Arrival  of  the  Tsar  and  the  Imperial  Family  ai 

Tobolsk.     A  few  nights  were  spent  on  board  the  steamer 

before  they  were  taken  to  the  Governor's  house. 
{December  29)  January  11,  1918.     Uprising  of  soldiers  in  Tobolsk 

on  account  of  the  officiating  priest  reading  the  prayer  for  the 

prolongation  of  the  days  of  the  Imperial  Family. 

1918 

February  (12)  25.  Arrival  of  an  order  from  Moscow  reducing  the 
allowances  of  the  Imperial  Family  to  a  soldier's  ration.  The 
commencement  of  a  life  of  privation. 

{March  30)  April  12.  Arrival  of  an  order  from  Moscow  to  increase 
the  severity  of  the  supervision  of  the  Imperial  Family. 

April  (13)  26.  Departure  of  the  Emperor,  the  Empress  and  the 
Grand  Duchess  Maria  Nikolaievna  to  Ekaterinburg.  The 
other  daughters  and  the  Tsarevich  remained  in  Tobolsk. 

April  (17)  30.  Arrival  of  the  Emperor  and  the  persons  who  accom- 
panied him  at  Ekaterinburg.  Interned  in  Ipatiev's  house.  A 
search  of  the  Emperor's  belongings. 

{April  18)  May  i.  Dismissal  of  all  persons  attached  to  the  Imperial 
Family  with  the  exception  of  the  physician. 

May  (7)  20.     The  Tsarevich  and  Grand  Duchesses  left  Tobolsk  for 
Ekaterinburg. 
4*1     t     May  (10)  23.     Arrival  of  the  Tsarevich  and  Grand  Duchesses  at 


// 


9  -  \         .■  Ekaterinburg. 

"^  )  '^       j(^'   July  (4)  17.     The  last  day  of  life  of  the  Imperial  Family,  and  the 
9"*   y  last  walk  in  the  garden.     That  night  they  were  murdered  and 


^  C^  the  bodies  searched  and  removed  to  the  woods. 


EXPLANATION   OF  RUSSIAN  NAMES  MENTIONED 
IN  THE    DEPOSITIONS 

Kresty.     a  jail  in  Petrograd  where  political  prisoners  were  con- 
fined. 


APPENDIX  311 

0.  E.  C.  Central  Executive  Committee  of  the  All-Russian  Congress 
of  Workmen,  Soldiers'  and  Peasants'  Deputies.  The  most 
important  institution  in  the  Soviet  Republic. 

3HREZVYCHAIKA,  An  Extraordinary  Committee  of  Inquiry — an 
institution  of  secret  political  police  of  the  Soviet  Republic, 
which  exists  in  every  district  town.  Through  this  Institution, 
according  to  the  scheme  of  the  Bolsheviks,  the  reign  of  terror 
is  carried  out. 

5issert's  Mining  Works.  These  are  fifty  versts  from  Ekaterin- 
burg, and  produce  cast-iron,  iron,  marble  and  gold. 

MoTOViLiKHA  Works.  These  are  situated  on  the  River  Kama, 
three  miles  from  Perm.  From  thence  came  a  large  production 
of  war  material. 

FoBOLSK.  A  town  on  the  right  bank  of  the  River  Irtysh,  near  the 
mouth  of  the  River  Tobol ;  it  was  formerly  a  very  important 
town,  but  after  the  trans-Siberian  railroad  was  constructed,  it 
lost  its  importance  as  it  was  too  far  from  the  railroad. 

Znamensky — THE  Ikon  OF  THE  HoLY  ViRGiN.  A  Very  ancient 
holy  image  given  to  the  Tsar  Alexis  Michailovich  (the  second 
Tsar  of  the  Romanov  Dynasty)  by  the  patriarch  of  Antioch. 
In  honour  of  this  image  the  Empress  Elizabeth  Petrovna  built 
a  church  in  Tsarskoe-Selo. 

^ERKH-IssETSK  Iron  Works.  These  are  situated  about  half  a 
mile  from  Ekaterinburg. 

FHE  DOCUMENT  FROM  THE  CHAIRMAN  OF  THE  URAL 
SOVIET  ACKNOWLEDGING  THE  ARRIVAL  OF  THE 
EMPEROR    AT    EKATERINBURG 

The  Workmen  and  Peasants' 

Government 
OF  THE  Russian  Federative  Republic 

OF  Soviets 


Ural  District  Soviet 

of  the  Workmen, 
Peasants'  and  Soldiers'  Deputies 


Presidio 

Ekaterinburg,  April  30,  1918. 
On  the  30th  of  April,  1918,  I,  the  undersigned,  Chairman  of  the 
Ural  District  Soviet  of  Workmen's,   Peasants'  and  Soldiers'  De- 
puties,   Alexander    Georgevich    Beloborodov,    received    from    the 
Commissar  of  the  All-Russian  Central  Executive  Committee,  Vasily 


312  APPENDIX 

Vasilievich  Yakovlev,  the  following  persons  transferred  from  the 
town  of  Tobolsk  :    (i)  The  former  Tsar,  Nicholas  Alexandrovich 
Romanov  ;   (2)  former  Tsaritsa,  Alexandra  Feodorovna  Romanova ; 
(3)  former  Grand  Duchess — Maria  Nikolaievna  Romanova — all  of 
them  to  be  kept  under  guard  in  the  Town  of  Ekaterinburg. 
{Signed)  A.  Beloborodov. 
Member  of  District  Executive  Committee, 
(Signed)  D.  Didkovsky. 


ALPHABETICAL  INDEX  OF  NAMES 

Aksiuta,  Captain.  In  command  of  the  First  Rifle  Regiment  at 
Tsarskoe-Selo  ;  he  commanded  the  detachment  of  the  guards 
in  Tobolsk. 

Apraksin,  Count.  At  the  outbreak  of  the  Revolution  Count 
Apraksin  was  attached  to  the  household  of  the  Empress,  and 
was  in  charge  of  her  private  affairs. 

AvDEiEV,  Alexander.  Was  formerly  a  locksmith,  and  afterwards 
Commissar  at  Ekaterinburg  from  May  till  June,  1918. 

Benckendorff,  Coimt.  He  was  Grand  Marshal  of  the  Imperial 
Court. 

Beloborodov,  Alexander.  The  Chairman  of  the  Ural  Provincial 
Soviet  of  the  Workmen  and  Soldiers'  Deputies.  Upon  orders 
given  through  him  the  Imperial  Family  was  assassinated. 

Botkin,  Eugene  Sergeievich.  A  physician.  Dr.  Botkin  stayed 
with  the  Imperial  Family  from  the  moment  of  their  arrest  until 
the  time  of  their  murder.  He  was  shot  with  the  Imperial 
Family. 

BuxHOEVDEN,  Baroucss,  Sophie.  A  personal  maid-of-honour  to 
the  Empress,  who  accompanied  her  to  Tobolsk. 

Chemodurov,  Terenty  Ivanovich.  The  Emperor's  valet.  He 
arrived  with  the  Imperial  Family  at  Tobolsk  and  stayed  with 
the  Emperor  until  the  Imperial  Family  was  removed  to  Ekater- 
inburg.    He  died  shortly  afterwards. 

Chkheidze.  a  member  of  the  Duma  and  one  of  the  leaders  of  the 
Petrograd  Soviet  of  Workmen  Deputies  during  the  first  months 
of  the  Revolution. 

Dehn,  Julia,  Madame.  The  wife  of  the  first  of&cer  on  the  Em- 
peror's yacht,  Standart.  Madame  Dehn  was  an  intimate  friend 
of  the  Empress. 

Demidova,  Anna.  A  favourite  maid  of  the  Empress.  She  stayed 
with  the  Empress  at  Tsarskoe-Selo,  Tobolsk  and  Ekaterinburg, 
^        and  she  was  shot  with  the  Imperial  Family. 


APPENDIX  313 

Derevenko,  Vladimir  Nikolaievich.  A  physician  who  stayed  with 
the  Imperial  Family  in  Tobolsk. 

Dmitriev.  a  special  Commissar,  sent  to  Tobolsk  by  the  Omsk 
Soviet. 

DoLGORUKY,  Alexander  Vasilievitch,  Prince.  Marshal  of  the  Im- 
perial Court,  who  stayed  with  the  Imperial  Family  in  Tobolsk ,  ^^ 

DoMODZiANZ,  Ensign.  Of  Armenian  origin ;  he  was  chosen  by  the 
Tsarskoe-Selo  Soviet  to  assist  Colonel  Kobylinsky. 

DuTZMAN,  Commissar  to  the  Imperial  Family.  He  was  sent  from 
Omsk  by  the  Siberian  Soviet. 

iRZBERG,  Elizabeth.  The  Grand  Duchesses'  maid.  She  was 
parted  from  the  Imperial  Family  on  the  way  to  Ekaterin- 
burg. 

jriBBES,  Sidney.  An  English  teacher  to  the  Grand  Duchesses  and 
the  Tsarevich.  He  joined  the  Imperial  Family  in  Tobolsk  and 
sta3'ed  with  them  until  their  arrival  in  Ekaterinburg. 

jiLLARD.  A  French  teacher  to  the  Grand  Duchesses  and  the 
Tsarevich.  He  stayed  with  the  Imperial  Family  in  Tobolsk 
and  accompanied  the  Tsarevich  to  Ekaterinburg,  where  he  was 
dismissed  from  the  service  of  the  Imperial  Family. 

3ARITONOV,  Ivan.  Chef  to  the  Imperial  Family.  He  was  shot 
with  the  Imperial  Family. 

rlENDRYKOVA,  Anastasia  Vasilievna,  Countess.     A  personal  maid- 
of -honour  to  the  Empress,  who  came  with  the   Empress   to   / 
Tobolsk.     Shot  at  Perm. 

rliTROVO,  Margaret.  Maid-of -honour  to  the  Grand  Duchesses. 
She  was  arrested  at  Tobolsk. 

Hlynov.     a  Tobolsk  priest  who  replaced  the  priest  Vasiliev. 

HoHRiAKOV.  Chairman  of  the  Tobolsk  Soviet.  He  became  Com- 
missar to  the  Imperial  Family  after  the  resignation  of  Yak- 
ovlev. 

Kerensky,  Alexander  Feodorovich.  Minister  of  Justice,  and 
Prime  Minister  of  the  Provisional  Government. 

Kobylinsky,  Eugene  Stefanovich,  Colonel.  He  was  appointed 
Commandant  of  the  Garrison  at  Tsarskoe-Selo,  and  was  Com- 
mandant of  the  Palace  later.  He  escorted  the  Imperial  Family 
to  Tobolsk,  and  was  in  command  of  the  guards  until  the  time 
when  the  Imperial  Family  was  removed  to  Ekaterinburg. 

KoRNiLOv,  Lavr  Georgievich.  A  famous  Russian  general  and 
patriot,  and  a  prominent  name  in  the  history  of  the  Russian 
Revolution.  During  the  first  days  of  the  Revolution  he  was 
made  commanding  officer  of  the  forces  of  the  Petrograd  Mili- 
tary District.  He  executed  the  order  of  the  Provisional 
Government  for  the  arrest  of  the  Imperial  Family. 


314  APPENDIX 

KoROViCHENKO,  Paul,  Colonel.     He  was  made  Commandant  of  tht 

Tsarskoe-Selo  Palace  after  Kotsebue. 
KoTSEBUE.    Captain  of  Uhlans,  Commandant  of  the  Tsarskoe-Sel< 

Palace.     He  was  dismissed  and  succeeded  by  Korovichenko 
KuzMiN,  Ensign.     He  was  in  command  of  the  military  forces  of  th» 

Petrograd  District  after  Kornilov  and  Polovtzov. 
Lvov,  George  Evgenevich.     He  was  Prime  Minister  of  the  Pro 

visional  Government   during  the  first  three  months  of  th( 

Revolution,  was  imprisoned  in  Ekaterinburg  at  the  time  of  th( 

Imperial  Family's  imprisonment  in  Ipatiev's  house. 
Makarov.     An  engineer,  who  was  attached  to  the  Imperial  Famib 

during  their  journey  to  Tobolsk. 
Medvedev,  Paul.     Senior  guard  of  the  Imperial  Family  in  Eka 

terinburg.     He    took    part   in  the    murder  of  the    Imperia 

Family. 
MosHKiN,  Alexander.     Formerly  a  locksmith,  who  became  assistan 

to  Commissar  Avdeiev  in  Ekaterinburg.     He  was  dischargee 

for  drunkenness  and  theft  of  the  Emperor's  belongings. 
Mrachkovsky,  Serge.     A  military  Commissar  in  the  Red  Army 

He  recruited  the  men  who  acted  as  guards  of  the   Imperia 

Family  in  Ekaterinburg. 
Nagorny,  Clement  Gregorievich.      A  personal  attendant  of  th( 

Tsarevich,  who  was  always  in  the  service  of  the  Imperia 

Family.     When  the  Imperial  Family  was  removed  to  Ekater 

inburg  he  was  dismissed,  put  in  prison  and  shot. 
Naryshkina.     a  lady-in-waiting  to  the  Empress. 
Nikiforov,    Alexis.     Senior   Guard   of   the    Imperial    Family   n 

Tobolsk. 
NiKOLSKY,  Alexander,  Ensign.     A  member  of  the  Socialist  Revolu 

utionary  Party.     He  acted  as  assistant  to  Commissar  Pank 

ratov  in  Tobolsk. 
NiKULiN.     An  assistant  to  Commissar  Yurovsky  in  Ekaterinburg. 
Pankratov,   Vasily   Semenovich.     Appointed  Commissar  to  th( 

Imperial  Family  in  September,  19 17,  and  was  dismissed  by  th( 

soldiers  after  the  Bolshevist  Revolution. 
Pereverzev,  Paul    Nikolaievich.     A   lawyer,  who  replaced  Ker 

ensky  as  Minister  of  Justice  and  resigned  on  account  of  troubl< 

with  the  Petrograd  Bolskeviks.     He  instituted  the  search  o; 

the  Emperor's  papers  at  Tsarskoe-Selo. 
PiGNATTi.     A  district  Commissar  in  Tobolsk.     He  occupied  this 

position  from  the  first  days  of  the  Revolution  until  the  time  o: 

the  downfall  of  Admiral  Kolchak's  Government. 
Polovtzov,  General.     He  replaced  General  Kornilov  as  commandei 

of  the  military  forces  of  the  Petrograd  District. 


APPENDIX  315 

*R0SKURIAK0V,  Philip.     A  workman  who  was  amongst  the  guards 

of  the  Imperial  Family  in  Ekaterinburg. 
Rasputin,   Gregory.     The  notorious  monk-adventurer.     He   was 

killed  two  months  before  the  Revolution. 
loDiONOV.     The  commander  of  the  Letts  detachment  in  Tobolsk  ; 

he  escorted  the  Tsarevich  and  the  Grand  Duchesses  from 

Tobolsk  to  Ekaterinburg. 
,CHNEIDER,  Katherine.     Court  reader.      She  was  separated  from 

the  Imperial  Family  in  Ekaterinburg. 
lEDNEV,  Ivan.     A  footman  in  the  service  of  the  Grand  Duchesses. 
iVERDLOV.     A   prominent    Bolshevik,    Chairman   of   the   Central 

Executive  Committee  of  the  All-Russian  Congress  of  Soviets 

of  Workmen,  Soldiers'  and  Peasants'  Deputies.  K  ^dKoXOsf  ■  tKK^O^T 

;^ATISHCHEV,    Ilia   Leonidovich,    Count.     General   A.D.C.    to   the 

Emperor  ;  he  stayed  with  the  Imperial  Family  in  Tobolsk  and 

was  discharged  and  shot  on  their  arrival  at  Ekaterinburg. 
:egleva,    Alexandra.     Nurse   to   the   Tsarevich   and   the   Grand 

Duchesses.     She  stayed  with  the  Imperial  Family  up  to  the 

time  of  their  arrival  in  Ekaterinburg. 
rRUPP,  Alexis.    An  attendant  in  the  service  of  the  Imperial  Family  ; 

he  was  shot  at  the  same  time  as  the  Imperial  Family. 
:uTELBURG,   Mary.     Maid  to  the  Empress.     She  was  separated 

from  the  Imperial  Family  on  the  way  to  Ekaterinburg. 
/"asiliev.     A  priest  of  the  Blagoveschensky  Church  in  Tobolsk,  he 

officiated  at  Divine  Service  in  the  Governor's  house. 
/"ershinin.     a  member  of  the  Duma  who  accompanied  the  Im- 
perial Family  to  Tobolsk  as  Commissar  of  the  Provisional 

Government. 
/OLKOV,  Alexis.     A  servant  who  was  discharged  and  re-arrested  on 

the  arrival  of  the  Imperial  Family  at  Ekaterinburg. 
/yrubova,  Anna.      A  maid-of-honour  and   a  personal   friend  of 

the  Empress. 
^AKiMOV,  Anatoly.     A  workman,  who  was  a  senior  guard  of  the 

Imperial  Family  in  Ekaterinburg. 
kfAKOVLEV.     A  Bolshevik  Commissar,  who  replaced  Pankratov  on 

April  9  (22),  1918.     Came  from  Moscow  to  Tobolsk  and  went 

back  on  account  of  trouble  with  the  Ekaterinburg  Bolsheviks, 

who  had  seized  the  persons  of  the  Imperial  Family. 
JiTuROVSKY,  Commandant.     The  jailer  and  the  executioner  of  the 

Imperial  Family. 


INDEX 


Lgafonov,  92-3 

^ksiuta,  Capt.,  173,  204,  312 

Uexandra,  Empress 

—  Arrest  by  Komilov,  50-1,  168 

—  Hatred  of   Germany  and  Kaiser, 

31.  37 

—  Private  life  and  character,  33-8, 

2ig-22 

—  Various  references,  9,  32-3,  44-5, 

58,  62-3,  69-70,  78,  89,  106,  132, 
157,  172,  209,  224,  226,  247, 
256-7,  274-5,  312 

^ilexeiev,  23,  48,  100,  143 

Llexis,  Tsar's  heir,  29,  35,  53,  63-6, 
68,  72,  87,  89,  91,  117,  177,  182, 
184,  186,  191,  221,  225,  234, 
242,  249,  252,  255-7 

dston,  Mr.,  122 

i.nastasia  (Montenegro),  41,  49 

iinastasia.  Tsar's  youngest  daughter, 
60,  73,  76,  90,  95,  114,  158,  172, 
186,  221,  242,  255,  279,  301 

k.nia,  172 

Laichkoff,  General,  197 

Lppelbaum,  129 

ipraskin.  Count,  170,  179,  312 

Lvanesov.     See  Ovanesov 

Lvdeiev,  Alexander,  67,  75-6,  78, 
80-3,  154,  201-4,  212,  238, 
259-62,  266-8,  272-3,  276,  284, 
287,  296-7,  300,  312 

Jadmaiev,  36,  43,  45 

Baltic  Fleet,  215 

ieloborodov,   28,   86,   98,    loi,    104, 

127,  140,   145,   147,   151,   153-4, 

211,  291,  300,  304,  311-12 
3enckendor£f,  General,   169-70,   182, 

199,  312 
3ittner,  Madame,  60,  70,  244-5 
Bloody  Sunday,  32 
Bolshevism  defined,  269 
Bolshevist      report      of     '  trial  '      of 

Tsar's  '  murderers,'  21 

—  report  of  Tsar's  death,  98-101 

—  revolution,  23,  193,  229,  248 


Bolshevists,  21-6,  30,  48-9,  52,  72, 

90,  128-30 
Boris,  Grand  Duke,  183 
Borunov,  122 
Botkin,  Dr.,  34,  53,  60,  70,  76-7,  87, 

89,  1 16-7,  184,  209,  217-9,  238, 

271,  312 
Boyard,  147 

Brasova,  Countess,  12 1-2 
Brest-Litovsk  Treaty,  14,  22,  25,  56, 

69-70,  142,  149,  206,  231-2,  242 
Buxhoevden,     Baroness,     212,     214, 

229,  237,  312 

Chelyshev,  122-4,  128 

Chemodurov,    70,    76-7,     184,     186, 

209,  216,  224,  238-9,  253,  315 
Chernavin,  Dr.,  277 
Chkheidze,  52,  173,  315 
Chrezvychaika,  25,  27-8,  31,  75,  78, 

85,  87,   104,   122,  126,   140,   161, 

268,  276,  311 
Chustkevich,  140 
Cologne  Gazette,  43 
Communists,  212 
Constantine,  Prince,  124 

Degtiarev,  66-7,  204 
Dehn,  Julia,  174,  258,  312 
Dekonsky,  Ensign,  181 
Demidova,    70,    74,    76,    87-90,    116, 

184,  186,  200,  235,  271,  312 
Derevenko,  Dr.,  60,  81,  83,  237,  275, 

312 
Disler,  200,  208 
Diterichs,  General,   14-16,   105,   108, 

127,  156 
Ditveiler,  251 
Dmitri,  Grand  Duke,   124,   127,  226, 

258,  312 
Dmitriev,  212 

Dobrynin,  264,  278,  288,  290-1 
Dolgoruky,    Prince,    53,    60,    63,    69, 

70,   75-6,   125,   130,   170-1,   182, 

184,  188,  197,  199-200,  209,  211, 

216,  229,  231,  235,  312 

317 


31^ 


INDEX 


Domodzianz,  Ensign,  177-8,  312 
Domontovich,  108,  116 
Dorofeiev,  198 
Dutzman,  65,  200-1,  313 

Efimov,  Ensign,  179-80,  184-5 

Efremov,  140 

Ekaterinburg,  13,  75-93,  passim 

—  Bolshevists  and  Soviet,  71-2,  211 
Elena,  Princess,  124,  128 
Elizabeth,  Grand  Duchess,  124,    157 
Ermakov,  87-90,  97,  106,  109,  292 
Ertel,  Engineer,  182 

Erzberg,    Elizabeth,    114,    184,    186, 
200,  313 

Feofan,  40 
Fesenko,  112-3,  142 

Gaida,  18,  133-4,  160 
German  Government's  help  to  Revo- 
lutionists, etc.,  27,   131-2,   147- 
151,  passim 
German-Magyar  Guard,  29 
German  plan  to  restore  Tsar,  29 
Gibbes,  Sidney,  56,  60,  117,  166,  200, 

237.  313 

—  Deposition,  242-58 

Gillard,  P.  A..  56,  60,  166,  177,  184, 
186,    188,    197,    202,    207,    243, 

245.  313 

—  Deposition,  224-41 
Goloshcheldn,   27-8,   75,   79,   84,   86, 

98,     127,     138-40,     151-4,    211, 

291-2 
Gorbunov,  283 
Guchkov,  51,  100,  131,  232 
Guseva,  46 

Haemophilia,  33 

Haritonov,  60,  76,  85,  87,  197,  237, 

313 
Heine,  118 
Hendrykova,    Countess,    53,    60,    64, 

125,  128-30,  184,  186,  200,  217, 

237-40,  245,  313 
Hermogen,  Bishop,  195 
Hesse  disease,  33-4,  219 
Hitrovo,  Margaret,  178,  183,  222,  313 
Hlynov,  Father,  195,  313 
Hohriakov,    73-4,    212-5,    236,    250, 

284,  313 
'  House    of    Special    Purpose.'     See 

Ipatiev's  House 

Igor,  Prince,  124 
Iliodor,  43,  46 
Ilmer,  135 
loan,  Prince,  124-5 


Ipatiev's  House,  18-19,  32,  39,  75-( 
94,  97,  104.  114,  125,  130,  13; 
155.  157.  216,  237-9,  253,  263-' 
294-6 

'  Jemmy,'  a  spaniel,  95,  115,  157 
Jewish  part  in  the  murders,  etc.,  2^ 

125,    148,    154,    161,  passim 
Johnson,  Mr.,   120,   122-3,   183-4 
'  Joy,'  Alexis's  .spaniel,  94,  157 
'  Judges  '  of  the  Tsar,  139 

Kalinin,  161 

Kanegisser,  148 

Kerensky,    48,    51-4,    63,    100,    174 

178-97,  226-7,  232,  244,  313 
Knox,  General,  137 
Kobylinsky,  Col.,  50,  52,  61-2,  66-9 

166,  226-8,  231-5,  313 
—  Depositions,  167-223 
Kolchak,  Admiral,   15-16,   108,    134 

136,  156 
Kornilov,   General,   50,   168-70,   172 

226,  243,  313 
Kornilov  House,  58,  65-6,  186,  206 

228 
Korovichenko,  Col.,  51,  174-5,  226-7 

313 
Kotsebue,    Capt.,    169,    173-4,    226 

313 
Koupchinsky,  172 
Krasnov,  23 
Kuzmin,  Ensign,  182,  313 

Lazarev,  Col.,  170 

Lebedev,  209-11 

Lenin,  9,  22-7,  121,  128,  232,  239 

Letemin,  94 

•  Letts,'    82-3,  85-90,  97,    120,    125 

129,  153,   166,  212-3,  222,  236 

269,  276,  284,  298,  304-5.     Se 

also  Magyar  Guards 
Loginov,  268 
Lokhvitsky,  16 
Ludendorlf,    14,   22-5,   43,    142,    150 

152 
Lupin,  193,  199,  203 
Lvov,  Prince,  100,  174,  252,  313 

Magyar  Guards,  82-3,  262,  269.     Se 

also  '  Letts  ' 
Makarov,    Paul    M.,     181-2,     184-6 

228,  314 
Manchester  Guardian,  100 
Maria.Tsar's  third  daughter,  70,  73 

171-2,   186,   209,   220,   226,  234 

242,  249,  255 
Masaryk,  Professor,  24 
Maslovsky,  Col.,  52,  173 


INDEX 


319 


atveiev,  193,  201,  203,  211,  215 
edvedev,  Pavel,  78,  81,  85-97,  160, 

166,    263-4,    267,    276-7,    293, 

296-300,  314 

■  Examination  of,  285-92 
ejanz,  184 

eledin,  Father,  272,  276-7 

esiankin,  185 

ichael,  Grand  Duke,  54,  72,  120-4, 

128,  183-4,  240,  309 
ihailovna,  Maria,  132 
ikhailovich,  127 
ilitza.  Grand  Duchess,  41,  49 
irbach,  Count,  22-27,  72,  134,  142, 

151.  153 

ordvinov,  258 

oscow  Central  Executive  Com- 
mittee, passim 

oshkin,  78,  154,  261,  267-8,  274, 
287,  296-7,  301,  314 

oundel,  Lieut.,  185 

rachkovsky,  286,  292,  295,  314 

abokov,  209-11 

agorny,  76,  184,  214-5,  236-8,  245. 

252,  314 
aryshkina,  52,  314 
icholas  II — • 

■  Abdication,  226,  248 

-  Allowance  restricted,  63,  199,  230 
•  Bolshevist  report    of    '  trial  '    of 

'  murderers,'  21,  140-1 

-  Diary,  extract  from,  99-100 

-  Ekaterinburg,     life     at,     210-38, 

passim 

■  'Execution,'  report  of,  143,  217 

-  Fortune  in  England,  156 

-  German   precautions   against   es- 

cape, 30 

-  Hatred  of  Germans,  218,  232 

-  Life  and  character,  257-8,  passim 

-  Loyalty  to  Allies,  9,  14,  32-3 

-  Mock  funeral,  102 

-  Moscow,  journey  to,  65-72 

-  Murder  of,  89,  279,  290 

-  Official    statement    of    death    by 

Moscow  Government,  14 

-  Official    statement    of    death    by 

Reds,  17,  98-9 

-  Order  of  the   Day  to   Army  on 

Abdication,  47-8 

-  Private  papers  seized,  175 

-  Refused     permission     to     go     to 

church,  195,  230 

-  Refusal  to  leave  Russia,  31 

-  Removal  from  Tobolsk,  25 

-  Removal  from  Tsarskoe-Selo,  54 

-  Suite  at  Tobolsk,  187-8,  199,  228 

-  Tobolsk,  life  at,  188-213,  245 


Nicholas  II  {continued) — ■ 

—  '  Trial  '  report,  21,  140-1 

—  various  references  throughout  the 

book 
Nicholas,  Grand  Duke,  49 
Nikiforov,  263,  286. 
Nikolsky,  61-2,  65,   134,   190-2,  196, 

212,  229,  248,  314 
Nikulin,  85,  89,  268,  297,  300-1,  304, 

314 

Okhrana,  26,  32,  82 

Olga,  Tsar's  oldest  daughter,  64,  73, 

114,   171-2,   178,   188,  213,  216, 

220,  245,  253-4 
Omsk  Bolsheviks  and  Tribunal,  108, 

134,  136-8,  201,  215 
Ovanesov,  202 

Pankratov,  61-2,  65,  190-4,  196,  229, 

248,  314 
Papus,  45 

Paul,  Grand  Duke,  50,  124,  127 
Pecherkin,  40 
Peissel,  200,  208 
Pereverzev,  175,  314 
Perm,  91 

Peter,  Tsar's  brother,  49 
Peters,  128 
Petrovsky,  129-30 
Philippe,  45 
Pignatti,  193,  314 
Pisarevsky,  192,  196 
Poincare,  President,  225 
Polovtsov,  General,  176 
Popov,  86,  266 
Pravda,  21,  102,  104,  144 
Prayer    transcribed    by    Grand 

Duchess  Olga,  64 
Preston,  Mr.,  31,  126,  130 
Proskuriakov,  90,  93—4,  314 

—  Examination  of,  294-308 
Protopopov,  50 

Pskov,  69,  100 
Purishkevitch,  45-6 

Rasputin,  19,  31-2,  34-46,  57-8,  63, 
131,  209,  221,  258,  274,  314 

—  Removal  of  body,  17 1-2 
Remes,  S.  M.,  125 
Ressin,  General,  169 
Ritzier,  Dr.,  142,  153 

Rodionov,   73-6,   196,  212-5,   236-7, 

251,  314 
Rodzianko,  69,  99,  206 
Ruzsky,  General,  99 
Rybakov,  195 

Sablin,  258 


320 


INDEX 


Safarov,  27-8,  138-44,  151 

Safonov,  264,  301 

Sakovich,  151 

Schneider,    Katherine,    53,    60,    125, 

128-30,  184,  186,  199,  217,  237- 

40,  246,  314 
Sednev,  70,  76,  86,  209,  215,  237-8, 

315 
Semenov,  135,  204 
Sergeiev,  137-8,  239,  285 
Sergius,  Grand  Duke,  124,  127 
Shikunov,  Sergeant,  198 
Shulgin,  100 
Skoropadsky,  23 
Smirnov,  Admiral,  166 
Sokolov,  N.  A.,  II,  15-16,  18-20,  96, 

105-6,     108,     112-3,     116,     128, 

132-3.  136,  138,  161-2,  165,  242, 

294 
Soloviev,  127,  131-3,  141,  149 
Soviets.     See  Bolshevists 
Sovnarkom,  25 
'  Special      Purpose      House.'         See 

Ipatiev's  House 
Stark,  147 

Starkov,  264,  290-1,  297 
Stamykevich,  135-8 
Storozhev,  Father,  272,  276-7 
Strekotin,  Andrei,  94,  301 
Stuermer,  49 
Sverdlov,  27-8,  32,  66-8,  75,  79,  84, 

99,  loi,  104,  119,  125,  127,  139- 

46,  150,  153-5,  161,  202,  315 
Syromolotov,  139-40,  145,  154 

Taneiev,  37 

Tatiana,  Tsar's  second  daughter,  69, 

73,  114,  172,  186,  220,  236,  242, 
.245.  254-5,  275 
Tatishchev,  52,  60,  63,  69,  125,  130, 

182,  184,  186,  188,  197-200,  206! 

222,  231,  237,  239-40, 250-1,  315 
Tegleva,  177,  184,  186,  197,  200,  215, 

315 
Tellberg,  George  G.,  11,  165 
The  Times,  9,  26,  98-9,  136,  146 
Tobolsk  Soviet,  212,  215 
Tomashevsky,  93 
'  Trial  '  of  the  Tsar,  140-1 
Trotzky,  27,  201,  215,  232 


Trupp,  76,  87,  237.  315 
Tsarevich.     See  Alexis 
Tsik,  25-7,  66,  73,  141,  146 
Tutelberg,  44,  114,  186.  200,  315 

Ukraintzev,  263,  274 

Ural   Regional   Council   and   Sovie 

98-9,  139-41.  151.  3" 
Uritsky,  122,  128,  148 


Vaganov,  87,  89-90,  97,  109-110, 

Varvara,  125 

Vasiliev,  Father,  57,  61,  132-3, 

189,  194-5.  315 
Vershinin,  57,  184-5,  228,  315    . 
Victoria,  Queen,  253 
Vladimir,  Prince,  124 
Voeikov,  53 

Voikov,  27-8,  139-40,  142,  151 
Volkov,    70,    loi,    125,    128-30, 

184,  217,  237,  239-40,  315 
Vyrubova,    Anna,    35-7,    53,    13 

173-4.  258,  315 


I 


13J 


William,  German  Kaiser,  37,  149-5; 

222 
Witte,  43,  100 

Xenia,  Grand  Duchess,  156 

Yakimov,  Anatoly,  90-3,  287,  315 

—  Defines  Bolshevism,  269 

—  Examination  of,  259-84 
Yakovlev,    Commissar,    65-75,     134 

141-2,  149-50,  160,  201-12 
233-6,  248-9,  262,  312,  315 
Yurovsky,  Tsar's  murderer,  27-9,  32 
81-92,  96-8,  loi,  104,  106,  113- 
4,  125,  138-40,  146,  154,  160 
268,  276-9,  288-90,  297,  300-8 
315 

Zaicek,  134 

Zaslavsk3\  66-7,  75,  200-10 

Zeleny,  Ensign,  176 

Zima,  Ensign,  185 

Zinoviev,  129 

Znamerovskaia,  Madame,  121,  129 

Znamerovsky,  Col.,  120-4 


OS) 


Printed  in  Great  Britain  by  Butler  &  Tanner,  Frame  and  London. 


\VS- 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SUPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


