“ 


sr 


z 
. 
BER 


2 


ei 
re 
ER 
al 
#6) 


N 
LER) 


ELITE 


N 
EM 
wu, a N 


+ 


pe 


| [EIERN Jo NOTIDISCARD 
Tel: 729943 : 


THIS BOOK SHOULD BE RETURNED ON OR BEFORE THE LATEST 
DATE SHOWN TO THE LIBRARY FROM WHICH IT WAS BORROWED 


& 
“ Eu 
i 
3- + 
3 
ER Tr % 
“t 
.. 
an Nie 6 
Js 114 X 
2 ’ 
AUTHOR CLASS No. 


NOoQY._H F 


..} aslaaıcı Ba. BOOK No. 
en... RNIZOFS 


This book must be returned on or before the date shown above 
to the Library from which it was borrowed 


— LANFASUIRE CNIINTV LIRRARY 
143 { m 


be 


e 
{ 
h 
1 
ß 


ANASTASIA 


A reconstruction in fictional form of the sensational 
events which followed the claim of Anna Anderson 
—a woman now living in Germany—to be the 
youngest daughter ofthe Czar of Russia, and to have 
miraculously escaped from the butchery at Ekaterin- 
burg. Two films and a play about Anastasia have 
been seen in England, and the mystery of this strange 
woman still holds the imagination of the world. 


si ua 


ANASTASIA 


ATI 


EDEN 


A Novel by Hans Nogly 


METHUEN.& CO LTD 


36 ESSEX STREET * LONDON WC2 


KIRKHAM 2.480 859 


First published by 
Verlag Der Sternbücher, Hamburg 1956 
First English Edition published 24th October 1957 
Reprinted 1957 
© 1957 by Methuen F Co. Ltd. 
Printed ın Great Britain by 
Purnell & Sons, Ltd., Paulton 


1.2 
CATALOGUE NO. 203/U 


I 


ATITATDDTDAEDDEDEDEDEIEICIIEDIES 


It was half past ten. In exactly half an hour’s time the young 
girl who gives her name to this story was going to turn up in 
the police files and medical records, in the family archives of 
the European nobility and in the imagination of men. It was 
a cold wet February evening. The girl ran across the street. 
The brakes of a taxi screeched. ’T’'he girl was wearing a dark 
checked shawl, which she pulled tighter round her thin shoul- 
ders as if she found in it protection both from the taxi and from 
the driver’s curses. 

The entertainment centres of Berlin’s West End were pre- 
paring for their nightly task. At the Palace "T'heatre it was the 
premiere of The Mikado. T’here was a rush to see the new star. 
Hans Albers was his name and everyone was talking about 
him. He was divine, the women said, with such bright, deep 
eyes that you felt you could drown in them. 

The girl jostled her way through the crowds thronging to- 
wards the theatre. She was oblivious of their angry looks and 
conscious only of the inner fear from which she was fleeing. 
The men and women around her had been through four 
years of war and a further year of disorders, of hunger and a 
frenzied thirst for life. T'he men had taken to drink, politics 
or street-fighting. The women frequented the the dansants 
and dance-halls, although you would have thought they 
would be worn out with queueing for food and lining up 
for jobs at oflice doors and factory gates. Berlin was like a 
red-hot frying-pan in which men and women leapt about as 
if possessed. Amid one-steps, shootings, showers of confetti, 


7 


“ red flags and Salvation Army meetings, they went their prim- 
rose way. 

The girl came to a stop in a big square and pressed herself 
close to the wall of a house. She was insensible to the cold that 
ran through her body. From a nearby street came rank upon 
rank of men with banners and flags which hung from their 
poles, red, bedraggled and sad. "T'hey carried torches and in the 
light their faces were lean, embittered and unsure. They chan- 
ted slogans to convince themselves and to keep warm. "Then 
they began to sing the Internationale in angry hoarse voices 
and the tune clashed with the dance music from a restaurant. 
Its door stood open. “Tioday—gay fancy-dress party’, said the 
poster beside it. A couple of women stood in the doorway. 
"They wore short skirts and long silk stockings. They had 
paper chains round their necks. T'heir mouths laughed with- 
out merriment. "T'hey shivered as they stared at the men in the 
procession and saw the police van drive to the head of the 
demonstration with its siren howling. The van braked and 
laid itself across the street; the police leapt down. Singers and 
men in uniform clashed. Warning shots rang out crisply into 
the air. Dance music, shots and the roar of voices mingled into 
one. 

The girl saw it all with staring eyes. Suddenly she felt the 
damp cold of the house wall and ran on until she could hear 
the noise no more. By then she was standing on the banks of a 
canal. She looked at the dark, murky water; it was calm and 
still. : ; 

Police Sergeant Hallman was strolling along the bank of the 
canal. He undid two buttons of his coat and groped for his 
watch. ’T'hen he stepped under a lamp to look at it. Fine, he 
thought, another three hours and that’s that for today. He 
went on with his round. On a bridge he saw a girl’s figure— 


saw her sway and fall forwards, heard the splash as her body 
hit the water. 


8 


He snatched his whistle from his pocket. 'T'he alarm signal 
re-echoed from the fronts of the houses. Someone was running 
towards him. Hallman recognised Bührle, who served in the 
same station. 

“A woman has jumped in,” he shouted. 

He was already at the wall which ran along the side of = 
canal. "I’here were steps running down to the water. Hallman 
threw off his coat, Jacket and helmet. ’T'hen he jumped in. 


Sergeant Bührle lifted the telephone and dialled the Elizabeth 
Hospital. Hallman came into the oflice. He had rubbed him- 
self down in the next room and pulled on a track suit. He 
looked at the girl sitting there, wrapped in a blanket, on a 
bench beside the glowing stove. 

Hallman reached for the coffee-pot standing on the stove 
and filled a tin mug. 

“Here,” he said to the girl. But she took no notice. Hall- 
man shrugged and drank it himself. “ T’hat would be just it, 
wouldn’t it, if I got a cold because of you.” 

“I want you to take her away,” Bührle shouted into the 
telephone. He glanced at Hallman, nodded towards the girl 
and, pointing at his forehead, made little circles with his finger. 
““Tralala,” he said under his breath. T'hen he spoke into the 
receiver again. “District 69—we’ve fished someone out of the 
canal. Could you send a van over—she needs looking at by a 
doctor.” He laid down the ’phone. “Coming right away. Did 
you hear, Miss? ’T'hey’re taking you straight to hospital. It’s 
warmer in bed than in the water.” He reached for the log- 
book. ‘But you can’t go on keeping mum,” he began coax- 
ingly. “You sit there and say nothing. But I’ve got to make 
an entry. Now then, what are you called?” 

The girl made no reply. Her face had a look of childish 
defiance. 

“You must tell us your name,” urged Hallman. 


9 


“For God’s sake, open your mouth,” Bührle shouted over 
the desk. “I must have your details. You must understand 
that. Everybody understands that. Are you going to speak or 
not? I’Il tell you something, my girl. You can’t try your tricks 
on us. It’s too damned silly. I don’t care why you jumped into 
the water but once we’ve fished you out you can’tact dumb to 
us.” Bührle paused and then tried Pe once more. 
“After all, you owe your life to my colleague.” 

The girl had sat there unmoved the whole time—a re 
choly, stubborn bundle with dripping hair and a pale face. Sud- 
denly she lifted her face with its great empty eyes. 

“Not need help,” she murmured. ’T'he voice was tired and 
monotonous. She had a strong foreign accent. "Ihe words 
came in any order. “I not ask for help.” 

“So you can speak,”’ said Bührle, nodding with a satisfied 
air. “Fine— whether you want help or not doesn’t matter. 
You’re a foreigner, aren’t you? But you are getting on quite 
nicely. Now let’s have your name and address.” 

“Not speak more,” whispered the girl. In his rage Bührle 
brought his pencil down on the desk with a bang. 

“Hell!” heshouted and came round the partition which di- 
vided off the room. He set himself right in front ofthe girl and 
thrust his hands into his trouser pockets with an angry gesture. 
“So you think you can play a game with us? We’ll soon find 
out who you are. "I'hat you can be sure of—quite sure. All 
this is damned nonsense. Can’t you get it into your head that 
we’ll know who you are tomorrow morning at the very latest? 
And don’t think you’re going to upset us just because you’re 
giving us a bit of work. Well find out what’s up with you 
whether you like it or not.” 

'T'he door opened, and two first-aid men came in. 

“Abitdamp, isn’tshe?”saidoneofthem. “Can wetakeher?” 

“Yes, right away,” growled Bührle, withdrawing once 
more behind his desk where he made the following note: 

“Height—five feet. Hair—brown. Eyes—grey-blue. 


Io 


Speaks broken German. Dress—black blouse, black skirt, 
brown shoes, grey silk stockings, black checked shawl.” 

“As far as I’m concerned you can push off with her,” he 
muttered. ’T’'he first-aid men took the girl between them. She 
made no attempt to resist and they left the room. 

'T'he doctor on duty at the Elizabeth Hospital inspected her 
and found that she was suffering from shock. Since he got no 
answer to his questions he finally confined himself to entering 
in the register what he could see with his own eyes. He dis- 
covered cuts on her head. On her forehead he found a slight 
scar which he put down toa fall a long time ago. Behind her 
right ear he found a larger scar. ““T'hat looks to me like a graze 
from a bullet,” he murmured to himself. He no longer expec- 
ted the girl to answer; nor did she say anything. He noted a 
scar at the bottom of the left middle finger—clearly the result 
of its having been crushed. Below the right shoulder-blade he 
discovered a little white spot which looked as if a mole had 
been removed. He noticed that the balls’of her feet were 
strongly developed—particularly in the right foot. 

He left his mute patient and ordered a nurse to stay by her 
bed. “She must sleep and not do anything silly,”” he said. T'hen 
he rang the police station and gave them the details for the 
register of missing persons. 


The Press Oflice of Police Headquarters, Berlin, made the 
following announcement to the daily papers: 

“Berlin, ı8th February 1920. Unknown Woman’s Sui- 
cide Attempt. At nine o’clock yesterday evening a girl, aged 
about twenty-one, attempted suicide by jumping from the 
Bendler Bridge into the Landwehr Canal. She was saved by a 
police sergeant and admitted to the Elizabeth Hospital. No 
documents or valuables of any kind were found on her. "The 
unfortunate girl refused to give any details about herself or to 
say anything about her reasons for attempting suicide.”” 


II 


The daily papers did not report the incident. It was too tri- 
vial. Police Headquarters published a photograph of the un- 
known girl in the Police Bulletin: “Who knows this person? 
This unknown girl was admitted to the Elizabeth Hospital 
after an unsuccessful attempt at suicide. Mental illness of a 
depressive nature having been diagnosed, she was transferred 
to the Dalldorf Asylum on 30th March. .. .” There followed 
an exact description of the girl and her clothing. T'he publica- 
tion of these details had no sequel. 

The bulletin of missing persons passed on throughout Ger- 
many the statement from Police Headquarters, Berlin, that no 
light had yet been cast on the identity of the girl in the Dall- 
dorf Asylum. 

“... Any information which comes in should be passed to 
Chief Inspector Gruenberg, Police Headquarters, Berlin.” 

But no information came in. 

On sth May 1920, Chief Inspector Gruenberg made the 
following notes: “Fresh interrogation of the unidentified girl 
without result. Her attitude throughout the interrogation was 
defiant. Says she does not wish to make a statement for reasons 
of her own. "The doctor examining her asked whether she 
heard voices, saw things or felt threatened. Answer: You 
must be very ignorant.” 

On ı2th August 1920, Chief Inspector Gruenberg made 
further notes: “At the request of the governor of Ploetzensee 
Prison the girl was today asked whether she was to be identi- 
fied as a certain ‘Marie Wachowiak’. She laughed and said, 
“Congratulations, Inspector.” A comparison of her finger- 
prints with those of the wanted woman showed, however, that 
her identification with the ex-convict Wachowiak must be 
excluded.” 

Entry for 12th April 1922: “Captain Stefan von Andre- 
cewski, a retired cavalry officer, reported to the office for miss- 
Ing persons and unidentified dead that he believesthe unknown 
girl may be his cousin, Maria Andrecewski, who has been 


I2 


missing for six years. T’his new clue led nowhere. ’T'he Dall- 
dorf Asylum reports that she is in the ward for non-violent 
patients since it is not certain that she is mentally ill. She does, 
however, suffer from partial loss of memory and a kind of per- 
secution mania. ’I’he doctor in charge of the case tentatively 
describes her as psychopathic and is of the opinion that after 
two years in the asylum a longer stay is unnecessary.” 


2 


BEE DEDDIEIIIITIITITITITIN 


“In a week I’ll be out, girls,” said Fräulein Peuthert. “A 
week. About time too. I told them at the time they couldn’t 
stick me in the loony-bin. Just because I chucked a couple of 
plates against the wall. What would it be like ifthey put every- 
body who did that in Dalldorf? And you should be getting out, 
too, my girl. Nurse said so and she had it from the doctor.” 

“I stay here,” said the girl in a low voice. Her bed stood 
next to the wall; she had piled up her pillows like a barrier be- 
tween herself and the other woman. It was evening. A light 
was burning in the room. The girl crouched in the shadow of 
the pillows. 

“Put away those stupid pillows,” said the woman. “No one 
is going to hurt you here.” 

“No one hurt me,” the girl repeated. “So I stay.” 

“I couldn’t stand it for two years. Three weeks are enough 
for me.” 

Klara Maria Peuthert was in her early fifties. She was a 
plump busybody of a woman who came from Charlottenburg 
where she had got on everybody’s nerves. She stuck her nose 
in everywhere, went about the house whining and had attacks 
when things didn’t go the way she wanted. T'he neighbours 
had put a doctor on to her and he had advised a check-up in 
the asylum. The neighbours had been delighted—but they re- 
joiced too soon. If Klara Peuthert did not fit into the neigh- 
bourhood she did not fit into the asylum either. 

"There were eight women lying in the room—harmless 
cases who had nothing to offer the inquisitive instincts of Fräu- 


14 


lein Peuthert who kept putting in curlers all day longand then 
taking them out again and could not keep her hands or her 
tongue still. The only one who seemed worth pursuing was 
the girl in the corner whom the doctors called ‘Miss Unidenti- 
fied’. For days Fräulein Peuthert had bombarded her with 
questions. She almost died of curiosity and her inner voice, 
which was just as loquacious as the one other people could 
hear, kept telling her that she must have seen this unknown 
girl somewhere before. 

“T’d like to have your nerve,” sighed Fräulein Peuthert. 
“I tell you they’ll put you out on the street one of these days. 
What else can they do with you? Andthen where willyou go?” 

“Won’t send me away.” 

“You could live with me. "T'here’s room.” Fräulein Peu- 
thert bent forward and pushed down the wall of cushions to 
see the girl better. 

“I not want to!” shouted the girl with sudden violence and 
built the cushions up again. 

“You’re daft,” said Fräulein Peuthert to the cushion wall 
behind which the girl lay hidden. “I’d like to know what sort 
of a person you are. Miss Unidentified—a fine thing. But I’ll 
remember yet. I’ve seen you before somewhere. I know your 
face.” 

“I not know you,” muttered the girl. “And you not know 
me. You always talk that way—I not want to listen.” 

“But I will talk. I’ll soon remember where I saw you.” 

The girl said no more. She had pressed both her hands 
against her head. She could hear inside herself the droning 
questions which police and doctors had been putting to her for 
two years: “What are you called? You must say who you are. 
What is your name? How did you get the cuts on your head? 
You must speak. We are only doing our duty. Tell us your 
name.” Sometimes the voices were soft and persuasive, some- 
times sharp, angry, even enraged. "I'he questions were a per- 
petual torture. 


15 


“. .. And to jump into the water like that. What sort of 
thing is that to do?” came Fräulein Peuthert’s whining voice 
beside her. “Why did you do it? You—did you hear? Why?” 

The girl started up in a blaze of excitement, her voice 
veiled with rage. i 

“Questions, questions—always the same. I not want to 
hear. I want peace. You from the police. Admit. You have to 
ask and ask and make me mad. You think I speak because no 
policeman or doctor here. I not speak. Not a word. Tellthat _ 
to man who send you.” 

Fräulein Peuthert stared at the girl in amazement. 

“But Iam not from the police,” she stammered. “Just listen 
to that. I meant well, I did. Me and the police!” 

"The nurse on duty came into the ward. 

“T’m putting the light out now,” she said. "T’hen she noticed 
how excited the girl was. “Is anything wrong?” she asked. 

The girl did not reply. Carefully she built up her pillows 
into a barrier, lay back and turned her face to the wall. 

“We were just talking,” said Fräulein Peuthert sulkily to 
the nurse. “You put the light out earlier every night,” she 
complained. "T'he nurse suppressed a retort and pressed the 
switch. a x 2 n 
The others were sleeping. Fräulein Peuthert lay awake and 
cudgelled her brains. She was sure she had met the girl some- 
where and she was furious that she could not remember where. 
It was dark—only the light from the lamp outside in the 
courtyard shone in at the window and made a bright patch on 
the ceiling. Fräulein Peuthert raised herself up quietly, slipped 
across to the girl’s bed and bent down. When she saw the wide- 
awake eyes looking fiercely up at her she started back. 

“You aren’t sleeping,” whispered Fräulein Peuthert. T’'he 
girl’s defences drove her back. She turned away and sat on the 
edge of her bed. "T’'his same face—this dim face in the dark, 
palely lit by the light of the lamp, had looked familiar, like 


16 


something Fräulein Peuthert clearly remembered. She felt as 
if her head must burst with an upsurge of curiosity, of half- 
recognition and a thousand confused questions. It brought her 
to her feet. She slipped quietly across to the girl again. Her 
face was close to hers. 

“Quietly now, girlie,”” she whispered and tried to stroke her 
with her plump hands. ““T'hey’ve driven you off your head be- 
tween them. "T'hey all want to know who you are. What busi- 
ness is it of theirs? None at all.” Her whisper died away to a 
breath. ‘“We’re the only two who need know, eh girlie?” 
There was a triumphant gleam in Fräulein Peuthert’s eyes. 
“Everyone knows who I am. Some ofthem even know that I 
was in Russia—a long time ago, before the war. I wasin Rus- 
sia, do you hear? In 'T'sarskoe Selo. Do you hear? You know 
where that is, don’t you? I know you do. It has just come to 
me. Of course it’s no business of the police. But you can tell 
me.” 

"T'he whispered stream of words flowed over the girl like an 
avalanche. "Ihe fat woman straightened herself; she needed 
air. She gulped and ran on her bare feet to the locker where 
her things were kept. She rummaged about in it. At last she 
found what she wanted—.an illustrated paper—and came tip- 
toeing quickly back. She held the picture she was looking for 
in the pale light of the lamp in the courtyard. It had been 
taken at the Imperial Court long before the Revolution— 
years before the Czar and his family were shot. It showed the 
Czar’s children—the Grand Duchesses Olga, "Tatyana, 
Maria, Anastasia and Alexey, the Czarevitch. 

“Just look at it,” whispered Fräulein Peuthert trium- 
phantly. “Come on, look.” 

The girl stared at the photograph and pressed her lips to- 
gether. Her face was lifeless. 

“You know what it is,”” said Fräulein Peuthert, returning 
to the attack. Her voice hissed and she stumbled in her speech, 
stuttered and almost choked with excitement at her discovery. 


B 17 


“Thhat’s true, isn’t it? You can tell me. I’ve often looked at 
the picture. I knew that I knew you. I knew it all the time. 
Now I know who you are. Now I know.” 

Tears suddenly began to run down over the girl’s face. She 
stretched out her hands as if to ward off the other woman. 


Then she threw herself down sobbing. 


18 


3 


aaa aaa aaa aaa 


In the days ofthe Czar, Baron Arthur von Kleist—a Russian 
in spite of his German name— had been Chief of Police for an 
important district of Russian Poland and a person of some note 
whom people had thought it best to greet with due courtesy. 
Even now that, like so many of his compatriots, he was living 
in Berlin as an exile, he was the object of respectful attention 
in his own circle, although his old position was gone for good 
and the future would never bring anything like it again. 

"The baron, like all the others who had found refuge in Ber- 
lin, met regularly for Orthodox Mass in the church attached 
to the old Russian Embassy in Berlin. In the same regular way 
they would meet in the restaurants and coffee-houses which 
some of their fellow-exiles had started. Here they were among 
their own people. Here they allowed themselves to pretend 
that things were much as before—that not everything had 
changed. 

It was a very mixed society of aristocrats, ex-civil servants, 
merchants, writers, ladies-in-waiting and oflicers. Only five 
years had passed since the Czar’s abdication and only four since 
that terrible night when the Communist Commissar, Yankel 
Yurowski, with his guards had driven the Imperial family and 
a handful of faithful attendants into the cellar in Ekaterinburg 
and shot them down. "The memory of these events was still 
fresh and if you were not quite clear about certain things—for 
example, about the confused reports on the killings at Ekater- 
inburg—then on your way back from church or in the evening 
in an @migre restaurant where there was vodka and a 


19 


strumming balalaika you could confidently turn to Baron von 
Kleist. After all he had been a Chief of Police. He could 
make sense out of confused reports. 

The Baron had read everything there was on the subjectt— 
newspaper reports, documents, books written by refugees. 

When his friends asked him: “What happened on the night 
of the murders, Arthur Ivanovitch?” he could tell them. 

About this time, he would say, the Reds in Ekaterinburg 
were getting nervous. The Whites under Kolchak were mar- 
chingon the town to free thecaptive Czar. Yankel Yurowski, 
the local commissar, telegraphed to the Central Committee of 
the Moscow Soviet to ask what he should do with the pri- 
soners. Sverdlov’s reply from Moscow was: “You’ll know 
what to do.” ’This telegram (it was simply an incitement to 
murder) reached Ekaterinburg on the evening of ı6th July 
1918 at about eleven. Half an hour later a lorry drove up to 
the back entrance of the house where the prisoners were kept; 
in the back of the lorry there was straw and blankets. At one 
o’clock on the morning of the 17th the prisoners were a- 
wakened. "They got dressed. "Then they were led into the 
cellar. "Ihe Czar carried the heir to the throne in his arms; the 
Empress, the four Grand Duchesses, the waiting-woman 
Dimidova, twoservantsand the court doctor, Botkin, followed. 
The driver of the lorry left the engine running to cover the 
shots. At 2.45 exactly it was all over. 

"The Baron could even quote oflicial records to his listeners, 
who never tired of hearing of the terrible event. When the 
White Guards took Ekaterinburg an investigating judge called 
Sokoloy was instructed to establish what had happened. His 
reports were published. 

T'here was the testimony of a certain Medrelan who had 
been one of the Czar’s prison guards and had later been 
captured. 

. I went out into the courtyard, which was enclosed by 
a fence, but before I reached the road I heard firing. I at once 


20 


turned back into the house—only two or three minutes had 
passed—and when I entered the room where the executions 
had taken place I saw all the members of the Imperial family 
lying on the floor, wounded in many parts of the body. Blood 
was flowing in streams. 'T'he doctor, the waiting-woman and 
the two servants had also been shot. When I came in the heir 
tothethrone was still alive and was groaningalittle. Yurowski 
went over to him and fired two or three shots at him; then the 
heir to the throne lay still. The sight of the killings and the 
smell of blood made me feel ill. After they had been killed 
Yurowski said to one of the men to fetch some of the guards 
and wash away the blood. Outside I met two of the older 
guards, Ivan Starkov and Konstantin Dobrynin. Dobrynin 
asked me: ‘Has Nicholas II been shot?’ I answered that 
Nicholas II and his whole family had been shot . 

And there was the testimony of another guard, Yakimov. 

. the first to fall was the Czar and then the heir to the 

throne. Dimidova struggled and covered herself with cushions. 
She was bayoneted by one or two Russians belonging to the 
“Special Commission’. When they had fallen they began to in- 
spect them and finished some of them off with revolvers and 
bayonets. Of all the members of the Imperial family only one 
was said to have been killed with a bayonet thrust.”’ 

When Baron von Kleist told people things like this or read 
them out to them, they listened in silence. "Then they would 
talk the affair over until late at night, for it was constantly in 
their minds; they would produce more material of their own 
— half truths, rumours, fantasies. “But, Arthur Ivanovitch,” 
they would say, “isn’t it the case that perhaps not everything 
in the reports is accurate. Some people say that only the Czar 
and the Czarevitch were killed. Dzherzinsky, the head of the 
Moscow Cheka, is supposed to have said himself that the 
women weren’t touched—that they were removed alive. 
They. are supposed to be in a cloister in Siberia, isn’t that so, 
Arthur Ivanovitch?” 


21 


Baron von Kleist had to admit that he had heard such stories 
too. On the other hand, like them, he had heard reports which 
said just the opposite—such as that this story about the cloister 
could not be true because the women had been killed—only 
one had escaped, one of the Czar’s daughters, who had been 
left for dead. “Do you know anything about it, Arthur Ivano- 
vitch?” they would ask. 'T'he Baron could only shrug his shoul- 
ders; for how could that be? 

That was how they used to talk and think of itall. Perhaps 
the Bolshevik regime wouldn’t last long. Perhaps they would 
be able to go home again. Perhaps there wasn’t so very long to 
wait. In church they sang their chorales—those Russian 
chorales which sound like folk-songs: in the restaurants they 
sang their folk-songs, which were sober and simple, like 
prayers. T'hey revelled in the dream of a happy future not far 
away. F 
The priest gave them his blessing. ’I’hey crossed themselves 
and then thronged out of the church on to the street. It was a 
bright, sunny day. Baron von Kleist took his wife’sarm. With 
a smile they greeted Baroness von Buxhoeveden, a former 
lady-in-waiting to the Empress, but before they could start a 
conversation the Baron heard his name being called. Heturned 
round. Behind him stood a plump woman of some fifty years 
of age. She was excited and jerky in her movements; she 
kneaded her large handbag with nervous fingers and her 
artificial curls quivered as she looked earnestly up at the 
Baron. | 

“Excuse me, are you Baron von Kleist? They told me 
what you looked like and said I would find you here. I have 
something to tell you, if you please. It is—I mean I have 
something important, terribly important, to tell you.” 

“Really—who are you?” 

“Peuthert, sir, Klara Peuthert.” 

“Is it so important er 


22 


“Oh, it is. It’s sensational.” 

"The Baron looked the woman up and down dubiously. His 
wife made a sceptical grimace as if she wondered what sort of 
sensation this woman could produce. 

“I haven’t a great deal of time,” said the Baron shortly. 
*“Kindly be brief.” 

“But you will have time,” exclaimed Fräulein Peuthert 
aggressively. "Then she launched out: She had been in the asy- 
lum but they mustn’t jump to false conclusions, she was quite 
normal, even the doctors had seen that—that was why they 
had discharged her because otherwise they didn’t let you out 
so easily, did they? ’I'he Baron would be surprised if he knew 
who had been in the next bed to her in the hospital—a woman 
patient, the patient the papers were always talking about and 
telling people to report ifthey knew who she was. T'he Baron 
must have read about her or heard people talking about her. 
But she, Fräulein Peuthert, knew who the girl was. She was 
quite certain—it was a sensation—the kind that would be a 
sensation in world politics. 

“For goodness’ sake, woman, what is it you want?” said 
Baroness Buxhoeveden sharply, interrupting the torrent of 
words. Fräulein Peuthert took a deep breath. 

“The unidentified girl,” she said with immense effect, “the 
unidentified girl who won’t say who she is, is the Grand 
Duchess Tatyana Nikolayevna, the second daughter of the 
ezar; 

That evening the Russian restaurant which the Baron 
regularly patronised was packed. "The rumour that one of 
the Czar’s daughters had turned up in Berlin had spread 
among the &migres like a forest fire. Witnesses of what 
happened outside the church had seen to that. 

They sat round the tables and talked till their heads swam. 
Their mood was a mixture of feverish excitement, credulous 
joy and scepticism. 

“It’s nonsense. You can take it from me that it’s nonsense.” 


23 


“Why? Why shouldn’t it be true? Everyone knows that 
one of the Czar’s daughters survived.” 

“No one knows for certain. People only say so.” 

“All right, then. But why shouldn’t she have survived?” 

“Do you mean to say she would simply have stayed there in 
the asylum? Just like that? Ifshe wasthe Grand Duchess Tat- 
yana she would have said so.” 

“How do you know that she didn’t?”’ 

“Suppose she did—some people in that asylum think they 
are the Emperor of China.” 

“Something must be done,” said a voice at another table. “I 
tell you the official representatives ofthe Russian &migres have 
a duty to decide with their own eyes whether there isanything 
in the story the woman told this morning.” 

“I was in Ekaterinburg then,” said another voice. “Every- 
one told you that a peasant cart had crossed the bridge over 
the Bug secretly in the night. It was the last bridge left over 
the river—a pontoon bridge. "The German sappers built it 
during the war. Everyone said one of the Grand Duchesses 
was in the cart—badly wounded but still alive.” 

“But that was supposed to be Anastasia and not I atyana.” 

“It doesn’t matter. No one saw her anyway.” 

“Well, Baron von Kleist is going to the asylum tomorrow 
morning early.” 

“Has he said so?” 

“Somebody told me.” 

They drank and talked eagerly and as they talked they 
listened with one ear to the band. It was singing: ““T'he snow 
has covered you, Russia, little mother... .” 


Chief Inspector Dr. Gruenberg was sitting in his office in the 
headquarters of the Berlin Police. He was in his middle fifties. 
Younger colleagues, new to the job, said of him that he was 
already a little dry, a little dusty, but a decent chap who didn’t 


24 


sit on his high horse. His superiors valued him because he did 
his work calmly and thoughtfully even if he were a bit old- 
fashioned because most of hisservice had been pre-war—under 
the monarchy. Not that that was a drawback—on the con- 
trary, it meant that you could rely on him. Dr. Gruenberg 
himself believed he had learned from life that in the long run 
everything can be explained in terms oflogic. He was not with- 
out some property of hisown in the country; some people held 
that he had retained a tendency to be human because, out 
there, in the country, he bred puppies and grew roses. T’he in- 
ternal telephone rang and Gruenberg answered. His immedi- 
ate superior was on the line. Gruenberg listened for a while. 

“Yes,” he said at last. “I have had a report already. ’T’'he 
€migres have gone off their heads of course .... Baron von 
Kleist? You mean he is the most sensible of them—I don’t 
know—I have heard it said that he likes to make himself 
important. A daughter of the Czar turns up— what more 
could he ask for? T'hey have all worked it out like this—if only 
they get into the good books of this girl they’ve discovered at 
Dalldorf they’ll be showered with honours when the Imperial 
court is restored. T'he girl hasn’t opened her mouth since 17th 
February 1920. Ifshe says anything now we will be compelled 
to do something about it. I don’t care how we close the case— 
it’s all the same whether we write in her name as Grand 
Duchess X. But I would prefer it to be simply X. 'T'he other 
way round will just mean trouble. .. . All right I’ll go out 
right away. Maybe she’ll appoint me Commander of the 
Palace Guard on the spot.” 

Gruenberg smiled slightly at the telephone, mildly pleased 
with his own joke. Then he hung up and buried himself once 
more in the files on the desk in front of him. 


25 


4 


(as) 


The girl had crept almost out of sight under the blanket. 'T'he 
sun was shining in at the window and threw golden circles on 
the white cover. The ward sister looked anxiously at the 
patient and wondered whether she should intervene. 'This 
Baron von Kleist and Baroness Buxhoeveden, who had come 
with him, had been talking at the girl for a quarter of an hour 
now; but she merely shook her head and said nothing. 

“There’s no point in going on with this,” exclaimed the 
Baroness impatiently. “We stand about here and she doesn’t 
utter a sound.” She looked at the Baron with a mixture of 
annoyance and contempt. “I thought there was something 
funny about it from the beginning.” 

“But you saw the Grand Duchess often enough,” muttered 
the Baron. 

“If she keeps disappearing under the bed-clothes, there’s 
nothing I can say.”’ ’T'hen she had an inspiration. “If only you 
would go out for aminute—I guarantee that I can tell you in 
a minute whether it is Tatyana or not.” 

The Baron walked undecidediy towards the door, torn 
between disappointment and a vague hope. In the corridor he 
met Gruenberg. 

“We have already spoken on the telephone,” said Gruen- 
berg and they exchanged courtesies. Before they could become 
involved in a conversation they heard shrieks from the ward: 
“I not send for you. I send for no one. Go away. I want peace 
—nothing else. Go away, I say. No, No, No.” 

As the voice rose to a pitch, the two men rushed in. A nurse 


26 


ran past them into the corridor. They saw the Baroness tear- 
ing off the bed-clothes in order to catch the girl by thearm and 
drag her out of bed. T'hen the Baroness turned towards them. 

““There—there you have it. She’s a fraud. And mad into 
the bargain. The Grand Duchess Tatyana was bigger than 
I. This girl here is smaller. T'o think that we came here at 
all? 

She let the whimpering girl sink back into the bed. T'he 
Baron stared at her as she pressed herself against the wall, 
clasping her pillow in her arms as if it gave her protection. 

“Come along, Baron, what is the use of watching this per- 
formance any longer.” 

Gruenberg stayed behind alone with the girl. He glanced 
briefly at the women in the other beds; they stared at him dully 
—-some wept, some were merely angry. "Then he sat on the 
edge of the girl’s bed and pulled out of his breast pocket the 
same illustrated paper as Fräulein Peuthert had produced. He 
compared the girl with the persons in the photograph. "T'hen 
he thought for a long time. 

"The doctor came in. 

“The nurse has told me what has happened,” he said 
sternly. “I should never have allowed the interview. I must 
ask you to leave the patient alone now.” 

“Very well,” said Gruenberg quietly, and deep in thought 
he left the room. 

Gruenberg hesitated to leave the asylum and walked up and 
down the corridor. Mechanically he felt in his coat-pocket for 
the eucalyptus sweets which he always had about him, took 
one out of its paper and stuck it in his mouth. Eucalyptus 
sweets were his passion—when he was in a very good temper 
he would offer them to his subordinates. However much they 
disliked them they had to swallow them down out of respect. 

The doctor came out of the ward. 

“You are still here?” he said and he sounded far from 


pleased. 
27 


Gruenberg did not care. 

“How is she?” 

“She is completely exhausted,” answered the doctor. “She 
said she did not wish to see that woman again.” 

“Who said that? T'he sick girl?” 

“Yes—she said she did not wish people to interest them- 
selves in her when they had behaved to her mother the 
way Baroness Buxhoeveden had. I have noidea what she 
means.” 

“Did she mention the name “Buxhoeveden’?” 

“Yes,” said the doctor with amazement. “Why?” 

“Because she wasn’t told who was going to visit her. At 
least so I understand from Baron von Kleist.” So she knows 
exactly who was there, thought Gruenberg. 

“What about the nurses?” he asked. “Some of them must 
have hada great deal to do with her. She’s been here two years, 
after all.” 

“She is very shut up in herself.” 

“I know—still.” 

“I will ask the matron which nurse is responsible for her. I 
think she’s called Barftknecht.” 

“If I could have a few words with her ie 

"They went into the doctor’s oflice. Gruenberg had to wait 
a little before a middle-aged woman came in. She wore nurse’s 
uniform. She had a soft, good-natured face and a thin voice 
which sounded as if she was apologising for every word she 
said. 

“The doctor told me tocome. You wanted to speak to me,” 
she said. 

“‘Frau Barftknecht?” 

She nodded. 

“It's about our unknown girl here—what do you think 
about her?” | 

“Oh, she’s a nice person,” said Frau Barftknecht in her 
thin voice. Gruenberg suppressed a smile. 


28 


“T’m sure she is,” he said. “I mean— you must have spoken 
to her a lot—in the course of your daily duties.” 

“She eats so little, you know. I have often told her she 
should eat more. She weighed nine stone when she was 
brought here—now she only weighs about seven. And we 
offer her plenty to eat—it’s only that she doesn’t want any 
er 

Chief Inspector Gruenberg nodded patiently. 

“Does she often say odd things? Does she ever speak about 
things in general—has she ever said anything that struck you 
particularly?” 

"The nurse laid the tips of her fingers together. . 

“I don’t know—she knows a lot about military things — 
particularly about the Russian army, you know. That did sur- 
prise me.” 

“About the Russian army?’’ asked Gruenberg quickly. 

The thin voice became still smaller. 

“Yes—that’s so.” 

“What did she say? Can you give details?” 

“I don’t know anything about these things. I was Just sur- 
prised. She talked about the names of regiments or something 
like that. T'hey’re difhcult those Russian names. I can’t re- 
member them. I thought perhaps her father was a Russian 
officer. Or maybe her husband. But her father more likely. 
She’s still so young that I don’t think she was married. And 
she said something about Copenhagen.” 

“What did she say?” 

“She has relations there.” 

The Chief Inspector remembered that the Czar’s mother, 
Maria Feodorovna, was a Danish princess, and that since the 
collapse of the Czarist regime she had been at the Danish 
court. And he thought he remembered that one of the Czar’s 
sisters, the Grand Duchess Olga, was in Copenhagen. 

“What did she say about her relatives? Just think. Did she 


mention any names?” 


29 


“I don’tthink so. I don’t know. She spoke about her grand- 
mother, too. She always wore black, she said.” 

“She didn’t mention her er s name! 

END, ” 

“Did she talk about her grandmother in connection with 
Copenhagen?” 

“No—the talk about Copenhagen was later. Perhaps Frau 
Buchholz knows more. She usually does night duty.” 

*]Is she another nurse? Can 1 see her?” 

“She’s at home. I would say so—she is mostly on night 
duty. I don’t know her address but you can get that from the 
ofhice.” 

“Did you notice anything else? I’m putting you through it, 
aren’t 1?” 

“That doesn’t matter—really not. I think she knows quite 
a lot about royalty. She spoke about Prince Heinrich of 
Prussia and his wife, Princess Irene, and about the Grand 
Duke of Hesse. Not in connection with each other you under- 
stand, she never speaks connectedly—only a word here and 
there. I simply thought she was interested in people like that 
because she is an oflicer’s daughter and had heard about it at 
home.” 

Clearly the nurse had no more to reveal. She gave Gruen- 
berg an inquisitive glance. 

“Is what I have said any use to you?” 

“I don’t know yet—perhaps,” said Gruenberg and smiled. 
“Thank you, anyway.” 

“She really is a nice person and someone should help her,” 
said the nurse, softly and patiently. T'hen she left the room and 
Gruenberg felt for another sweet. 

He had his own views about the police inquiries so far. In 
the records there was nothing of what the nurse had said to 
him. ’The police had interrogated the patient themselves but 
she was obstinate, unco-operative and said nothing. T'hey had 
spoken to the doctors, who had made long statements about her 


30 


2” 


spiritual, mental and physical condition. T’he whole thing has 
gone very far wrong, said Gruenberg to himself. He had come 
to the conclusion that the time had come to concentrate on 
details, on tiny hints, on vague statements—things the girl 
might have said or done when she did not feel exposed to 
the assaults of the officials and doctors. He suddenly realised 
that he must search for things which the sick girl had let slip 
unconsciously—when the nurses brought her food, or made 
her bed or kept her company at night when she could not 
sleep. 

As he left the main building he threw a glance up at the 
cold, sober edifice. He saw the barred windows and thought 
that the reasons which would make a girl in her early twenties 
take refuge in such stubborn silence simply to make people 
treat her asa difhicult case and keep her in an asylum must be 
strong onesindeed. He walked along the drive to the gate. T'he 
tall trees on either hand with their attempt to simulate a park, 
to be substitutes for the sight of the free, open country, could 
not conceal the fact that whoever had to live here was strictly 
cut off from life. 

Gruenberg waited for a tram. ’T'hey were niggardly with 
expenses at Headquarters and even a tangled affair like this did 
not permit him the luxury ofa taxi. In the tram he rode to the 
address they had given him in the asylum office, climbed to the 
second floor and rang the bell. 

Erna Buchholz opened the door. She was an energetic, im- 
posing woman, who listened calmly to his apology for disturb- 
ing her. T'hen she led him into her room, which was small and 
comfortable with stupid still-life paintings on the wall—clearly 
her landlady insisted that they hang there. "They sat down and 
she eyed him critically. "Then he said his piece—who he was 
and what he wanted. 

“Naturally I can tell you some things,” she said. “It hap- 
pens that the night nurse’s post is in the ward where she is ly- 
ing. Besides she did attempt to commit suicide by jumping into 


31 


the canal. In such cases I have instructions to keep particu- 
larly close watch.” 

“Your colleague, Frau Barftknecht, told me that the 
patient knows a good deal about Russia. She is supposed to 
have spoken about Russian regiments and military matters.” 

“Maybe. I told her once that I wasata charity ball in Mos- 
cow and said that Russian oflicers dance well. T'hen she smiled 
and said yes, she knew.”’ 

“How did you come to speak about that?” 

“At night I am just beside her bed with my table and 
chair. Once I unpacked the food I had brought with me and 
she had a very hungry look. So I offered her some and she ate 
heartily.” 

“Your colleague told me that she hardly touched any- 
thing.” 

“She doesn’t like it when the whole ward can see her. I 
think that is why she always hides behind her cushions and 
won’t say a word—during the day, that is. I can only say that 
we have had long conyersations at night. "Then she was al- 
most merry—quietly, of course, so as not to waken the others. 
I told her about Moscow and she told me about Petersburg. 
I take it that she comes from there.” 

“‘For two years we have been trying to discover who she is. 
You haven’t told the police any of this,” said Gruenberg with 
no attempt to conceal the slight reproach. 

“First ofall, no one asked me,” answered the woman coldly. 
“I was not questioned at all. Secondly, I reported to the office 
that I spoke Russian to her. So far as I know that was entered 
in the case history. But then they knew that she must be a 
foreigner and so perhaps they did not think anything of 
BER 

Gruenberg sighed resignedly. 

“And / learn it by the by—by mere chance. How does it 


come that you speak Russian and how did you come to be in 
Moscow?” 


32 


“I was born in Libau. T'hey spoke Russian in the school I 
went to but at home we always spoke German. T'hen I went 
to Tula and other towns—Moscow, too, later on. Always in 
Russian families as companion or children’s nurse. In the war 
I was interned in Russia. In 1919 I came to Berlin and trained 
as a nurse in Dalldorf. T'hat’s how it all comes about.” 

Gruenberg looked at the woman thoughtfully. She was 
calm and at her ease. She was perhaps about thirty-five; her 
manner confident and unforced. He had the feeling that she 
would like him to go soon. But she did not give him the im- 
pression that she gave way to fantasies out of sheer boredom 
on night duty and that she was now presenting him with what 
she had thought up in a half-waking state. 

“So you say the girl is Russian,” he said. It was a statement 
not a question. 

“It was on the night we talked about dancing,” she said. “I 
don’t know—-perhaps I simply began to speak Russian, per- 
haps I asked her first whether she understood Russian. In any 
case she speaks fluently and I can’t believe that anyone but a 
Russian would speak the language so well. More I cannot say. 
After a time she stopped. She said we ought to speak German. 
She was a bit funny about it. But she is eccentric. Sometimes 
she has real tantrums—as far as that goes she could easily be 
a Grand Duchess.” 

“So you have heard the story that is going the rounds?” 

“T'hat Peuthert woman shouted about it long enough.” 

“Yes, she talks a lot,” said Gruenberg. “When did you 
speak Russian to the girl?” 

“I know what you are thinking,” she said calmly. “You 
think that I heard the story from the Peuthert woman and 
now I would like to have something to do with the discovery 
too. But this happened long before Peuthert came to Dalldorf. 
I told you, I reported it. You can check the date.” She rose. 
She seemed offended although she did not wish to show it. 


Gruenberg rose, too. 


c 33 


“Our professional scepticism loses us all sympathy,” he said 
and smiled weakly. She showed him to the door. 

“If you have any further questions ” she began politely 
but he was aware that her pleasure in telling him her story had 
gone. 

“ Another time, perhaps,” he said. 


34 


3 


aaa 


Baron von Kleist stared in rage at Fräulein Peuthert’s round, 
shining face. "T'hey were sitting in his drawing-room. Fräulein 
Peuthert sank deep into the armchair; she was enjoying the 
soft cushions—she found them very comfortable and the 
Baron’s rage, which she had been stoking for the last quarter 
of an hour, could not mar her good humour. 

“My dear Baron,” she said and her intimate tone was like a 
shock to him, “it is your fault ifthings have gone wrong. Must 
you frighten the poor girl like that? Did you have to go and 
tackle her with Baroness Buxhoeveden?” 

“First ofall you try to tell me that this sick girl isthe Grand 
Duchess 'Tatyana,’ said the Baron stiffly, “and now for the 
last ten minutes you have done nothing but repeat that she 
isn’t Tatyana after all but Anastasia. You say whatever suits 
you. And what do you mean by ‘tackling her with Baroness 
Buxhoeveden’? Baroness Buxhoeveden was a lady-in-wait- 
in a 

EA fine lady-in-waiting: she left the Empress in the lurch 
when the big day came % 

The baron leapt up from his chair. 

“Think what you are saying,” he shouted, losing all con- 
trol. “I will not allow you to insult the Baroness.” 

“Aren’t you formal,” said Fräulein Peuthert and she grin- 
ned maliciously. ‘Such nice chairs and then you stand. When 
things folded up in Russia and the Imperial family was sent to 
Siberia that Baroness of yours—the one you are jumping about 
for—made herself scarce. Make yourself at home again and 


35 


sit down. I’ll explain it all to you. "T’hey tried lots of times to 
set the Imperial family free. It didn’t work. And the Empress 
was sure the Baroness was somehow to blame, do you under- 
stand? All right, then the Baroness was brought to Ekaterin- 
burg as a prisoner herself. So it didn’t do her any good after all 
to have flirted with the other side.” 

“]’m beginning to see just how wild your imagination can 
be,” hissed the baron, still standing in front of her. 

“Perhaps you are learning to understand me,” said Fräulein 
Peuthert calmly. She thrust a plump finger towards the baron. 
“You’ll find that what I say is correct. Whether the Baroness 
tried to get into the good books of the Bolsheviks or not is 
neither here nor there. Anyway the Empress thought she did 
and she didn’t make any secret of it. She even told her daugh- 
ters. Are you surprised that the girl out there in Dalldorf gets 
rubbed the wrong way when the Baroness herself rushes into 
the room? I would have crawled under the bed.” 

“Where did you learn all this about the Baroness,” asked 
Kleist gloomily. 

“From Anastasia, naturally.” 

“Do stop talking about Anastasia. Just because the Baroness 
has definitely established that she isn’t "Tatyana you come 
and = 

“I went to visit her today. I asked what happened with the 
Baroness and she told me what I have just told you. I never 
said she was ’Iaatyana. I only said that she must be one of the 
Czar’s daughters.” 

“Of course you said she was 'Tatyana,” said the baron 
forcibly. He went to his desk, took a cigar from a box, cut and 
lit it. He really would throw this woman out, he said to him- 
self; he busied his hands with the comforting task of preparing 
the cigar, because he felt a great urge to take her by the throat. 

“Suppose I did say so.”’ Fräulein Peuthert was unshaken in 
her conviction. “I believed it. "T'oday Anastasia is the very age 
her sister Tatyana was when they took the photograph that 


36 


put me on to the whole affair. At least just about the same age. 
It’s quite logical. Sisters naturally look alike. I didn’t think of 
the difference in age. Anastasia would be twenty-one now. 
"Thhat’s the exact age of the girl in Dalldorf.” 

“You always find the right answers,” murmured the Baron. - 
The cigar was having its effect and he sat down again. He 
would have been perfectly willing to follow Fräulein Peu- 
thert’s thought processes but her manner and the fiasco over 
her story of "Tatyana prevented him. He remembered what 
Baroness Buxhoeveden had said to him when they left the asy- 
lum after the unsuccessful trip to Dalldorf. She was not going 
to be deceived, she said, by a certain facial resemblance; then 
she had repeated her argument that Tatyana had been much 
bigger built than the sick girl. So even the Baroness, Kleist 
could not help thinking, had been struck by a similarity in 
their features. 

This thought, together with Fräulein Peuthert’s loud asser- 
tions that the sick gir—there was no doubt about it this time 
— was the Grand Duchess Anastasia, came temptingly close 
to the baron’s secret wish— which was that perhaps he him- 
self might make a historical discovery. 

“Of course I get the right answers,” said Fräulein Peuthert 
with a smug smile. “I will tell you something else, my dear 
Baron”’— he swallowed hard as she once more slipped into 
calling him ‘dear Baron’— “if you were absolutely convinced 
that there was nothing in this story, if you were sure that the 
girl could not possibly be a daughter of the Czar, then I would 
have been out at that door long ago.” 

The Baron shifted about in his chair. He felt cornered. He 
opened his mouth to say something but Fräulein Peuthert 
snatched the opportunity from him. 

“Ie’s true, isn’t it? Besides, what do you expect, I’m not the 
only one by any means who has recognised Anastasia. I had 
bad luck with Tatyana but, I tell you, with Anastasia I can’t 
go wrong. I was out there today with a couple of Emigres.” 


er 


"The Baron was suddenly all attention. 

“Out where?” he asked sharply. 

“In Dalldorf, of course. With that Russian ex-cavalry cap- 
tain, Herr von Schwabe, and with Frau von Tolstoy. You 
know both of them.” 

“ And what was the aim of the visit?” 

“That has spoilt things for you, hasn’t it?”” Fräulein Peu- 
thert laughed loudly. “It’s quite simple—I told the two of 
them that I had made a mistake the first time but now I was 
convinced that the girl is Anastasia. "They came along with 
me to hhavea look at her. Frau von Toolstoy was often at court. 
She behaved a lot better than the Baroness.” 

“All right—tell me what happened then,” said the Baron. 

“Usually you say I speak too much—now you can’t get 
enough out of me,” said Fräulein Peuthert sarcastically. “You 
might at least offer me something—a cigarette, for instance.” 

He stretched out for the cigarettes and offered her the 
packet. She took one and he lit it for her. 

“Things look different now,” she giggled. “What do you 
expect would happen? "They are both delighted. They saw 
that it must be Anastasia. "They want to make sure that the 
poor girl comes out of the loony-bin. "T’hey are going to do the 
very thing you couldn’t do. Frau von Schwabe is expecting. If 
it isa girl they are going to call it Anastasia. In memory of the 
great moment, the captain said. How’s that?” 

Baron von Kleist rose and walked uneasily up and down the 
room; his cigar was half-smoked and cold between his fingers. 
At last he came to a halt right in front ofthe woman and stared 
at her artificial curls. 

“If there is anything in this story 4 

“Then the others will have the honour and you’ll have a 
disappointment,” she interrupted. “It’s quite obvious—she 
isn’t Just an ordinary girl. A daughter ofthe Czar is somebody 
that matters. If things ever change in Russia—the people who 
look after Anastasia will have expectations.” 


38 


"The baron relit his cigar with deliberation. 

“That’s not the point as far as I am concerned,” he 
muttered. 

Fräulein Peuthert threw a quick glance at him but for once 
said nothing. 


Extract from the police records: “Berlin, 25th May 1922. 
Subject—Unidentified Girl. On the instructions of the Police 
Office Reinickedorf an unidentified girl, inmate of Dalldorf, 
was handed over to the care of Baron Kleist of 9 Nettelbeck- 
strasse, Berlin, W.62. A request from Baron Kleist to this 
effect was granted with the approval of the director of the 
asylum. "T’he unidentified girl continues to refuse to give any 
information about herself. Currently various steps are being 
taken in Russian circles to discover her identity, since she is 
assumed to be the Grand Duchess Anastasia. So far it has not 
been conclusively established that she is in fact the Grand 
Duchess although in many quarters there is no doubt that she 
bears a resemblance to her.” 

Chief Inspector Gruenberg read the entry and laid it care- 
fully aside. Now that things had taken this turn he was not at 
all sure that the matter would ever be cleared up. 


"They were all there—Captain von Schwabe, Frau von Tol- 
stoy, Baron von Kleist, his wife Maria—and even Baroness 
Buxhoeveden had come along, but she kept herself a little 
apart. They were the chosen circle, who were permitted to 
approach the girl, who were allowed the honour of being 
near her, were able to hear her few stammered words. A 
little further off stood other &migres—people of less impor- 
tance—who were clearly trying to decide whether to cheer 
or not. 

It was a sunny morning in May; the blue sky stretched 


=, 


peacefully over this little confused erowd of men and women. 
Later some ofthe more enraptured among them thought they 
remembered that at this moment the birds sang a special song, 
the spring fowers had a particular scent and a very special 
fragrance was borne on the mild air. 

The girl walked along with natural dignity, inclining her 
head graciously but shyly; to all she gave an impression of 
gentleness, graciousness and gratitude. ’I'he brick buildings of 
the asylum and its barred windows fell into the background 
like a grotesque back-cloth, which was not so much unreal as 
impossible, and out of the gloom the girl stepped into the 
warm, life-giving sun. 

A taxi was waiting at the porter’s lodge. T'he driver was a 
White Russian for whom it was an honour to offer to drive 
her without charge to the Baron’s house. ’T'hey were all 
gathered round the vehicle, some full of deep feeling, some a 
prey to corruption, to quiet credulity or silent speculation. In 
the taxi, the seat next to the girl was reserved for Frau von 
Schwabe with her devoted eyes and fecund body; her deepest 
wish—she had uttered it to the Holy Mother of Kazan— was 
that the child she awaited might be a girl so that she could give 
itthe name Anastasia. For did not the name mean ‘She who 
has come again?” And had not the girl who walked towards the 
taxi literally come again that very day? 


'I'he Baron’s house was a good middle-class flat—not too ex- 
pensive, for there was not enough money for that, and not too 
simple, either, because after all he did have a certain position. 
Asthe girland.a chosen few went in, they seemed to be passing 
under triumphal arches. 

‘The whirl of activity lasted for months. Daily there were 
countless visitors. Old acquaintances kept reappearing and 
new, unknown faces, too, emerged—men and women who 
gazed with curious eyes at the quiet figure sitting there on the 


40 


sofa in the living-room, with her great eyes and her pale, won- 
derfully fascinating face. 

"They hung about waiting for some statement, for a couple 
of words which might give them certainty, which would help 
them to kill their secret doubts. Often for days there was noth- 
ing for them to hear. Often, on special occasions, the girl be- 
gan to speak and everyone listened with excitement. What 
they heard were fragments—they seemed to feel the girl grop- 
ing for her memories; now and again finding something, she 
gave it utterance. 

“When we were still little,” said the girl in her slow, broken 
way of speaking, with her strong accent, “Papa used to play 
with us. He used to play helter-skelter. We had a room— and 
there was helter-skelter.” She is speaking, thought the visitors, 
at last she is speaking. But then it was all over again. 

“Papa used to play in the snow— he liked to play with us,” 
said the girl. “We threw snow at him— he was all white and 
. then he threw us into the snow.” 

“But I wasa bad girl,” said the girl, smiling, and the visitors 
smiled, too, “I was so wild and naughty. I ran like a boy. I was 
up the trees in the park. I tear all.my clothes. Mama was so 
cross.” T’he visitors smiled delightedly—this was enough to 
satisfy them. Next day they came again so as not to miss any- 
thing. 

“I think I wasa funny child,” said the girl, ‘a funny child. 
"They often laugh because I did funny things and I thought I 
must always be funny. But once Papa was very cross. 'T’hat 
was on ship. The sentry was a sailor. I tugged him and 
bothered him and kicked him. But he had to stand still. Sud- 
denly Papa came from behind and took me tight by the hair— 
I had them always loose. Papa was so cross and took me away. 
I was so ashamed.” 

“With Mama we spoke always English,” said the girl. 
“When we were with Papa—alone with him— we spoke Rus- 
sian, but all together we spoke only English. Mama did not 


41 


like to speak Russian—she hadn’t a very good accent. That 
was because she was German.” 

“Mama.did not like Germany much,” said the girl. “She 
was bitter over the war against Germany. Papa and Mama 
spoke bitterly of Kaiser Wilhelm and with scorn. He wanted 
to harm us but he hurt himself too.” 

The visitors listened. Eagerly they gleaned these scraps of 
memory and ran off with their spoils to offer them to persons 
they expected to be informed about the Imperial court. And 
they showered questions on them. 

“Yesterday she said there was a helter-skelter. Was there 
one and did the Czar play with his children?” they asked. "They 
were delighted when they got confirmation and they spread 
the news. 

Their attentions, their continual presence surrounded the 
girl like a thick, coarse blanket. They buzzed around her and 
kept repeating that they meant well. T'hey poured out cour- 
tesy, sympathy and curiosity before the girl, who shrank back 
in fear. T'hey looked forward to a reward in heaven and—in 
an unspoken corner of their thoughts—to the possibility of re- 
ward from the house of Romanov. "They dragged the girl to 
the Russian church and the Russian restaurants. "They were 
everywhere and they never flagged. "They made the girl ill 
with their respect and their continual activity. 


"T'hey sat in Baron von Kleist’s flat, drank vodka and tea and 
smoked. 'T'hey talked quietly about Rasputin, the great monk, 
the holy libertine. T'hey began to tell slightly improper stories, 
whispered that he had perhaps— with the Empress herself— 
and they glanced over to the sofa to see whether she heard 
their whispers and how she reacted. T'hey had got used to the 
girl and wanted to have their little spiteful jokes. Hadn’t Ras- 
putin gone into the nursery every night at T'sarskoe Selo? 
Hadn’t he stroked the daughters of the Empress? Hadn’t he 


42 


always kissed them when he said goodnight? What do you 
mean “nursery’? they whispered, the Grand Duchesses weren’t 
, So very young any more—they were young girls, fine morsels. 
for Grigori Yefimovitch Rasputin with his long beard and a 
Siberian soul in which holiness and lust went together. 

Frau von Tolstoy sat at the piano. She played whatever 
came into her head, improvising, trying—so painful did she 
find it—to drown their idle chatter. T'he girl’s face twitched. 
She tried hard to listen only to the music and not to the other 
things. 

"The conversation died down and Frau von Tolstoy gave a 
sigh of relief. An idea sprang to her mind. Her slim fingers 
sought a couple of chords and at last found a quiet melody, a 
waltz, at once graceful and gay, which they had not heard her 
play before. 

The girl sat bolt upright as if the music had touched some- 
thing in her—as if it were drawing back a curtain. "T'here was 
a smile in her eyes. ’I'he door-bell rang shrilly. Reluctantly 
Baron von Kleist stood up and went out into the corridor. 

As she struck the last chords Frau von T’olstoy stared at the 
girl as if bewitched. "T'he others suddenly felt that there was 
some hidden meaning in the melody. "I'hen they heard the 
girl’s voice. 

“I know that,” she said. “You play it for me once, didn’t 
you? In Tsarskoe Selo. I know you play it.” She had a 
gleam of recognition. “You play it for us, for the children. 
"That is your waltz. It is, isn’t it?”’ Frau von Tolstoy sobbed. 
Her eyes had tears in them. 

“You recognised it,’ she said with difhiculty, “no one else 
knows the tune—but you recognised it R 

The Baron opened the door. Fräulein Peuthert stood there, 
bright red in the face, breathing heavily after climbing the 
stairs. T’he Baron’s fingers itched to bang the door to, but the 
Fräulein raised her umbrella like a battering ram. 'Their eyes 
met and revealed their mutual contempt. 


43 


“] expect that it isn’t convenient for you that I have come,” 
she said, spitting like a cat. She attacked at once. “I must see 
Anastasia.” 

“ Must you shout like that?”’ retorted the Baron. “I did not 
invite you here.” 

Fräulein Peuthert laughed bitterly. 

“Invited! I would have had to wait a while before you in- 
vited me. I’ve been waiting for months.” 

“I do not see that we have anything to discuss,” said the 
Baron coolly. “Be sensible—I have guests.” 

"The woman’s eyes blazed with anger. 

“I don’t want to speak to your guests or to you. I want to 
speak to Anastasia. Do you understand—I mean to speak to 
her. Right away. I want to ask her what she is thinking about. 
She must tell me to my face what she is thinking about.” 

She tried to push past the Baron, but he barred the way with 
his arm. 

“T should like to point out to you,” he said icily, “that you 
are in my house. I have said that I do not wish to receive you. 
And perhaps even you know what ‘disturbing the peace’ 
means.” 

“Don’t try that stuff on me,” she said. She was boiling with 
rage and had begun to shout and bawl. “I won’t be made a 
fool of. Don’t imagine that. Who do you think you are? Who 
discovered Anastasia? You or I? I discovered her. All alone. 
She has me to thank that she is being treated like a normal 
human being. She owes it to me that she has got away from 
Dalldorf. I'm not going to let myself be pushed aside—and 
certainly not by you. Don’t you think I can’t see what is going 
on. For months no one has shown their face. If I write here I 
get no reply. If I come here I’m told there is nobody at home. 
I suppose I’m not good enough for you. Who was she when 
she was in Dalldorf? A stupid young girl no one cared a straw 
for. But I did. I cared for no one but her. And now I’m no 
use any more. Now she isa fine lady, the Grand Duchess.” 


44 


Her voice became shriller and the words came tumbling 
out. “But she must know what is going on. T'here must be 
gold somewhere abroad, mustn’t there? The Czar must have 
put some away somewhere—in a nice safe place. "T'hat’s why 
you are all dancing round her. Don’t think I don’t know. I 
suppose you think that if she is recognised then she will in- 
herit it. And then she will have to pay you for dancing atten- 
dance on her—because one good turn deserves another, doesn’t 
ie” 

"The Baron was chalk-white. In his uncontrollable anger he 
struck her umbrella aside. 

“Get out,” he shouted at the screaming woman. T'he living- 
room door had opened and the Baron’s guests, startled by the 
noise, stared at the scene before them. ’I'he Baron pulled him- 
self together. He pushed the door against the raving woman’s 
sturdy body, thrust her out and closed it. Then he leant heavily 
against it while from the other side there came a stream of 
obscenities. "Ihe Baron pressed his lips together. ““I must beg 
your pardon,” he murmured amidst their embarrassed silence. 
“I really do beg your pardon. It isa matter of no significance.”’ 

He stared uncertainly at the girl who suddenly was standing 
before him. 

“Is it true what she said?” he heard her say with her deep 
voice. His attempt at a smile was unsuccessful. 

“She is out of her mind,” he said, “we all know that she is 
out of her mind.” T'hen he became very formal. “Will you be 
good enough to pardon the incident. It is best forgotten.” 

Next morning the girl had disappeared from the Baron’s 
flat. 


From the police records: “Subject: Unknown Woman miss- 
ing. Baron Kleist, 9 Nettelbeckstrasse, Berlin, W.62 reports 
that the unknown girl, entrusted to him with permission of 
the Police Ofice Reinickedorf on her leaving Dalldorf Asy- 
lum on 22nd May 1922, has been absent from his dwelling 


45 


since 12th August 1922; her present whereabouts is unknown. 
He suspects that a certain Fräulein Peuthert, domiciled at ı 
Schumannstrasse is sheltering and concealing her. In order to 
determine Baron von Kleist’s rights over the unknown 
woman the relevant documents are required from Reinicken- 
dorf. Please treat as urgent.” 

From a police notice: ““. ... the missing person is wearing 
the following articles of clothing—a yellow coat, a light green 
felt hat, high-laced boots, a lilac cotton dress.” 

From a police report: “... Klara Peuthert, unmarried, at 
present on poor relief, born at Meissen on 3rd September 
187 1,domiciled at ı Schumannstrasse, declared on being ques- 
tioned that she knew nothing of the present whereabouts of 
the missing person. From certain contradictory statements 
made by her it appears likely that she was not telling the 
truth 


46 


6 


NN aaa g\e\e\a\a\a\a\aNa 


The girl stood and leaned against the wall as if she found in it 
support to withstand the torrent of angry words which came 
from Fräulein Peuthert. 

“Have I done anything to you,” whispered the girl in her 
low voice. “I not know.” 

“I not know—-I not know,” the woman mocked her 
cruelly. “You don’t know anything do you? You have no 
idea, not the foggiest notion, you poor lamb. In Dalldorf you 
wouldn’t say who you were. I had to put you on to it. And 
when you were with Kleist, with that fine Baron of yours, 
you didn’t want to know me. I could hang about outside the 
door. I wasn’t let in. No one deigned to know me. So the 
gentleman threw me out. Because Her Royal Highness didn’t 
deign to receive Klara Peuthert, who people can treat like 
dirt. I’m telling you people can’t do that to me. On the con- 
trary. I’m not so stupid as you all think.” 

She was standing in the doorway between the tiny living- 
room and the kitchen. In the ceiling a weak, unshaded bulb 
fought the darkness with a pale, yellow light. From the kit- 
chen came the smell of dishwater. T'hrough the walls you 
could hear coughing and movements from the neighbour- 
ing house. It was an old dilapidated room with a few dark, 
dilapidated pieces of furniture, a gloomy hole. It was a place 
where Fräulein Peuthert’s destructive temperament could 
simmer. 

The sturdy woman stepped close up to the girl. "T'here was 
a threatening look in her eyes. 


47 


’ 


“There is something going on,” she said, controlling her 
temper. ““T'here’s something funny about you. Perhaps you 
aren’t Anastasia. What would you say if I thought you weren’t 
her at all? Come on, tell me. Of course you won’t open your 
mouth. T'hat’s your trump card. Not so stupid, are you? You 
let the others talk and do things. Something will come of itt— 
that’s what you think, isn’t it? T’hat has passed through my 
mind too. You gave me plenty of time to think—months! 
Perhaps you don’t want to hear my thoughts. Perhaps Her 
Royal Highness doesn’t wish to hear them. Well, why does 
no one do anything and find out what has happened to the last 
of the Czar’s family? "T’hat’s very odd, isn’t it?” 

The girl’s big eyes were fixed on Fräulein Peuthert. She 
seemed to be unmoved by what the other was saying. 

“You are my friend, I thought,” she said in a low voice. “I 
don’t want to go back to the Baron any more. I cannot stand 
it. I thought you my friend.” 

“ Ah—so because things went wrong with the Baron you 
come back to me,” cried Fräulein Peuthert ironically. “Why 
did they go wrong? "These fine &migr&s must have found out 
long ago whether you are Anastasia or not. T'hey hung about 
enough. I suppose they sent you away. 'T'hat’s very funny! 
You are supposed to have disappeared quietly. "They must have 
seen that there was something very fishy and now they are fed 
up to the teeth with being laughed at and having to stand there 
like fools. So they sent you here? I’m going to be the fool who’s 
left with you on my hands. I tell you I acted in good faith— 
no one can say I didn’t.” 

T'he astonishment with which the girl listened was barely 
perceptible. But suddenly there was a bright gleam in her big 
eyes, a shimmer of mirth, which irritated the other woman. 

“What is there to laugh at?” she spat in her rage. 

"The little Aame was extinguished. 

“I not laugh,” said the girl calmly. “But it is all strange. I 
want peace always. I not want to be nuisance. In Dalldorf I 


48 


was in peace. It is not my fault if it is over. It is not my fault 
that they all promise and are angry when it does not go right.” 

““Of course it’s not your fault, I’m beginning to learn that 
slowly,’” growled the woman bad-temperedly. A note of low 
cunning came into her voice. “But I’m slowly beginning to 
see that I must be careful. I have written a letter—to Princess 
Irene of Prussia. T'hat’s a surprise for you, isn’t it? She’s your 
aunt, isn’t she—if all that you say is true. She’s your mother’s 
sister, if you really are Anastasia. I have told her all about you. 
"The funny thing is that there is no answer so far—no sign of 
an answer. An aunt ought to worry about her niece, oughtn’t 
she? But maybe you aren’t her niece e 

The girl stared at her. 

“You wrote to Aunt Irene ”’ she stammered. 

“Thhat’s a blow, isn’t it?” "T’'he woman grinned maliciously. 
“And Auntie won’t have anything to do with her little niece.” 
Once more the cunning note was there. “We are alone, my 
dear, and there’s no harm in your knowing what I mean. It is 
quite simple—if you are Anastasia and they recognise you, 
fine, then I was the first person to help you. Everyone knows 
that, and if you say you want nothing to do with me, they will 
say you are ungrateful—and grateful you must be, out of com- 
mon decency. Now if you aren’t Anastasia, then I’m not go- 
ing to be the one that people will point at and say ‘she fell for 
it’. Iacted in good faith as I told you. And that’s true, too. But 
when I got suspicious I was the frst. I’m not so stupid—that’s 
a fact. I’Il wait and see what happens.” 

Her voice had grown louder; she seemed to be trying to 
convince herself. 

“And now,” she said, coldly and threateningly, “you are 
getting out of my house.” 

For a few seconds it was unnaturally quiet in the room. ’I’'he 

. *girl’s face was expressionless. T'he older woman heldherbreath; 

for a moment she hesitated. But the girl’s immobility checked 
her impulse. She took up a straw hat and threw it to the girl. 


z 49 


“Get out,” she shouted and her voice cracked. “Get out— 
out of my sight.” She stared after the girl as she made her way 
stifly towards the door. Quietly, as if not to rouse Fräulein 
Peuthert’s anger, the lock clicked. "T'he staircase was dark and 
the girl groped mechanically for the banister. "Then she be- 
came aware of a slight smell of eucalyptus, and felt a hand 
touch her arm. She was not afraid—she was beyond that. ’T’'he 
voice she heard was Gruenberg’s. 

“The stair-light isn’t working,” he said, and led her down 
the stairs. 

“We have been looking for you for three days. Were you 
here all the time?” he asked. She did not reply. ““I'hat woman 
has a very loud voice,” he said. "I'hey came out into the court- 
yard and so into the street. She walked quietly along beside 
him. When they passed a street light he glanced at her and 
saw her face as a pale, lifeless patch. He saw that she was 
wearing a dark blue costume and a light blue straw hat 
with six yellow pansies. "T’he hat was so terrible that he pulled 
a face. Then he remembered that the police notice had said 
that the girl was wearing a bright green felt hat and a lilac 
cotton dress. A question was on the tip of his tongue but he 
kept it for later. But later he forgot to ask where she had got 
her clothes and years later his forgetfulness was to complicate 
matters greatly. 

Suddenly the girl stood still. 

“I don’t want to go to Baron Kleist,” she cried. ‘“ Take me 
anywhere you like—not there.” 

“You can decide for yourself,”” Gruenberg replied slowly. 

“Decide for myself. ”” she whispered. She stood there, 
slim, helpless and afraid. "T'hen a shy smile emerged. 

“You decide, please,” she said softly and she seemed trust- 
ingasa roe-deer which has been fed by hand and has no longer 
any wish to escape. 


5o 


Baron von Kleist entered Gruenberg’s office. The chief in- 
spector stood up and came out from behind his desk to offer 
his hand. 

“Please sit down,” he said to his guest, ignoring his un- 
friendly air. It was near the beginning of August; the sun 
shone into the room, slanting across files and rulers, to gleam 
on an inkwell and prickle the back of the Baron’s neck. ’T'he 
Baron moved to one side, cleared his throat and looked 
gloomily at the chief inspector. 

“I can naturally imagine why youare here,” said Gruenberg. 
“But there’s no need for us to quarrel merely because of that.” 

“Naturally not,” said the Baron, “but I honestly do not 
understand you. It’s clear that you must take an interest in the 
girl from an ofhcial point of view—-but as a private person! 
What interest can you have in the matter?” 

Gruenberg shrugged his shoulders. 

““ That is my business,” he replied coolly. “At least Iam not 
making any financial speculations.” 

“Are you trying to say: 2” said the Baron heatedly. 

“Let’s not quarrel,” said Gruenberg, refusing the chal- 
lenge. “In the whole story there are very few reliable facts. 
But one ofthem is a statement of an engineer from your own 
circle of friends, Herr Baron. He says he gave you a thousand 
marks to form some sort of fund to support this girl of ours— 
because after all enquiries cost money. He maintains that when 
you took over the money you said to him: “You have no idea 
what good business we can do with your money.’ 'T'he good 
man was very angry at this because he felt——” 

“T'hat’s a slander,” the Baron roared. “I never said any- 
thing of the kind. It’s a disgusting conspiracy.” 

“Maybe. It doesn’t really matter whether you said it or not. 
What matters is the impression your efforts on the girl’s be- 
half make on other people. And there is a strong impression 
that what you have done has not been free from selfish motives. 
But don’t let that annoy you—people wzl/ talk.” 


51 


The Baron pressed his lips together. 

“At all events I wish to state,” he said, “that it is you who 
are casting doubts on the work I have done up to now. You 
have taken the girl into your house. And if you are going to 
say things to me which aim at wounding me, then you must 
allow me to remark that I find your behaviour—shall we say 
— very unusual in a criminal investigator.”” 

“Certainly,”” Gruenberg said with a thin smile. “In my 
case the following facts were decisive. The girl fled from your 
house because, as she declares, her stay had become unbearable 
to her. She then disappeared for three days. Whether she was 
with the Peuthert woman all that time is uncertain. T’'he girl 
says Yes; the Peuthert woman says that Anastasia—or who- 
ever she is—only appeared at her place on the third day. Since 
we questioned Peuthert on the first day, and she denied any 
knowledge of where the girl was, it may very well be true that 
the girl was there all the time, and Peuthert stuck to her state- 
ment merely because she was afraid we might take action 
against her for giving false information. "The girl insists that 
she no longer wishes to avail herself of your hospitality. My 
information is that you have no legal grounds for asking for 
her to be returned to your care. T'he girl can do whatever she 
thinks fit. T'he doctors have not diagnosed any mental defect— 
only fitsof depression and a kind of loss of memory—atany rate 
nothing which could have her put into ofhicial keeping or yours 
either. "That is the situation. I have a very nice country house 
out at Teltow. My wife was very willing to look after a guest. 
And I myselfam convinced that Ican reach my goal— which is 
to clearthe matter up once and for all—in what you might call 
more private, less formal surroundings. So I invited the girl to 
come and stay with me. She accepted the offer. T'hat is all.” 

"The Baron had listened in silence. Now and again he had 
felt like raising objections but he had suppressed them. 

“That all sounds very logical,” he said, “but I am free to 
have my own ideas on the subject.” 


52 


“You are,” said Gruenberg drily. He unwrapped a euca- 
lyptus sweet and stuck it in his mouth. “May I offer you 
one?” 

"The Baron shook his head indignantly. 

« “I consider it my duty,” he began, “to point out to you that 
meantime considerable doubts have arisen in Russian &migre 
circles over the identification of the girl asthe Grand Duchess 
Anastasia.” 

“Suddenly—like that?”” Gruenberg smiled. 

“Some time ago now,” replied the Baron. 

“My starting point isn’t that I must discover a daughter of 
the Czar,’ declared Gruenberg. “For me the girl is a tragic 
figure and everyone is hovering around her without asking her 
leave. I don’t know whether she is Anastasia or not—but I 
know that she is no confidence trickster. And she isn’t mad 
either—the doctors will tell you that.” 

“There are still plenty of the real Anastasia’s uncles and 
aunts,’’ the Baron interjected. “Ihe Grand Duke Ernst of 
Hesse-Darmstadt, the Empress’s brother, refusesto doanything 
in the matter. His sister, Princess Irene of Prussia, won’t lift a 
finger. "The members of the Romanov dynasty sitting in exile 
in Paris and elsewhere show no interest in the girl. "T’'hat must 
give you food for thought. It has given me that for some time.” 

“All right,” Gruenberg replied. “On the other hand, as 
you yourself know there are plenty of similar cases in history. 
There is the man with the iron mask, kept in a state prison 
under Louis XIV. Lots of people say that he was really the 
French Dauphin and that he had to disappear simply to set the 
throne free for someone else. And there’s the case of Kaspar 
Hauser, who is supposed to have been a Prince of Baden on the 
wrong side of the blanket; people still get excited about him 
to this day.” Gruenberg was beginning to ride his hobby-horse 
without being aware of it. “After all, uncles and aunts—even 
fathers and mothers—in these great houses don’t always res- 
pect feelings of kith’ and kin. Often enough other interests take 


53 


pride of place—and then they are called ‘higher interests’. "The 
Romanovs are no exception. I have been poking about in his- 
tory books these last few weeks—I had to. When Czar 
Feodor III died his son, Ivan, should have come next in suc- 
cession. But he wasn’t quite right in the head, so his brother 
Peter should have been chosen. What happened? Sophia, their 
elder sister, let neither of them get power but made herself 
regent until Peter saw the light and had her removed. Then 
he became Peter the Great of whom we today talk with such 
respect. Where do family ties come in there? And Elizabeth, 
Peter the Great’s daughter, kept the rightful Czar a captive 
until his death and seized power for herself. Peter II was mur- 
dered on the instigation of his wife and she then became 
Catherine the Great. Her son was murdered and family ties 
had something to do with that too. I know I am not telling 
you anything new but I think one ought now and again to 
bring such things quietly to mind— particularly when one is 
tempted, as a private citizen, to apply normal criteria to re- 
lationships within great dynasties and so make errors in 
Judgment.” 

'T'he Baron had risen to his feet. Gruenberg rose too. 

“Thank you for your history lesson,” said Kleist coolly. “I 
take it that you will a prior: find evidence of hostility in the 
behaviour of Anastasia’s relations.” 

“ That’s not quite right,” Gruenberg replied calmly. “I am 
only saying that I cannot exclude hostility—there may be 
reasons for it.” 

“You will understand that I consider it pointless to con- 
tinue this conversation,” said the Baron curtly. 

“As you will,” said Gruenberg with a smile. 

When they parted they did not shake hands. 


. 


The girl had spread a blanket on the grass and was sitting on it 
with her back against a tree. In Gruenberg’s garden the rose 


54 


bushes were drawn up in ranks and files, the lawn was close- 
cut and the boundary hedge severely clipped. The Chief In- 
spector tended to force nature into the order which he himself 
liked so much. The sun was sinking red in the western sky and 
gave the girl’s face colour and warmth. T'here was a chopping 
block near the tree; a fat, grey rabbit was sitting on it, feeling 
miserable. T'he girl had taken it out.of its hutch and set iton 
its insecure perch. She had a drawing book on her knees—the 
rabbit was the model and she was making a caricature of it: a 
fat head, squinting bulging eyes, huge ears, between which a 
police cap was uncertainly and unfittingly poised. 

Gruenberg came out of the house and, walking up behind 
the girl, glanced at the sketch. 

“My rabbits aren’t members of the police force,” he said 
with a smile. "T’he girl laughed. 

“That is not a rabbit—that is you. All day long shut up in 
the ofhce like a hutch and making big ears to hear things.” 

Gruenberg sat down beside her. She tore the page from the 
block and laid it on the blanket. 

“Not so bad,” he said. “T’oday it was very hot in the hutch 
and I did hear something— Baron von Kleist.” 

A sharp furrow appeared between the girl’s brows. 

“I not want to hear,” she said in a low voice. 

Gruenberg pointed at the caricature. “You can draw 
nicely,” he said. "T'he shadow vanished from the girl’s face. 

““Gleb showed me a little how to do,” she said eagerly. “He 
always made funny things—always animals with funny faces 
like men, pigs’ heads and lions’ heads and things like that. But 
always they had on clothes or uniforms like men. He drew 
Papa with a lion head and the ministers with fat pigs’ heads— 
but only when the ministers were stupid and conceited. We 
laugh so often when Gleb drew.” 

Gruenberg tried not to show his interest. He was tortured 
by the question who this Gleb could be. But he had discovered 
that if you asked direct questions the girl’s memory failed her. 


55 


“Gleb must have been great fun,” he said. 

“I hope he is alive,” she said. “I saw him again in Tobolsk.” 

The rabbit was tired of it all and leapt down from the block. 
The girl leaned quickly over, caught it and held the caricature 
before its snuflling nose. 

“There—look at yourself,” she laughed. Gruenberg was 
struck by the fact that she held the middle finger of her left 
hand a little stifly. He saw a scar on it to which he pointed. 

“A cut?” he asked as nonchalantly as possible. ’T'he girl let 
the rabbit go free. 

“That was the door of a car,” he heard her reply. “What 
excitement! I sat in the car beside Mama and the servant shut 
the door. I had my hand there. Mama was very, very frigh- 
tened because I faint. It was Mama’s personal servant—he 
was afraid Papa will send him away for ever.” 

Perhaps, Gruenberg thought, I will find someone who will 
testify that it did happen. ’T'he sun had gone down. The girl 
stared at the scar and her mouth quivered. 

“What is that compared to the other things,” she whispered 
in a monotonous voice. “Always when night comes I am 
afraid 2 

“You don’t need to be afraid here.” 

“It is in me even when you say I do not need to be afraid. 
When it is night the fear comes. It was always night—when 
they killed Papa and Mama and all the rest— when they cried 
out and I prayed—it was always night. ’T'hey said they will 
help and I must be quiet and I will be better and they bandage 
me. "They said they can travel by night—only at night so that 
the murderers do not find me and still kill me because they do 
not kill me the first time R 

"The girl was speaking with a high, stammering voice like 
a frightened child who tries to unburden its fear on someone 
it trusts, 

“Was it a man who saved you?” asked Gruenberg. 

“Alexander ’T'schaikovsky—that was his name,” he heard 


56 


her say in her high childish voice. “He said he was called 
Alexander ’I'schaikovsky. His face looked as if he did not 
know how to smile. He drove the peasant cart. His brother 
was there and two women. ’I'he murderers thought I am dead 
like the others. He saw that Iam not dead and took me away 
— we always drove by night and I was frightened.” 

Gruenberg held his breath and listened. It was the first 
time the girl had spoken about these matters and he had in- 
numerable questions but he was afraid the mood would pass if 
he asked them. The girl looked at him and he saw to his 
astonishment that the gleam of fear had disappeared from her 
eyes. Sheseemed to be lookingat him earnestly and searchingly. 
'The transformation confused him. 

“You must tell me something,” said the girl, this time with 
the deep voice he knew. "Then after a pause: “Why did you 
take me into your house?” 

He pondered his answer. 

““] am not going to tell you any stories about human kind- 
ness,” he said calmly. “I wantto clear up your case and I think 
this is the best way. 'T’hat’s all.” 

“You want to know if Iam Anastasia?” 

Nas? 

“I am Anastasia.” 

Gruenberg was surprised that her assertion did not excite 
him more. For the first time she was saying of her own accord 
what he and everybody else had been waiting to hear for 
months. And he accepted it quite calmly. 

“Perhaps what Iam now going to say isa mistake,” he said 
slowly. “Everyone—the doctors, the police and the people at 
Baron von Kleist’s—has discovered that, if they don’t bom- 
bard you with questions, you often hint at your identity with 
the Grand Duchess Anastasia. You have just said yourself 
that you are Anastasia—for the first time. Your memory fails 
if you have to answer direct questions. Something inside you 
seizes up. I am going to tell you what we—other people— 


31 


think of it all. Perhaps it comes from your wounds and all 
you have gone through— you are still suffering from shock. 
Perhaps your inheritance from your mother has something to 
do with it—I have been going into that. I have found indi- 
cations that the Empress was psychologically insecure to the 
point of illness. Often if she had to talk to ministers or diplo- 
mats whom she did not like she had a constriction of the throat 
and was incapable of uttering a sound. She kept her composure 
and attempted not to show it—those who experienced it 
thought her behaviour was due to arrogance. Perhaps it is 
wrong of me to tell you this. But perhaps you will be freer in 
yourself when everything becomes clear to you.” 

“I cannot help being like that,” she whispered. 

“You were brought up,” said Gruenberg, “without any 
form of contact with a milieu like the one in which you now 
find yourself. You must realise that we are different people 
and react differently from yourself and the men and women 
you had around you. I know it was contrary to court etiquette 
to ask questions ofa Grand Duchess. But you must realise that 
questions have to be asked. You must see that. It cannot be 
avoided in your situation. I don’t know whether I have made 
myself clear.” 

“I understand,” she said. 

“But you do not see why—-isn’t that so?” 

“I will try to.” 

“Try not to search so desperately in your memory—say 
whatever comes to the surface. Try not to think that Iam ask- 
ing you questions. Simply react by saying whatever is on the 
tip of your tongue. I shall ask you quickly—you must answer 
quickly and not think. ’The man who rescued you—you say 
he was called Alexander ’T'schaikovsky?” 

rd a 

“Was he your age?” 

“A little older—not much.” 

“Was he a soldier or a peasant or what was he?” 


58 


“He was one of the guards. One of the men who kept us 
prisoner at Ekaterinburg ‚2 

“Don’t let yourself think. He saw you were still alive. He 
carried you out of the house where it all happened. I take it 
you were unconscious. When did you come to? Do you know 
that?” 

“He said it was many weeks.” 

“What did you see when you came to yourself?” 

“The cart—there was a cloth over it like a tent.” 

“Did he say where he was taking you?” 

“To Rumania.” 

“Did you get there?” 

“We cross the river—he said ‘Now you are in Rumania’.” 

“What was the weather like when you crossed the river?” 

“It was cold. "T'here was snow.” 

“The night of the killing was 17th July 1918,” said Gruen- 
berg. “So it was the end of 1918 or the beginning of 1919 
when you reached the frontier.” He felt that her answers were 
limper, that it exhausted her to speak. He hastened on before 
the thread snapped. “You were in Bucharest,” he said. 
“Queen Mary of Rumania is your aunt. Did you go to her? 
Did you tell her that you are Anastasia Nikolayevna? Answer 
quickly.” 

“I not go,” murmured the girl. “I would never go 

“Why not?” 

“T could not—I could not do it.” 

“Had you a reason? Why did you not go to her? Did 
Tschaikovsky not want you to?” ’I'here was a long pause. 
“Did he prevent you?” Gruenberg insisted. 

“I not want,” the girl’s voice was a mere whisper, half- 
drowned by a suppressed sob. 

“Why did you not want to? You must tell me.” 

“] won’t,” whispered the girl. "T’hen almost shrieking she 
went on: “I don’t want any more. Stop, I tell you. You won’t 
stop. What do you want to hear? What then? Do you want 


59 


” 


to hear that Ihada child by him? Do you want to hear that he 
said I was alive because he was there? T'hat I owe my life to 
him? He took his payment. I was ill. He did not ask. Should 7 
gotothe Queen and say that Ihavea child by a soldier? Should 
I say he took his payment in the only way he knew?” 

The cry stopped. She was at the end of her strength. Her 
voice failed and she threw herself on to the blanket. Helpless 
weeping shook her body. Her hands twisted conyulsively and 
crumpled the paper with the funny drawing of the rabbit. 

Gruenberg touched her shoulder but could think of nothing 
to say to her. 


60 


/ 


aaa aa aaa aaa aaa 


"The car drew up and the chauffeur squeezed himself out from 
behind the wheel and ran round the bonnet. He took off his 
cap and opened the door and Princess Irene stepped out. She 
was of medium height. For a moment she stood still, taking a 
quick glance at the rose bushes and at the gravel path which 
led to Gruenberg’s house. Round her mouth there was an 
expression of good-humoured haughtiness. 

‘The door opened and Gruenberg hastened towards the 
Princess. He was wearing a dark suit; his movements were 
stiff and he held himself bolt upright. Many years before he 
had served in the Imperial Navy. "Ihe Admiral of the Fleet 
had been Prince Heinrich of Prussia; this was his wife. She 
was the sister-in-law of the Kaiser and sister-in-law of the 
murdered Czar. Even ifthe Republic had done away with the 
old splendours she was still a lady whom he was honoured to 
be able to meet, with excitement and deep respect. 

“Welcome to Your Highness,” he said formally and his 
bow was exactly right. ’I'he Princess smiled at him briefly. 

“Your letter aroused my curiosity,” she said and followed 
him into the house. He had prepared his study for the visit, but 
had not thereby succeeded in making it more comfortable. But 
he had plundered his rose garden and the perfume of the 
flowers counteracted the painful bareness of the room. 

The Princess sat in a leather easy chair so placed that she 
could have no doubt it was meant for her. Gruenberg opened 
his briefcase to give his hands something to do. He cleared his 
throat and she helped him to begin. 


61 


“Your letter was very full,” she said, “but I find some 
things still unclear. I must confess that I was astonished. I 
have already received one letter in this connection—apparently 
from a mad, confused person, a woman who had been in an 
asylum.” 

“Peuthert,” exclaimed Gruenberg. 

“Where is the girl?” asked the Princess. 

“She has gone for a walk,” replied Gruenberg. “I allowed 
her to go because Your Highness wrote that you wished to see 
me alone before the confrontation.” 

“And you are conyinced that it is Anastasia?” 

“In my.opinion there is no other possibility. I have already 
written to Your Highness about the first full statement my 
protegee made and of her collapse. She has, thank God, re- 
covered—from the shock that it produced. But her health is 
not very good. ’I'he doctor comes to see her often. Unfortun- 
ately there is suspected tuberculosis of the bone. But if I might 
make a proper report to you e 

“Please do,” she said. "T’'here she sat in hat and coat and he 
was not sure whether etiquette permitted him to ask her to 
take them oft. 

“I wrote to you telling you what the girl told me that 
evening,” he said. “ Meanwhile she has given me more details. 
It is not a very pleasant story. When she saw that she was hav- 
ing a child she insisted that this T'schaikovsky should marry 
her. The whole thing is all very mysterious. I have the im- 
pression that "Tschaikovsky went to Mass with her in a 
Catholic church in Bucharest and pretended to her that she 
had thereby gone through the ceremony. I may be mistaken, 
but I cannot get rid of the feeling that that is the case. She is 
familiar only with Greek Orthodox ritual. At all events she is 
conyinced that her name is now Anastasia T'schaikovsky. She 
has no marriage certificate. Her child wasa boy and was chris- 
tened Alexey. Tschaikovsky insisted on putting the child into 
a home. Later Tschaikovsky was shot in the street—by the 


62 


Bolsheviks, she thinks. Then she began to feel threatened. 
She says her only wish was to come to Your Highness because 
you are both her godmother and her aunt. T'schaikovsky’s 
brother, Sergei, brought her to Berlin. "T’hey crossed the fron- 
tier somewhere on foot. She wanted to fetch the child later. 
‘They undoubtedly had difhiculties at the frontier and were 
chased. She must have thought the killers were behind her 
again. 'T'hat idea is constantly with her. It looks as if Sergei 
then abandoned her in Berlin. Perhaps he thought he would 
be able to turn up later asa disinterested saviour. T'he girl wan- 
dered through the town. She did not know what to do. Her 
illusion of being constantly pursued, the shame of the child, 
now so remote and inaccessible, her memories of Ekaterinburg 
—all these emotions undoubtedly fused when she threw her- 
self into the canal on ı7th February 1920. ’I'hat is the story as 
I see it, Your Highness.” 

“Supposing she is a fraud nevertheless?”’ said the Princess 
undecidedly. 

“I expect great things from this confrontation,” replied 
Gruenberg. “You wrote to me that you have not seen your 
niece since 1912.” 

“She was eleven then,” said the Princess. ““T'en’ years is a 
long time. I remember her as a charming, well-brought-up 
eirl,® 

"T'he door-bell rang. 

“That is my wife,” said Gruenberg hoarsely. He was con- 
vinced that a decision was imminent. “When Your Highness 
arrived I sent my wife to fetch the girl. Will you excuse 
me?” 

“Don’t tell her who is here,” said the Princess hurriedly. 

“Naturally not. She doesn’t even know that I wrote to 
you.” Gruenberg hurried out. T'he girl was about to go up to 
her room. In her hand she carried a cloth which she had knot- 
ted into a bundle. She was hot and her hair was untidy. She 
showed him the bundle and her dirty hands. 


63 


’ 


“] have a lot of mushrooms,” she said smiling. 

“Come here and put it away,” said Gruenberg impatiently. 
“There is a visitor.” He took the bundle and threw it care- 
lessly onto a chair. T'hen he grasped her arm and pushed her 
in front of him into the room. 

“This is my protegee,” he said. “This lady is Baroness 
Hall.” 

“I am delighted to meet you,” said the Princess and held 
out her hand. At the sound of her voice the girl quivered. She 
took a step towards the Princess. "Their eyes met and she tried 
to take the other woman’s hand. ’T'hen she shuddered and hid 
her dirty hands behind her back like a naughty, frightened 
child. 

“Baroness Hall,’” she muttered. A look of surprise which 
turned to one of bitter obstinacy passed quickly over her face. 
There was hatred in her eyes. Suddenly she turned about, ran 
past Gruenberg and out of the room. "T'hey heard her run up 
the stairs and then the bang of a door. 

Gruenberg was dumbfounded. 

“I do not understand it, Your Highness,’” was all he could 
find to say in his embarrassment. "T'he Princess stood there, un- 
bending and angry, with her eyebrows slightly raised in silent 
reproach. “I beg you to excuse me for a moment,” he said in 
confusion. 

He left the Princess alone, hurried up the stairs two steps at 
atime and rattled at the locked bathroom door. 

“Do be sensible,” he shouted through the door. “Open 
up, I beg you.” "Then he added in righteous indignation: 
“Open up and come downstairs. Your behaviour is simply 
impossible.” 

"The girl was standing in the bathroom. She had turned on 
the tap in the basin arıd was holding her hands under it. Tears 
were running down her face. She hid them with her hands so 
that the dirt smeared her eyes and brow. When she heard 
Gruenberg’s steps retreating she went slowly to the door and 


64 


unbolted it to go to her room. On the landing the woman 
whom Gruenberg had called Baroness Hall suddenly con- 
fronted her. 

“You must say something,” said the woman. “You must 
speak. Say something.” 

Gruenberg stood in the background and looked at the girl 
entreatingly: she stood there dirty, weeping and obstinate. 
Then she turned her back on them with childish defiance. 

‘The Princess brought the scene to a close by going 
down the stairs without saying a word. Gruenberg followed 
her. 

“I really do not know—I beg you to believe that it is very 
painful for me ” he felt that what he was saying did not 
sound very convincing. 

“] am not angry with you for considering this meeting 
necessary, said the Princess coolly. She stood for a moment in 
the door; he opened it for her. 

“It is very puzzling,”’ he muttered. 

“You need not apologise,”” said the Princess. “If you 
wish to know, I feel no sense of kinship towards the girl. 
That is not the Grand Duchess Anastasia. She is a stupid, 
ill-behaved creature.” She left him standing in the doorway. 
“You wanted to have my verdict,” he heard her add over her 
shoulder. 

The chauffeur opened the car door. "I'he Princess got in. 
When the car drove off Gruenberg forced himself to bow. 
Then he stared after the car. An uncontrollable fit of rage 
rose within him. He stormed up the stairs and pushed open the 
door of the girl’s room. She was standing huddled in a dark 
corner. In her eyes there was an expression of unbounded 
arrogance. Her glance was like a slap in the face—but he swal- 
lowed his anger, for a sudden, inexplicable feeling of helpless- 
ness prevented him from shouting at her, from hurling re- 
proaches at her, from telling her what a fool he had made of 
himself in front of his visitor, and from saying that she herself 


65 


E 


was entirely to blame for it all. Her glance swept everything 
away and her arrogance robbed him of words. He had expected 
to find the helpless girl whom he knew— he had meant to ask 
her what she meant by it, and now he felt that it was he who 
had to answer for all that had happened. He strove against the 
feeling but could find no words with which to combat the look 
in her eyes. Not that she was embarrassed—he was. It was in 
vain that he told himself that he was out of his senses. Her eyes 
ordered him to quit the room. I am imagining it, his reason 
told him, but he capitulated and went. 

He was no sooner on the landing than his rage returned, but 
now he was limp and depressed and not strong enough to face 
her again. He went into his study. He realised that in the last 
half hour he had been twice defeated—first by Princess Irene 
of Prussia, then by the girl upstairs with whom he could no 
longer cope rationally. And he was uncertain which defeat 
caused him more heartbreak. 

I shall send her away, he thought. "T’'here is no point in her 
living here any more. Somebody else can try what they can 
make of her. His thoughts took flight into the realm of bitter 
irony. "The girl had been in the asylum—so too had the Peu- 
thert woman, that unbearable, hysterical creature. Between 
the two ofthem they had worked out the whole act. T'hey had 
raised the curtain and shown the world their wonderful turn 
—the Czar’s dead daughter in her famous act, the girl who 
could weep so heart-rendingly, smile so mysteriously and 
look so arrogant. It was a wonderful idea. T'he emigres beat 
the drums when her sick mind leapt back into the days of 
Petersburg and its ancient glories, when like a hard-working 
medium in a state of trance—and in broken German like all 
virtuosos—she told stories of the night of Ekaterinburg and of 
her miraculous rescue. All seats sold out. Enthusiastic press 
notices. Ladies and gentlemen from the audience are invited 
to come on to the stage. All good illusionists have that trick. 
There is great applause and the audience laughs—yes, they 


66 


laugh, thought Gruenberg in a fury, and they laugh particu- 
larly loudly at me, at the police official who fell for it. 

He paced up and down in his study and prayed that his 
powers of reasoning might not leave him. He made great in- 
roads into his supply of eucalyptus sweets. Late at night, when 
he crept into bed, he could not sleep. Next morning, unslept 
and cross, he went to see Fräulein Peuthert. He found her 
coming and going between a stack of dirty dishes and a slice of 
bread and Jam lying on the kitchen table. He descended on her 
like a hurricane because he wanted to have done with the 
whole thing but she took refuge in cool impudence. 

“You can shout as much as you like,” she said, grinning 
malevolently, “you can’t do anything to me. I am an honest 
woman.” 

“You certainly are a cunning one. In spite of having been 
in Dalldor ® 

“I suggest you ought to be careful. I will not allow myself 
to be slandered—not even by a policeman.” 

“It is no slander to say that you were in Dalldorf. It’s a 
statement of fact. And it is also a fact that you discovered the 
Grand Duchess. You managed to convince Baron von 
Kleist.” 

“Convince? Are you trying to say she isn’t a Grand 
Duchess? You must prove it first. I acted in good faith. Don’t 
come to me with that sort of story. What have I to do with the 
whole business? Nothing at all.” 

“]’m afraid you do—even ifit doesn’t suit your book,” said 
Gruenberg, attempting to be calmer. “Did the girl ever state 
to you thatshe was one ofthe Czar’s daughters? Answer that.” 

“What do you mean ‘state’?” 

“Yes or no. Did she ever say to you that she isa daughter of 
the Czar?” 

“Of course she is a daughter of the Czar. I lay long enough 
in the same room with her. You could easily recognise her 
from the photograph in the illustrated papers.” 


67 


“But did she ever say so, that’s what I want you to tell 
me,” 

“You with your statements. How do I know what she 
stated?”’ 

“So she never said anything of the kind. It was you who 
thought it all up.” 

“Don’t twist everything the way you want it. She does have 
a family resemblance. Everyone sees that. I only told the 
emigres that they ought to have a look at her. I didn’t do any- 
thing more.” 

“For nights you sat by her bed in Dalldorf. For nights you 
talked at her. You told her she was a Grand Duchess. You 
suggested it to her sick mind. You kept on suggesting it until 
illusion became reality.” Suddenly he felt that he was facing 
his third defeat. He realised that he could not steam-roller this 
woman like a petty thief, whom he could take and shake dur- 
ing interrogation. He realised that it had been a mistake to 
come. His words no longer carried conviction and clearly the 
Peuthert woman noticed it. Her mouth took on an expression 
of biting contempt. 

“Just look at what I have to put up with,” she said, grinning 
maliciously. ‘] put the idea into her head. I must bea fine one. 
Am I supposed to put ideas into your head now? I don’t need 
to, do I? You take care of that yourself. Is it contempt of 
office if I say that you put ideas into your own head? If I were 
to say that Herr Gruenberg is a twister that would be con- 
tempt of oflice. But I’m not saying that. Not on your life. 
You would end up by believing it yourself if I’m so clever.” 
Her mocking grin became extraordinarily nasty. “Are you 
going already? When it’s such an honour for me to see you— 
and such a pleasure? A very odd kind of pleasure. Must you 
really go?” She went to the door and threw it open. She 
watched him through slitted eyes. He bit his lips. He looked 
old and tired but he kept his dignity. 

“Perhaps you feel you have won,” he said stiffly. “But Iam 


68 


afraid I shall one day be compelled to come and see you once 
more. Some time.” 

But it wastto be eleven years before he had anything further 
to do with Fräulein Peuthert. He would be called to a house in 
Hufelandstrasse. T'here he would identify the inmate as the 
same Klara Maria Peuthert who had once lived in Schumann- 
strasse and had started the whole mystery surrounding the un- 
identified girl. He would find a dead woman and have the duty 
of entering in the records: “Moved on ı2th January 1927, 
from ı Schumannstrasse to 22 Hufelandstrasse; found dead 
there on 6th October 1933: presumed to have died on ısth 
September 1933.” He would be told by the police doctor 
that the cause of death could no longer be determined. He 
would also learn that suicide could not be excluded. He would 
see to it that the corpse which had lain there, undiscovered, for 
three weeks, was removed. He would think that to the very 
end Klara Peuthert had contrived to provide a puzzle to which 
there was no solution. 


Next morning Chief Inspector Gruenberg was a thorn in his 
subordinates’ flesh. But he had enough sense not to go too far, 
so at midday he went home, saying he wasn’t feeling very well, 
and the whole office breathed again. His idea was to go to bed 
and sleep off his run of ill-luck. When he reached home the 
doctor, whom he had so often called to the girl, met him out- 
side. Now there’s this too, he thought. 

“ Anything wrong?” he enquired, knitting his brows. 

“She can’t stay here any longer,” answered the doctor. 
“That inflammation at the elbow—it has got worse. I think 
it’s so serious that I’m afraid the arm will have to be ampu- 
tated. There is no doubt at all that it is tuberculosis of the 
bone. Besides, she’s on the verge ofa nervous breakdown. Has 
there been anything to bring it on?” 

“Maybe,” muttered Gruenberg. He wanted to be rid ofthe 


69 


girl but that it should happen so suddenly and in this particular 
way gave him—to his annoyance—a bad conscience. 

“] have rung up Doctor Graefe, the medical adviser to the 
Charlottenburg Assistance Board,” said the doctor. “They 
are the people who have to deal with her. I have established 
that, as far as the police go, she is still registered as domiciled 
with Baron von Kleist. Or do you feel like meeting the 
expense?” 

“Doctors’ bills are a bit beyond my means,” said Gruen- 
berg. “Can I talk to her?!” 

“But of course.” T'he doctor took his leave and Gruenberg 
slowly climbed the stairs to the girl’s room. Once more she 
had a surprise in store for him. Her arrogance of the evening 
before had vanished and in its place was a calm, matter-of-fact 
mood. 

“I am so sorry,” she said in a low voice, “that I make difhi- 
culties.” 

“That's all right,” said Gruenberg. 

“About yesterday. You must excuse, please. You must 
understand. I came all dirty, with hands all dirty and then— 
why does she lie? Why lies? Is she ashamed because I am so 
poor? Does she want to see how poor I am? She comes and 
stares at me. Like a fair—everybody comes and stares. If she 
does not want to have anything to do with me, why does she 
come at all? She is Princess of Prussia and my aunt. Does she 
think I do not see? If she comes only to stare at me and if she 
lies then I want nothing to do with her. Then she is not my 
aunt. "Then I am alone and it is better.” 

She had spoken calmly. She lay in bed and her pale face was 
expressionless. Now and again her hand felt her left elbow, 
which the doctor had bandaged. If she felt pain she did not 
show it. 

Gruenberg had listened without interrupting. He felt as if 
his thoughts had been thrown into a vacuum. 

“So you recognised her?” he said softly. 


79 


“She does not want to know me so I do not know her 
either,” said the girl. 

“I do not understand,” said Gruenberg in bewilderment. 
“I shall never understand you. If you had said a single word 
— the Princess was here to see how you reacted. If you had 
gone up to her. You could have spoken to her and convinced 
her.” 

“How convince?” said the girl. “I saw Aunt Irene last 
when I was eleven. She must know that I look different now. 
But she has not changed much. She must know that I recog- 
nised her. She must know perfectly. And if she lies and says 
she is Baroness Hall, although she knows I know her, then 
she does not want anything to do with me. She comes out of 
curiosity, not to help.” 

“You have a mistaken view of things,” said Gruenberg in 
a tired voice. “But whether I can persuade you that such is 
the case I do not know. What you are telling me now does not 
alter the fact that the confrontation had a negative outcome. 
A confrontation like that is something of real use—at least as 
I see things. Perhaps you see things differently—if sensibilities 
are involved we will never get anywhere. I do not know what 
more I can do.” 

He had meant to sleep things off but the girl had once more 
set him back to the beginning. "That whole afternoon he 
thought and thought. He told himself that the girl could have 
seen a photograph of the Princess Irene somewhere. He told 
himself that the girl had baulked at a real talk with the Prin- 
cess because the game would have been up. Meanwhile—so 
he tried to persuade himself—the girl had taken a grip of her- 
self and decided to go on with the deception. But each time he 
thought over what she had just said to him he had doubts 
whether she was not in fact telling the truth. He sat down and 
wrote out his thoughts in an attempt to attain some clarity. 
At the end of his observations he wrote: “Ifshe isa confidence 
trickster, it is contrary to all my criminological experience. A 


71 


trickster would have undoubtedly exploited the unique chance 
of convincing Princess Irene. "This girl is seriously ill, both 
physically and mentally. Psychologically she is in a terrible 
state—of that there is no doubt. Where could she draw the 
strength to erect an edifice of lies? She was two years in Dall- 
dorf Asylum; now she knows that she has tuberculosis of the 
bone, which has reached a dangerous state. No confidence 
trick was ever begun in such a situation . . .” 

In the afternoon the ambulance came. "T'he girl was taken 
away. 'I'he parting was difhcult. In the evening Gruenberg 
wrote a letter to Princess Irene of Prussia. In it he told her the 
gist of his last conversation with the girl and told her, too, of 
his reflections on it. His answer he received weeks later. Her 
Royal Highness Princess Irene of Prussia’s secretary informed 
him that the matter was closed both as regards the Princess and 
her family. But as far as the family went this was not in fact 
the case. Many years later Princess Irene’s son was to come to 
a different conclusion from his mother, for he was to make the 
following statement before a notary: 

“I, the undersigned, Prince Sigismund of Prussia, hereby 
declare upon oath, being fully aware of the nature of such a 
statement: 

“That when, in 1932, my father-in-law, Prince Friedrich 
Ernst of Sachsen-Altenburg, expressed his intention of meet- 
ing in Ilten Frau A. ’T'schaikovsky, who declares that she is 
the Grand Duchess Anastasia, the surviving daughter of the 
last Czar of Russia, I discussed with him certain events which 
had occurred before the war and with which only the Grand 
Duchess Anastasia could now be familiar in view of the death 
of the other members of the Czar’s family. I told him of my 
last meeting with the Grand Duchess and instructed him to 
address to her a question concerning that last meeting, which 
for personal reasons I prefer not to put in writing. T’he answer 
which my father-in-law communicated to me was completely 
accurate and could have been given only by the Grand 


72 


Duchess Anastasia herself. "T’his incident and the other 
material concerning the identity ofthe Grand Duchess Anas- 
tasia, which I have studied, has convinced me that Frau 
'Tsschaikovsky is the Grand Duchess Anastasia of Russia. 
“signed: Sigismund, Prince of Prussia. 5th July 1938.” 


73 


ö 


EEE 


Harriet von Rathlef hurried through the streets of Berlin. It 
was the month of July and although it was only nine in the 
morning the heat was already oppressive. She stopped in front 
ofthe Villa Mendelssohn. It was a splendid building—a palace 
with a high portico and an imposing fagade. On a bronze plate 
by the door stood the words: “Danish Consulate.’ Frau von 
Rathlef hesitated. She searched in her handbag and brought 
out a letter, which she had received two days before. She read 
it through once more. 

“... You are requested by His Excellency, the Danish 
Ambassador in Berlin, to an interview on 3rd July 1925, at 
nine o’clock in the Danish Embassy.” 

So it isn’tin the Consulate, she thought, and went on to the 
next, and considerably more modest, house where she found a 
tiny notice saying that this was the Danish Embassy. 

"The porter took her letter and she was led into a drawing- 
room. Whereas outside she had wondered that the Consulate 
was ina jewel ofa villaand the Embassy in a simple house, she 
now discovered that behind its simplicity it had rooms richly 
furnished with antique furniture and precious works of art. 
On three walls there were rows of paintings of seventeenth- 
century Danish kings, while the fourth was covered by a huge 
Gobelin tapestry. In a glass case beneath it she found the finest 
collection of etchings she had ever seen. Carefully she 
examined each one. 

“There are some nice things among them, aren’t there?” 
she heard a voice say behind her. ’T’'he man who approached 


74 


was tall and slim. He was perhaps in his middle fifties. His 
hair, which was very grey at the sides was brushed straight 
back. His eyes were calm and friendly. 

“They are wonderful,” she replied. “I am a sculptress. 
Really wonderful things.” 

“So you know something about such things,” he said smil- 
ing. ““T'hank you for having acceded to my request. My name 
is Zahle,” he said with a slight bow. She knew of him that he 
was a connoisseur of the arts, that he was preparinga German- 
Danish exhibition to be held that autumn in the Prussian State 
Library, and that Berlin society fought to be invited to the 
salon of the Danish Embassy, where Herluf Zahle arranged 
intimate concerts which had won him the reputation of being 
a discerning friend of the arts. T'hey sat down together. She 
was, he calculated, about forty. Next to him she seemed small. 
She was thin rather than slim and her dark hair framed a small 
face which derived its expression from an energetic mouth. 

“Presumably you know what I wish to discuss,” he said 
with a pleasant smile. 

“I can imagine, Your Excellency. It is about Anastasia.” 

He nodded. 

“Let me tell you the situation,” he said. “But first ofall one 
question—how long has Frau Anastasia 'T'schaikovsky—let 
us call her that 2 

“She has received an identity card in that name on instruc- 
tions from the German Foreign Office,” she interrupted. 

He did not pursue the matter. 

“Yes, I have been dealing with her case only for the last 
week—but I have been going very thoroughly into all that is 
known of it up to now. I wanted to know how long it is since 
you took Frau ’T'schaikovsky under your wing, so to speak.” 

“] havetold you that Iam a sculptress. At an art exhibition 
I met Pastor Karl Sonnenschein hi 

“Who is known—not only in Berlin—as the poor man’s 
friend,” said the Ambassador with a smile, 


75 


“Yes. Chief Inspector Gruenberg, who long took an in- 
terest in Frau T'sschaikovsky, wrote to him. Because I speak 
Russian—which may be significant although Frau T'schai- 
kovsky refuses to speak the language—Pastor Sonnenschein 
asked me whether I would look after her. I agreed.” 

“Now she is in hospital?”’ 

“Yes,” replied Frau von Rathlef. “She has been through 
a great deal in the last two years. First of all she was 
living in Gruenberg’s house. "Then she had to be taken to 
hospital and have a series of operations on her left elbow 
—tuberculosis of the bone. She is very run down. Every 
other month the doctors are faced with the question whether 
they should amputate her left arm or not. For a time she 
was able to leave hospital. "The authorities sent her back to 
Baron von Kleist. Once again she ran away as she had done 
before.” 

“I know,” he said. 

‘““Then you must know about this Fräulein Peuthert. She 
got in touch with Frau "T'schaikovsky once more and per- 
suaded her to move into her place. It is a terrible house. ’T’he 
police discovered that this woman, who is quite down and out, 
had taken up with Frau ’Tschaikovsky only to live on the 
allowance which she gets from the Welfare Office in Charlot- 
tenburg—and that isn’t very much. Probably the woman ex- 
pected more. Perhaps she thought money would come in from 
emigre circles or from the royal houses of Europe. When 
nothing was forthcoming she put the girl out in the middle of 
the night—that was the second time she had to suffer this at 
Fräulein Peuthert’s hands. "T’hen she lived with a couple—the 
man’s a coal-heaver—who have sub-let a poky room near the 
Peuthert woman. "T'here Chief Inspector Gruenberg found 
her. And then because—just as happened two years before— 
he simply did not know what to do he wrote to Pastor Sonnen- 
schein. For weeks now Frau 'Tsschaikovsky has once more 
been Iying in hospital.” 


76 


““T'hat completes the picture for me,” said the Ambassador. 
“I have been studying a report from Chief Inspector Gruen- 
berg which comes up to the point where he attempted to in- 
terest Princess Irene of Prussia in the affair.” 

“That lady,” said Harriet von Rathlef with some asper- 
ity, “has certainly not behaved as an aunt and godmother 
ought.” 

‘The Ambassador declined to express a view on the Prin- 
cess’s behaviour. 

“But some good did come of Gruenberg’s letter to her,” he 
continued. “Allthe Prussian ra began to discuss u. case. 
My intervention stems from that.” 

“I don’t understand.” 

“IT should tell you that I am not acting in my capacity as 
Danish Ambassador but as a private individual—on behalf of 
a highly placed person. Do you know who Prince Waldemar 
ish. 

=N0,2 

“The Russian Imperial family was related to the Danish 
royal family through the Czar’s mother, Maria Feodorovna. 
By birth Maria Feodorovna is Princess Dagmar of Denmark. 
Since the Revolution, she has been living in Copenhagen again 
with her brother, Prince Waldemar of Denmark.” 

“And he is going to do something for Anastasia?” asked 
Frau von Rathlef hopefully. ‘““So Anastasia’s grandmother is 
behind it?” 

“I must ask you not to build too many expectations on my 
intervention,” said Zahle cautiously. ‘Ihe Dowager Empress 
does not even know of the existence of your protege£e. 
Any news that might remind her of the events at Ekaterin- 
burg is kept from her. You must not forget that she isan old 
woman—in fact she even clings to the belief that perhaps no 
murders were committed at Ekaterinburg.” 

“But if Anastasia were taken to her—perhaps she would 
recognise her granddaughter.” 


77 


“That is impossible. First of all, it is not yet certain, and 
secondly, if Anastasia were taken to her she would be a living 
proof that all the others were killed. I have told you the kind 
of hope the Dowager Empress clings to. She is a very old 
woman and very obstinate. For that reason her relatives do not 
consider that a meeting would be right or proper. They fear 
the worst for the old lady.” 

“Which relatives?” 

“Aboveallthe Grand Duchess Olga—the Czar’s youngest 
sister, who is therefore a daughter of the old lady. ’T'hey live 
together.” 

“So to preserve the illusions of an old woman this girl has 
to remain in obscurity,” exclaimed Frau von Rathlef. “I’m 
sorry, Your Excellency, but my respect for royal blood is not 
highly developed.” 

“Please, do keep calm,” said Zahle with a weak smile. 
“You will understand that I cannot follow you there.” 

“I am sorry,” murmured the lady. 

“I understand you, of course,” he said, “but we must keep 
calm. We cannot ignore the realities of the situation— whether 
they are understandable in human terms or not. It is my con- 
viction that your prot&ge&e’s chances are not as bad as they 
might appear. I was commissioned to intervene by Prince 
Waldemar. He is prepared to produce a certain sum of money 
each month so that the invalid does not have to live as miser- 
ably as she has up to now. Furthermore, money is at her dis- 
posal within certain limits—to help to continue the investi- 
gations which may establish her identity. So there is no reason 
to despair.” 

“So Prince Waldemar believes in Anastasia’s authenticity?” 

“Let us put it this way. He does not exclude the authen- 
ticity of her claim. I have mentioned that since Princess 
Irene’s unfortunate visit to Gruenberg the matter has been the 
subject of discussion in the Prussian royal family. In this way 
the Duchess of Brunswick, Victoria Louisa, who is William 


78 


Il’s daughter, came to hear of it. She was in Copenhagen two 
months ago on a visit and there she told Grand Duchess Olga 
and Prince Waldemar as much as she knew. The result was 
my request for you to visit me today. You said a little while 
ago that your protegee had received an identity card through 
the German Foreign Office.” 

“Up to now she had no papers of any kind,” answered Frau 
von Rathlef. ‘One day a gentleman from the Foreign Office 
came and asked for two passport photographs of Anastasia. 
A week later she received a document made out in the name 
of Anastasia "T'schaikovsky, nee Romanov, former nationality 
Russian, now stateless. Up to now she had oflicially only been 
the unidentified girl of Dalldorf Asylum. Now at least she has 
become a real living creature for the authorities—at last, after 
five years. Before that she was a sort of shadow 4 

“And why was the Foreign Oflice suddenly interested?” 

Frau von Rathlef shrugged. 

“] have no idea,” she replied, “but I have a suspicion. One 
of the gentlemen mentioned the name of General Hoffman. I 
mentioned this to Chief Inspector Gruenberg. General Hoff- 
man wasa German general who took part in the peace negotia- 
tions with the Soviets at Brest-Litovsk in 1918. Gruenberg 
believes that Hoffman is the best informed of the German 
General Staff on Russia. He negotiated with Trotsky and is 
supposed to know more about the tangled history of the Rus- 
sian Revolution than anyone.” 

“] don’t see what that has to do with the document.” 

“Gruenberg says that he has heard that General Hoffman 
went to the Immigration Authorities and the Foreign Office 
and made a statement to the effect that he is convinced that the 
Grand Duchess Anastasia is still alive. He says he has precise 
information to that effect. He gave his word as an oflicer that 
his information was accurate but said that for political reasons 
he could not give details. He added that he was ninety-nine 
per cent certain that Frau Tschaikovsky isthe Grand Duchess 


79 


Anastasia. So I presume that on the strength of this statement 
they finally saw fit to give her papers.” As Frau von Rathlef 
spoke Zahle had been taking notes on a piece of paper. 

“] shall attempt to discover how things stand,” he said. He 
rose and his visitor rose too. 

“] am sorry,” he said, “that I cannot spare you more time 
at the moment. One more question—can your protegee 
receive visitors?” he asked as he accompanied her to the 
door. 

“Yes. Iam very glad, Your Excellency, that you are taking 
an interest in the girl. I have a feeling that everything won’t 
be so much against her any more. You see I have already in- 
curred the enmity ofa grand duke, merely because I look after 
Anastasia.” 

"T'hey stood for a moment in the doorway. 

“Who objected?” he asked. 

“The Grand Duke of Hesse, her mother’s brother—if 
Anastasia is the Grand Duchess. She told me about him. I 
wanted to write to as many of her relatives as I could. I asked 
her when she saw her uncle last. She said in Petersburg in 
103.022 

“During the war?”’ asked the Ambassador in astonishment. 
““T'hat seems very doubtful to me. As far as I know the Grand 
Duke wasan Army Commander. A reigning German Prince 
who was also an Army Commander could hardly pay visits to 
enemy territory—even if the Empress were his sister.” 

“That’s so,” Frau von Rathlef replied with an air of resig- 
nation. “I hadn’t thought of that. I don’t know much about 
these things. I wrote to the Grand Duke that Anastasia says 
she saw him in 1916 and that it would help to clear things up 
if he would confirm her statement. I had a very sharp and 
angry letter from his secretary using the same arguments as 
you have mentioned.” 

“Her statement really cannot be correct,” said Zahle. He 
smiled a little. “If this visit were proved to have occurred it 


80 


Your prot&gee must be mistaken.” He held out his hand to 
Frau von Rathlef. T'hen he hesitated for a moment and said 
slowly: “I shall visit Frau Tschaikovsky this afternoon and 


bring someone with me. Perhaps some things will be cleared 
7 


up. 

Frau von Rathlef looked at him uncertainly. 

“Whom will you bring with you, Your Excellency?” 

“I had rather not say,” he replied. “I should like to hear 
how Frau T'schaikovsky reacts irhet her FERSWINE before- 
hand. So do not be cross with me.’ 

"The Ambassador gazed reflectively after his visitor. He had 
his own views about the men and women who thrust their 
company upon the girl. He was of the opinion that Baron von 
Kleist had expected a rich reward and Chief Inspector Gruen- 
berg the satisfaction of his ambition to achieve the solution of 
a problem in world history. As he slowly made his way to his 
study, he asked himself what aims Frau von Rathlef might be 
pursuing. 

For years one of the most hotly debated points in the story 
of Anastasia was to remain the girl’s assertion that she had 
seen her uncle, the Grand Duke Ernst Ludwig of Hesse- 
Darmstadt in Petersburg in 1916. The girl was to stick to her 
assertion. She was always to declare that she was not mistaken. 
The Grand Duke, for his part, never made a direct statement 
but always explained through his secretary that it must be 
clear that a German prince could not have been on a visit to 
the enemy capital in time of war. Many of those who believed 
the girl would for years smell a scandal and whisper to each 
other that perhaps the Grand Duke went to Petersburg with 
traitorous intent—to attack his own Kaiser in the rear with 
the help of his sister, the Empress of Russia—or else they 
would suspect that he had been there on a secret mission with 
the knowledge ofthe Kaiser. Others who considered the girl 
a fraud would, for their part, seize upon the statement as a 


81 


F 


clear proof that she was not only a swindler but unblushing, 
stupid and simple. 

But on ıgth April 1929, Dr. Larski, a former Russian 
oflicer then living near Basle, made the following written 
statement: 

“In January ıgıs I was severely wounded and for that 
reason found myselfin ıgı5and rgı6bina Finnish sanatorium 
on Lake Saimaa. T'here, one evening, together with one of the 
Czar’s aides-de-camp, Colonel Mordvinoff, I had an oppor- 
tunity to observe a “foreign prince’ who was travelling through 
and whom I immediately recognised as the Grand Duke of 
Hesse-Darmstadt.... When Mordvinoff saw that I had recog- 
nised the Grand Duke he asked me not to reveal it and to say 
nothing about the matter. He had been informed that the 
Empress’s brother was travelling secretly under the name of 
one of the Princes of Thurn and Taxis. I can add that—so 
far as I remember—a full statement by Mordvinoff is to be 
found in the dossier which Baron Taube, the Professor of 
International Law, handed over to the Grand Duke of Hesse 
on the orders of Grand Duke Alexander of Russia so that it 
might be preserved in the family archives of the Grand Duke 
of Hesse.” 

And the German Crown Princess Cecilie, Wilhelm II’s 
daughter-in-law, was to state in writing in 1953: 


“. .. I know that the younger generation of the family are 
as unsympathetic to the problem of her identity as the late 
Grand Duke of Hesse-Darmstadt. I have been told that this 
is presumably to be attributed to the fact that in the twenties 
Frau 'Tschaikovsky spoke of a visit by her uncle, the Grand 
Duke, to her parents in Russia. Since the view is still held that 
this visit by the Grand Duke never took place I can state from 
my own knowledge—my source is my late father-in-law— 
that in our circles the visit was common knowledge at the 
time. In my opinion, therefore, Frau Tschaikovsky, by her 


82 


remark which I heard of only much later, has produced strong 
evidence of her intimate knowledge of high policy and the 
most secret events in the Imperial family if of nothing else. 


“Stuttgart, and October 1952. 


“Signed: Cecilie, Crown Princess of Prussia, Duchess of 
Mecklenburg.” 


83 


9 


m 


"The man with whom the Ambassador approached Frau von 
Rathlef walked with a stoop, leaning heavily on a stick. His 
face was worn and creased; his snow-white hair lay in thin 
strands. T'he skin of his fallen cheeks was white and dry as if 
it had been dusted with powder. "T'he July day, which had be- 
gun by being so sultry, laid an unendurable burden of heat on 
the city and its inhabitants. But the old man seemed to be un- 
conscious of it. His frailty seemed to bring with it a slight chill 
against which even the unpitying sun was powerless. 

"The Ambassador presented his companion. 

“Herr Volkov—formerly valet to the Empress.” 

Frau von Rathlef touched a blueish hand, which felt icy 
and lifeless. 

“I have told Herr Volkov not to speak Russian to your pro- 
tegee. He does not quite understand z 

“Well, how can I?” came the old man’s frail voice. 

“The invalid is lying in the garden,” said Frau von Rathlef. 
“There are reasons why she does not want to speak Russian. 
'Thhe doctors consider that she possibly suffers from a speech 
disorder caused by the blows she received from the rifle butts. 
Besides, some psychological conflict may prevent her from 
using the language which the murderers spoke. People say, 
too, that in Ekaterinburg the Czar gave instructions that his 
family were to speak English among themselves so that the 
guards could not understand them.” 

“Yes, that’s right—that’s right about the English,” said the 
old man in his cracked voice. 


84 


“The doctors think she may still suffer from a compulsion 
to avoid speaking Russian as far as possible,” said Frau von 
Rathlef. “You have picked a good day. She is quite jolly. She 
is 1ying in the shade under the trees. She said she felt she would 
suffocate in her room.” 

"They walked along a gravel path and saw the girl resting in 
a cane chair. She hada cat on her lap. 

“I gave itto her asa present,” whispered Frau von Rathlef. 
“She is so fond of animals.” She felt an unbearable sensation of 
suspense and dabbed at the sweat on her forehead with her 
handkerchief. i 

"The Ambassador looked across at the girl, who seemed a 
tender, fragile creature, sitting there playing with the cat. 
The thought that he would have to address her as ‘Frau 
Tschaikovsky’ and the idea that this woman, still herself a 
child, might have a child somewhere in Rumania, caused him 
a feeling of discomfort. 

Volkov had stopped still. 

“Is that supposed to be the Grand Duchess Anastasia?” he 
kept muttering. 

The sick girl heard their steps on the gravel and turned her 
head to smile at her visitors. ““Frau von Rathlef told me you 
were coming, Your Excellency,” she said, holding out her 
hand. He had heard that she could be moody, eccentric, stub- 
born, childishly naive, querulous and stiffnecked—he had 
heard all kinds of things about her. When he had seen her 
from a distance she had given him the impression of being a 
helpless, sick child to whom one gives a bar of chocolate to 
make it happy. To his astonishment he found, now that he 
was near her, no sign of childishness or helplessness in her. He 
saw a smile on her face—the smile ofa lady welcoming a guest 
of honour in her salon. He looked into her calm eyes, which 
gazed up at him as if she wished to be sure that he was worthy 
of a smile. He had prepared a few words to express his sym- 
pathy and inspire hope in her. But now he had the feeling that 


85 


they were unnecessary. He bent over her hand and kissed it. 
If she isa fraud she must be thinking that she has won a trick, 
was the thought that ran suddenly through his head; but sur- 
prisingly the idea did not disturb him. He gave her a box of 
sweets he had brought. 

“You are very kind, Your Excellency,” she said with a 
smile. "There was a hint of coquetry in her glance—just 
enough to enchant him. Volkov kept in the background. He 
had bowed but had said nothing and the Ambassador took no 
steps to introduce him. A couple of wicker chairs were waiting 
for them and the visitors sat down. 'T’he invalid leaned back 
and began to eatthe sweets, now and again givinga piece to the 
cat, which sat lazily in her lap. She stroked it from time to time. 

“This is Kiki, my only real friend,” she said. ““He is never 
cross with me, never annoyed even when he could be. I often 
make friends cross with me.” 

“] cannot believe that,” said the Ambassador with a smile. 

“Allsay I must understand who they are and what they are 
doing and I want to understand—I do want to understand— 
but when I cannot then they are cross. Baron von Kleist is 
cross with me, Dr. Gruenberg too, and Fräulein Peuthert. 
Frau von Rathlef says you want to take an interest in me. 
"That is nice. But you will be cross too and so will I—that will 
happen one day. It is always like that. You must not say I did 
not warn.” She said it quite calmly, nibbling sweets and feed- 
ing Kiki. She threw a glance at Volkov, who sat in his wicker 
chair, frail and dead-white, and stared at her. 

“This gentleman,” she said with a nod towards him, “is the 
reason for your visit, isn’t he, Your Excellency? You expect 
me to know him. Or him to know me. I do not know if I do. 
He is so old, so very old.” 

“He looks older than he is,” said the Ambassador, “he has 
gone through a great deal. Will you allow him to ask you 
some questions? Please understand that it is not meant as an 
importunity.” 


86 


She smiled weakly. 

“Itry to get rid of the feeling that it is terrible always to be 
asked questions.” 

"The old man bowed like a toppling ruin. 

“Please will you say,” the old voice came, “whether you 
recognise me?” 

“I do not know.” 

“Yes—but I have some questions to ask—perhaps then you 
will recognise me—perhaps you will remember something.” 

“Remember ” whispered the girl. 

“I have been requested to ask you the following questions,” 
said the old man formally. “Who was the servant who was in 
personal attendance on the Czar?” 

“He was very tall. He was called—Nagorny.” 

“Yes, that’s right. Who was Tatishchev?” 

“Tatishchev? He was Papa’s adjutant. But only when we 
were in Siberia—but there was another servant, who only 
looked after Alexy—not just Nagorny. 'T'here was Dere- 
venko, too. He hada son who always played with my brother.” 

“Yes, Derevenko and Nagorny,” said the old man. He 
produced a photograph from his pocket-book. It was of Maria 
Feodorovna, the Czar’s mother. ’T'he girl looked at the picture. 

“Is she well?” she asked. “Have you come from Copen- 
hagen?” 

“Yes,” replied Volkov. His dull eyes shone and his breath 
came with difhculty. 

“I am surprised that Grandmama does not wear black in 
the picture. She always wore black. Did Grandmama send 
you? Did she say you must examine me?” She suddenly smiled 
gaily. “Now I will examine. I shall ask. You remember the 
room in our summer house? Each year when we came Mama 
went to the window there. She took her ring and scratched the 
date on the glass and her initials and Papa’s as well.” 

Volkov sobbed. 


“Yes,” he said hoarsely, “how could I not know? I was 


87 


often in the room. But please—I have to ask you this too. Do 
you remember the Monastery of St. John?” 

“The one in Siberia,” replied the sick girl softly. “There 
were nuns. They often came. We sang with them. Mama and 
we four sisters, we sang with them.” 

The old servant rose slowly. His throat was tight; there 
were tears in his eyes which fell down his hollow cheeks un- 
heeded. 

“It must come right—it must come right,” he said with 
dificulty. He bent over her hand to kiss it and froze as he sud- 
denly discovered the scar on her left middle finger. His trem- 
bling hand touched it lightly. 

“The scar,”’ he whispered. 

‘““T'hat need not upset you,” said the girl with a smile. 
“That was long ago. You were upset enough when it 
happened.” 

“I was to blame,” exclaimed Volkov. 

““Nonsense,” she said. “If I was so stupid to hold out my 
finger and the car door caught it 2 

Volkov passed his hand over her face. 

“T do not understand,” he whispered. “Holy Mother of 
God, I do not understand.” 

He pressed his lips together and tried to steady himself on 
his stick. "Then he turned away suddenly and slowly went off. 

“He is so old,” said the girl, “I do not remember him so 
old.” 

“That was Volkov,” said Zahle. 

““Mama’s personal servant,”” she said, nodding. “At Eka- 
terinburg his hair was not white.” 

“The Bolsheviks took him prisoner,” said the Ambassador. 
“When the White Army was at the gates of Ekaterinburg the 
Bolsheviks dragged him into a wood with the others and shot 
them down. He survived. T'hey thought he was dead and went 
away. He had an exciting escape but he survived.” 

Frau von Rathlef rose. 


I 


88 


“People believe that this man escaped,” she said sharply. 
“Those who doubt Anastasia’s authenticity always say that 
she can’t be alive because no one could survive such a massacre. 
But he survived.” She ran after Volkov and caught up with 
him at the entrance to the hospital. 

“You did recognise her,” she cried. “Everyone can see that 
you recognised her. You must say that you did!” 

"T'he old man shook his head in despair. 

“What can I say?” he stammered. “She did not call me by 
my name. What can I say? I think it is she. But if they ask 
whether I am positive Suppose I say it is she and the 
others say the opposite—how will I be then?” 

“What do you mean?” exclaimed Frau von Rathlef. “You 
must say what you think.” 

He lowered his eyes. He is a lackey, she thought with rage, 
he does not have ideas of his own. 

“‘She never said my name,” he repeated. 

“What are you going to tell them in Copenhagen?” she in- 
sisted. “You must know what you are going to tell them.” 

He pulled himself together. 

“I don’t have to tell you,” he said with an old man’s stub- 
bornness. 

“Naturally not,” she said angrily. “You don’t have to tell 
me. You won’t say anything. You will wait to see what they 
want to hear from you and then you will say it. T'hat is how 
you must have behaved all your life.” 

He left her standing there and walked off as fast as he could, 
banging the pavement with his stick—it made an angry noise, 
as if he were protesting because an old man like himself had 
been burdened with an uncomfortable, dangerous decision. 

In the weeks following Volkov’s visit the invalid’s health 
deteriorated once more. T'he Ambassador, who visited her 
often, had to watch the charming lady he had met turn into a 
whimpering bundle of misery, tortured with pain and pursued 
by feverish fantasies. "T’'he tubercular tumour on her arm grew 


89 


larger and swelled up. Her temperature was always high. "The 
doctors decided to operate and her arm was lanced to release 
the pus. Under the anaesthetic, the girl called on her mother 
and the doctors heard with astonishment that she called her in 
English. The Ambassador had a long talk with Frau von Rath- 
lef about this incident. 

“When fully conscious she has never spoken English, but 
long ago they say she spoke nothing but English to her 
mother,” said Frau von Rathlef. T'he Ambassador interro- 
gated the doctors who explained that, in view of the state of 
her memory, it was not unusual that she should have forgotten 
the language in which she had mostly spoken to her mother. 
But when she was under an anaesthetic, or in a state of deli- 
rium, the repressions which prevented her from speaking it 
when fully conscious were removed. 

"The Ambassador sent a report on the incident to Denmark. 
His account made Prince Waldemar decide not to suspend his 
monthly subvention. He also informed the Ambassador that 
they could make no sense out of what Volkov had told them, 
for the old servant had been very confused and obviously did 
not wish to commit himself. 

In Berlin the Ambassador got into contact with Professor 
Rudneff, a well-known Russian surgeon, who had been driven 
from Russia by the Revolution. Rudneff had a practice in the 
Mommsen Sanatorium and the Ambassador found the invalid 
a bed there. She occupied Room 18; it was furnished like a 
private house and it scarcely seemed part of a hospital. Frau von 
Rathlef also moved into the Sanatorium to be in constant 
attendance on her prot&gee. T'he ‘trio in Room 18’—the sick 
girl, who was supposed to bea Grand Duchess, her attendant, 
Frau von Rathlef, and the spoilt Angora cat, Kiki—became 
one of the favourite subjects of conversation in the Berlin 
West End. People became heated as the eternal argument 
swayed to and fro. It was only the sick girl who reacted apa- 
thetically and indifferently to the growing commotion around 


90 


her. Pain dulled her senses. In the dreams which fever brought 
she talked of her grandmother in Copenhagen and said she 
must be sent to her. Or she accused God of playing a terrible 
game with her and begged Him to let her die at last, saying it 
would have been better if He had granted her death at 
Ekaterinburg. 

‘The torture lasted for weeks. "Then months went by 
through which she lived in a half-waking state. T'rue and false 
images merged. People came into the room and she stared at 
them. Pierre Gilliard, who had taught the Czar’s children, 
came. With him he brought his wife, Shura, who had been a 
nanny at the Imperial Court. The sick girl saw them vaguely 
as they sat round her bed and questioned her—the Ambassa- 
dor, Frau von Rathlef, Gilliard and his wife. They talked 
about her as if she were an interesting specimen, worthy of 
close study. She heard Frau Gilliard’s eager voice say: ““I'he 
feet are just like the Grand Duchess’s.” She heard Gilliard’s 
voice say: “I am leaving without being able to say positively 
that she is »o? the Grand Duchess.”’ She heard them whisper 
so as not to disturb her and discuss whether she ought not to 
be taken South—perhaps to Lugano. She bore patiently with 
their questions, with the long talks, the non-committal state- 
ments which they all made so as to avoid expressing an opinion. 
She also bore patiently two further operations in the course of 
which they removed a portion of the elbow. Every day she had 
morphia. 

A new visitor came—one from whom Frau von Rathlef 
hoped, as she had so often hoped before, to obtain a decision in 
favour of the girl. It wasthe Grand Duchess Olga, the Czar’s 
youngest sister. She came often—almost daily—and when the 
girl called her ‘Aunt Olga’ she took her tenderly in her arms. 
She told the invalid about Copenhagen, about her grand- 
mother and about her own children. Her visits were the visits 
ofa loving relative. When she had to leave Berlin she promised 
to write. She wrote: 


91 


“z1st October 1925. My thoughts are with you. I think 
of the time we spent together and how you stuffed me with 
chocolate, tea and cocoa. How are you feeling? You must be 
good—eat a lot and do what Frau von Rathlef says. I hope 
you will be quite well soon. I am looking forward to your 
letter. Olga.” 

“4th November 1925. I am sending my little invalid my 
own silk shawl—it is very warm. I hope you will put the 
shawl round your shoulders and arms and that it will keep you 
cosy in the winter. I bought it in Japan before the war... I 
am always thinking about you and send my best greetings to 
the three inmates of Room 18. How is white Kiki? Many re- 
gards to Professor Rudneff. Love, Olga.” 

“25th December 1925. Very many thanks for the book. 
I am longing to see you... . We will have a Russian Christ- 
mas. Everybody here is celebrating it in the Danish way. Best 
wishes, Olga.” 

"Then no more postcards or letters came. Frau von Rathlef 
had daily expected an ofhcial statement from Copenhagen to 
the effect that Grand Duchess Olga had recognised the sick 
girl as her niece, Anastasia. "T’'he tender letters with their inti- 
mate style had encouraged Frau von Rathlef in the belief that 
the decision would come soon. When no letters came and noth- 
ing happened she called on the Danish Ambassador. She could 
not understand what was going on in Copenhagen, she said. 
The tone ofthe Grand Duchess Olga’s letters spoke for itself 
—-there could be no more doubt, no one who was afraid she 
might be dealing with a fraud could possibly write like that. 
The Ambassador shrugged his shoulders. “I can say nothing,” 
he said and she saw that he felt ill at ease. “A statement can 
come only from the relatives.” 

Much later the relatives were to issue a statement. It would 
be signed by the Grand Duke Alexander—and also bear the 
name of the Grand Duchess Olga who had sent such charm- 
ing presents. 'T'his is what the sick girl would have to read: 


92 


“Tt is very difhcult and painful for us, the nearest relations 
ofthe Czar’s family, to accept the thought that no single mem- 
ber of that family survived. We would willingly believe that 
one at least escaped from their murderous extermination in the 
year 1918. We would heap on the survivor that love of ours 
which has had no object on which to expend itself all these 
years. And with our great love we would drown our great sor- 
row that it has not been our lot to be able to protect the pure 
in heart, those models of love and goodness, from the slander- 
ous tongues of their enemies. But our sense of duty compels us 
to state that, as far as the woman in question is concerned, her 
story is a pure invention. Our memory of the dear departed 
must not be clouded by allowing this fantastic tale to be spread 
abroad and gain substance. . . .” 


23 


IO 


Certain things had changed in Chief Inspector Gruenberg’s 
life. He had been transferred to the Police Ofhice in Wedding. 
He took the move for what it was meant to be: he had slightly 
greater powers and slightly greater responsibilities—but he 
was no longer in Police Headquarters, in the centre where the 
important decisions were taken. He saw his transfer as a deli- 
cate indication that he must reflect on his increasing age and 
prepare himself for retirement. He had a quiet office with a 
notice ‘By appointment only’, drawers full of eucalyptus 
sweets, and the respect of his subordinates. 

He no longer had anything to do with the cases he had pre- 
viously handled. But he still kept himself up to date on the 
case of Anastasia. He confessed to himself that, here, he was 
perhaps not pursuing purely professional interests and that it 
had become a sort of passion. He was drawn to the files and 
private notes, which he had made on the case, and had arranged 
so carefully, like a stamp collector to his album. For some time 
a series of articles had been running in a Berlin evening paper 
under the title: “Is Anastasia, the Czar’s Youngest Daughter, 
Still Alive? Notes and documents on a problem of human 
identification by Harriet von Rathlef.”” Gruenberg cut these 
articles out carefully. Somebody else trying to make money 
out of the girl, he thought. Up to now he had looked upon 
Frau von Rathlef as the sick girl’s unselfish nurse and atten- 
dant; now he came to the conclusion that she had listened to 
her prot&gee’s tale only to sell her knowledge for a newspaper 
fee. He did not know that the Danish Ambassador had thought 


44 


the same when he came upon the articles; butthen the Ambas- 
sador had classed Gruenberg along with the whole group who 
busied themselves with the girl’s strange fate for their own 
ends. In the Ambassador’s opinion Chief Inspector Gruen- 
berg was bent on winning fame by making a unique discovery 
as a criminologist. 

It was on a morning in March 1927 that Gruenberg got to 
know the man who had made his appearance on the scene 
some days before. ’I’he police sergeant on duty reported that 
Herr Martin Knopf wished to speak to him. Gruenberg was 
standing at the window looking out at the sleet and mist in the 
street when Knopf came in. Gruenberg turned and greeted 
his visitor. He was of medium height and seemed to be burst- 
ing with initiative and energy. His dark hair was combed 
straight; his chin jutted out and in his eyes there was a 
look of impatience and hustle, to which Gruenberg reacted 
sceptically. 

“Take a seat, Herr Knopf, Private Detective, of 13 Har- 
denbergstrasse,”’ said Gruenberg with a thin smile. 

Knopf laughed heartily. 

““Heavens! have you got my warrant ready there?” He sat 
down, crossed his legs and unbuttoned his coat but did not re- 
move it. He hasn’t time, I expect, thought Gruenberg. 

“May I smoke?” asked Knopf. 

“If you allow me to suck eucalyptus sweets,”” Gruenberg 
answered drily. “I have been expecting your visit for a long 
time.” 

“Then you clearly know the case I am busy on. I thought 
you had stopped taking an interest in Anastasia long ago.” 

“No, only recently. I heard from the Bureau of Missing 
Persons that a certain Martin Knopf, private detective, had 
suddenly become very interested in all girls reported missing 
between January and March 1920. Ihe name Anastasia 
Tsschaikovsky was also mentioned, so I said to myself, I won’t 
have to wait long for that chap.” 


95 


“One mustn’t underestimate the police,” grinned Knopf. 

“Then I will try not to underestimate private detectives. 
You know the police have an innate dislike for your pro- 
fession. Well, what do you want to know?” 

“] think we understand each other excellently, Inspector,’ 
said Knopf. 

“Why not? Who has commissioned you?” 

“Scherl, the publishers. You know about the articles by 
Frau von Rathlef in their evening paper?” 

“I cut them out every day.” 

“The publishers Iam working for have come to the con- 
clusion that, in spite of all the effort put into them, the articles 
do not prove that our girl is really the Grand Duchess Anas- 
tasia. The publishing house had hoped that readers would 
come forward to clear things up. But nothing happened.” 

“Only Herr Gilliard,”’ said Gruenberg, nodding. “Funny 
—he seems to be the girl’s fiercest opponent.” 

““What’s funny about that? He was tutor to the Czar’s chil- 
dren. If he is convinced that the sick girl is not Anastasia I find 
it laudable of him to inform the public.” 

“He has visited the girl,” said Gruenberg. “He even stated 
that she might very well be the Grand Duchess—I am accur- 
ately informed. Suddenly he says that the possibility is absurd 
— quite suddenly. And what is funny is that he says it after 
visiting the Grand Duke of Hesse.” 

“You mean it meetsthe Grand Duke’s wish not to acknow- 
ledge Anastasia and Gilliard falls in with that wish?” 

“I mean nothing—I am only stating that Gilliard’s state- 
ment that the sick girl cannot possibly be Anastasia was not 
made after he visited her but after he visited the Grand Duke. 
Nothing more.” 

“If you give it the proper intonation it sounds very like an 
accusation.”” 

“Give it any intonation you like,” said Gruenberg. 

Knopf stirred impatiently in his chair. 


96 


“I cannot express an opinion on the subject,” hesaid. ‘“T'hat 
is not my job.” 

““And what is your job?” 

“ You willadmit that this whole Anastasia business has gone 
so far that people concentrate almost exclusively on finding 
proof that she isthe Grand Duchess. We have almost reached 
the point where certain statements point strongly to her 
identity with the Czar’s daughter—and a lot of other state- 
ments only less strongly. Hardly anyone bothers to consider 
that she may be somebody quite different—an ordinary 
woman. I don’t know if Iam making myself clear. I mean we 
mustn’t try to find out whether she is one and the same person 
as Anastasia but try to find out—quite generally—who she is.” 

“But that is nothing new, my dear man,” objected Gruen- 
berg. “You are forgetting that the first time the girl and the 
Grand Duchess were associated was in 1922. But after her 
attempted suicide, up to that time—that is for two years— 
our only interest had been to establish her identity whatever 
the outcome might be.” 

““Perhaps some points have been overlooked. Perhaps some- 
thing has been forgotten.” 

“ All honour to your mistrust. I don’t want to say that the 
police are always right. But we are usually accused of inflexi- 
bility and bureaucracy. I can tell you that we have gone in- 
flexibly through all the lists of missing persons. In every police 
district. We have looked for a girl in her early twenties. She 
jumped into the canal on 17th February. We have investi- 
gated every person reported missing in February and there- 
after. ’T’'here is not a thing to be found. And there the problem 
really begins—if we wish to call it a problem. Now you have 
obviously looked through all the old lists and the unsolved 
cases. Did you find anything?” 

Knopf shrugged. 

“Nothing so far, admittedly,” he said. “I want to stress ‘so 
far’. I shall go on looking.” 


G 97 


“I can only wish you success.” 

“] start from this point of view: first of all, for me she isn’t 
the Grand Duchess—I exclude that Bössibiliey because it 
merely irritates me. So I say to myself that she must be some- 
one else. Until 1922 she was that other person. So one part of 
the solution to my task I must find in the year 1922 and be- 
fore it. After that the confusion with Anastasia set in. So I 
shall try to discover points in the later period which have some 
connection with the period before 1922.” 

Gruenberg listened attentively. 

“As far asthe post-1922 period goes I suppose you are look- 
ing for the famous mistake which every fraud makes once,” 
he said reflectively. 

“Exactly. And that is where I should like your assistance 
if that is not asking too much.” 

“Anything I can d——” 

“There is something you can do. Every day in the girl’s life 
can be traced accurately. We know when she was rescued from 
the canal. We know what she did and said in Dalldorf. We 
always know where she was on every day—except for three, 
Inspector. "There is a gap of three ee she ran away 
from Baron von Kleist. T'hat is the gap.’ 

“She was with Peuthert—it is as good as proved.” 

“But only ‘as good as’ proved.” 

Knopf took a notebook from his pocket and opened it. 

“She ran away from Baron von Kleist on ı2th August 
1922. She was found again on 15th August in Peuthert’s flat. 
When the police questioned Peuthert on ızth and ı4th 
Sun she denied that the girl was in her house. That s so, 
isn’t it?” 

“Yes, it is. But we didn’t search the house—we had noth- 
ing to go on.” 

“What did the woman say when the girl was discovered in 
her house on ı5th August?” 

»  “You’re right—she said that the girl had only come that 


98 


evening. She wasn’t there before. But it was clear that she was 
lying. She was frightened that she could be proceeded against 
for denying that she knew the girl’s whereabouts. Her only 
way out was to stick to her first statement. The girl said her- 
self that she had been there the whole time.” 

“The girl says a lot of things—she also says she is the 
Grand Duchess. I don’t believe it so she is a liar as far as I am 
concerned. She may have been Iying, too, about her stay with 
the Peuthert woman. And maybe Peuthert told the truth. 
Why not?” 

“If you knew both ofthem ei would know which ofthem 
is more inclined to untruths.” 

“That would be a subjective judgment. I won’t get any- 
where with my feelings. I have a request to make. How did 
the girl look, how did she behave when they saw her for the 
last time at Baron Kleist’s, and what was she like when she 
was found again? What did the police report?” 

Gruenberg stood up, went to a desk and took out a file. 

“Here are all the private notes I have made—and some 
copies of the documents in the case.” He opened the file and 
leafed through it. “Here are the days you are interested in.” 
He shoved the bulky file over to Knopf and with some irony 
watched the private detective read everything through care- 
fully. 

“May I make a few notes?” 

“Certainly.” 

“Did you see the girl yourself on that occasion?” 

“Yes, when we found her again.” He made a wry mouth. 
“She was wearing the most terrible straw hat I have ever seen 
—cornflower blue with six yellow pansies on it.” 

Gruenberg walked round his desk and sat down again. 
Knopf looked hard at him and then began searching through 
the file; his face suddenly became excited. 

“A cornflower blue hat, you say? Do you know what else 
she had on—the day you found her, I mean?” 


99 


Gruenberg hesitated. 

“Yes,” he began uncertainly. “I meant to ask her at the 
time. Then I forgot. It can’t be very important.” 

But apparently it did suddenly strike him as important. He 
stood up and walked over to Knopf so that he, too, could see 
the documents. 

“What did you forget to ask?” said Knopf. 

“] made some notes too,” muttered Gruenberg. He turned 
a page of the file. “Here—here are the clothes she was wear- 
ing when we found her. She was wearing a dark blue costume 
with a black and white striped lining—and, there you are, this 
funny hat.” 

Knopf sat bolt upright. 

“But these are quite different from the things she ran away 
in,” he said. “It says in the missing notice that she was wear- 
ing a yellow coat, a bright green felt hat, a pair of high boots 
and a lilac blue dress.” 

Gruenberg walked restlessly up and down the room. 

“She must have changed in Peuthert’s house,” he said, but 
he knew Knopf would not find that argument convincing. 
He was embarrassed that the other had stumbled on an in- 
accuracy in the records which he himself had failed to clear up 
in time, 

“Perhaps,” said Knopf quietly, “but you must admit it’s not 
very likely. Whose could the things be? Peuthert’s? She isa fat 
old woman and her clothes would hardly fit the girl. Were 
they old clothes belonging to the girl herself? How did she 
come to have clothes stowed away with Peuthert? T'here was 
never any suggestion of that. Besides, when she was taken out 
of the water she was wearing a black blouse, a black flared 
skirt and brown shoes. I know all that by heart. I have read it 
through often enough these last days. She had nothing else, 
and nothing else in Dalldorf, either. T'hese were the things 
she had when Baron Kleist took her in. It was only then that 
she got new clothes—the very ones she ran away in. Do you 


100 


really think the Peuthert woman bought her anything? I 
doubt if she had a penny.” 

“I have no idea,” said Gruenberg uncomfortably. 

“I attribute the utmost importance to this mysterious 
change of dress—the utmost importance,” said Knopf. He 
cast an undisguised look of reproach at Gruenberg. “I simply 
can’t understand why the police didn’t look into this.” 

“All right,” muttered Gruenberg crossly. “Perhaps we 
made a mistake.” 

“And I am telling you,” said Knopf triumphantly, “that is 
the mistake the girl made too. T'hat is the famous mistake. 
That is what I am after.” 

Gruenberg waved a hand in the air. 

“I am convinced,” he said, “that the story of the clothes 
has an innocent explanation. But please do not let me stop you. 
I can’t prevent you from thinking the girl is a confidence 
trickster. I can only tell you that if the girl is an impostor, 
then it goes contrary to all criminological experience. I know 
what she is like. I have had enough trouble over her. And I 
am very glad I have nothing more to do with her directly. But 
a confidence trickster—how can she be? She is very ill. The 
doctors have often despaired of her. "T’'hat’s nothing to do with 
confidence tricks. I tell you a swindler would have given up 
long ago. Why should she try to swindle? Do you think Russia 
is a monarchy any longer? If it were, there is no female suc- 
cession. She couldn’t become Empress.”’ 

“It’s not a question of being Empress or not,” said Knopf 
smiling and attempting to conceal his sense of triumph. “I 
wasa bank detective for years, Inspector, an international bank 
detective. It’sa question of money. My first thought was that 
it could only be a question of money. Even a Czar has a bank 
account. When it’s a question of money even crowned heads 
have bourgeois interests and open accounts.”” 

“Ifyou mean the Czar’saccount with the Bank of England, 
then I have to disappoint you,” replied Gruenberg calmly. 


IOI 


“You will be surprised but I also thought in terms of money 
at first. During my researches into the records I found a note 
that the Czar had banked part of his private fortune in Lon- 
don. I exploited all my connections. But there is nothing for 
anyone to inherit, Herr Knopf. Really not a sou. ’The Czar 
had forty million pounds sterling in the Bank of England— 
before the war. But during the war he drew the money. "There 
is a document, Herr Knopf, in which a Russian ofhicial notes 
with pride that Nicholas II considered it unpatriotic to leave 
such a large sum abroad. He withdrew the money. It was used 
to build up theair force. I tell you there is nothing for anyone 
to inherit.” 

Knopf was unshaken. 

“] know about that too,” he said stubbornly. “My know- 
ledge does not come from secret records. I told you I have con- 
nections in banking circles. I don’t mean the account you are 
speaking about.” 

“There is no other,” said Gruenberg sharply. 

“Let us put it this way,” said Knopf with a smile, “it is not 
quite certain whose the other account is. But there is talk of 
one. 'This girl we are quarrelling over hinted to Grand 
Duchess Olga, when she was on a visit from Copenhagen, that 
the Czar had opened an account for his children in England— 
five million gold roubles for each child. I am still arranging 
for inquiries to be made whether that is the case or not.” 

“If the girl made this statement and it turns out to be true 
then I think it only goes to show that she really is Anastasia,” 
shouted Gruenberg. “How else could she know? Did the 
Grand Duchess Olga know about it?” 

“No. But I won’t be drawn into the argument about 
Anastasia. How our girl got to know about the account is of 
no importance to me for the present. Perhaps she picked up a 
hint, perhaps someone put the idea into her head. I am sure, 
in any case, that she is not working alone. I only know that 
she believes in the account. The money is supposed to have 


102 


been set aside for the children, so she would be the sole inheri- 
tor— provided she manages to be recognised as Anastasia. 
"Twenty-five million gold roubles, Herr Gruenberg. That is 
something worth working for.” He sprang up in his excite- 
ment and his conviction that his theory was true. “Even ifshe 
has bone tuberculosis ten times over and is lying half dead. She 
is sure that this sum exists. She believes in it. She hangs on 
to it. Do you really think a confidence trickster wouldn’t last 
out? Everyone melts with pity when they see the poor sick 
girl. Everyone issad when they hear of her weak memory and 
her disturbed mind. I tell you she is the toughest, cleverest 
creature that I have ever come across.” 

Martin Knopf left Gruenberg’s ofäce in the best of moods. 
His eyes sparkled with zest; he held his head high. He seemed 
restored, invigorated and—as it were—newly ironed. He was 
convinced that during the conversation which had just ended 
he had come across his first decisive clue. Stepping out of the 
police station he hailed a taxi and got in. 

“13 Hardenbergstrasse,” he said and leaned back in the seat. 
He was pleased with the way the morning had gone. 

He was suddenly startled out of his train of thought by the 
driver braking sharply. A cyclist had come heedlessly out of a 
side-street; he wobbled dangerously then stopped, pale and 
frightened, just in front of the radiator. "I’he driver delivered 
a broadside in Hamburg dialect. 

“That was lucky,” said Knopf to himself; the dialect 
amused him. ’T’hey drove on. When they passed a telephone 
booth he stopped the taxi. 

“Just a minute,” he said and disappeared into the booth. 
He dialled the Scherl Publishing House and was put through 
to the research assistant who had been placed at his disposal. 
He reported briefly what he had learned from Gruenberg of 
the girl’s mysterious change of clothes. ‘“We won’t get any fur- 
ther with just the Bureau of Missing Persons,” he said. 
“Send someone to the Housing Department as well. Ask them 


103 


to try to provide a list of all the women or girls who are shown 
to have changed their residence without giving their new 
address between January and March 1920. Perhaps we will 
find something there. Maybe she wasn’t missing. If we find 
nothing there it will be a bit of a blow, of course. "That will 
mean she had come from outside Berlin and if we have no clue 
where she came from things will get really complicated. But 
try your luck.” 

He hung up and got into the taxi again. It occurred to him 
that it was still too early to go to his office, so he looked through 
his notebook to find the address of Captain von Schwabe and 
told the taxi-driver. His head was full of a confusion of 
thoughts. "They came in shoals and he rejected them all. He 
was possessed by impatience. His success with Gruenberg 
spurred him on to try and achieve something else that very 
day. He stared at the back of the driver’s head. He was ob- 
sessed with the idea that this man had put him on to the trail 
of an important idea, but he had forgotten what it was. ’I’he 
taxi stopped in front of a modest block of flats. Knopf paid the 
driver and stared after the taxi. He felt that the idea he could 
no longer recall was vanishing with it. "Then suddenly he re- 
membered what it had been. He was electrified. "T’hat may be 
it, he said. Yes, that may be it. He had a wonderful sensation 
that today he had struck a vein of bright ideas. 

He went into the house and hurried up the stairs. On the 
second floor he discovered the name Schwabe on the door. He 
rang and a woman answered. 

“T should like to speak to Captain von Schwabe.” 

“Yes,” said the woman uncertainly. 

“It isabout the case of Anastasia. I am a private detective.” 
He introduced himself and she invited him into the living- 
room where, as he entered, a slim, wiry man rose from an 
armchair. 

“This is my husband,” said the woman. “T'he gentleman 
has come about the girl.” She cast an inquiring glance at her 


104 


husband. He nodded and she left them alone together. T’he 
Captain frowned. 

“I wish to have nothing more to do with the affair,” he 
said sharply. 

“So you no longer believe that she is the Grand Duchess,”” 
said Knopf. 

“T don’t care who she is. But don’t bother me with her,” 
he said with annoyance. 

“T am trying to establish the identity of this gir—of Frau 
Tsschaikovsky,” said Knopf slowly. “I am convinced she is a 
fraud.”” Schwabe’s eyelids twitched and he passed his tongue 
quickly over his lips. 

“Is that so? Do take a seat.” 

Knopf smiled and sat down. He took in the room with a 
quick glance—good, simple, middle-class furniture, no pre- 
tensions to Juxury but a hankering after the past in old Czarist 
Russia. 

“IT won’t take up much of your time,” he said. “I have been 
tracing our unidentified girl from the moment she left Dall- 
dorf. I believe you belonged to the &migre circle which took 
her up. Didn’tshe become godmother to your daughter? I heard 
something of the kind.” He suppressed any hint of irony. 

The captain pressed his lips together. 

“Please do not refer to it,” he said gloomily. 

“So you really did have your daughter baptised Anastasia?” 

“We must have been blind,’ Schwabe replied vehemently. 
“We firmly believed that she was the Grand Duchess Anas- 
tasia Nikolayevna.” 

“So it was naturally an honour to obtain her as godmother,”” 
said Knopf calmly. “Now you no longer believe in the Grand 
Duchess—why not?” 

“Listen. Look how she behaved. She ran away. Baron von 
Kleist and I were ready to do anything for her and she simply 
ran away. If she were Anastasia Nikolayevna she would have 
sat back and waited for our efforts to bear fruit.” 


105 


“That isa matter of opinion. She says that the &migr&s were 
only interested in plans for making money.” 

“That’s a disgusting thing to say.” 

*“T’m not saying that it was so.” 

“] am sure that she cannot possibly be the Grand Duchess.” 

“But once you were very sure. Have you got proof—con- 
crete proof to make you change your mind?” 

“My instincts er 

“]’m sorry—that’s no good.” 

“Herr Gilliard, the tutor to the Czar’s children, also says 
that she isn’tthe Grand Duchess.” 

“But Herr Gilliard,”’ said Knopf with a slight smile, “was 
originally not of his present opinion. Don’t misunderstand me. 
I have said that as far as [am concerned she isa fraud. But in 
my job I have to look for things which can persuade even the 
people who still believe in her. And they can be convinced only 
by incontrovertible proofs—and then only with difäculty. 
Herr Gilliard’s statement that he cannot recognise Anastasia 
in the girl isa mere expression of opinion. Nothing more. The 
others will say—and rightly—that one cannot go by a mere 
expression of opinion.” He searched in his pocket-book and 
brought out a piece of paper. 

“Here—this is the statement which Frau von Rathlef 
made on Gilliard’s first visit to the sick girl.” 

“On that occasion the girl did not recognise Gilliard,”” 
shouted Schwabe. ‘““I'here you have it. She didn’t recognise 
her old teacher.” 

Knopf smoothed the piece of paper. 

“Listen to what Frau von Rathlef wrote. “The Danish 
Ambassador was in the girl’s room in the sanatorium. After 
Herr Gilliard had been with her a short time he left. T'hen the 
sick girl said to the Ambassador with obvious signs of mental 
strain: He must be my brother’s tutor but I did not dare to say 
so because he seemed unfamiliar to me. Next day Herr Gil- 
liard came once more and when he came to the side of her bed 


106 


she said to him: What happened to your beard? You used to 
have something on your chin.’ ” Knopf glanced at Schwabe. 

“So you see,” he went on, “the others can produce state- 
ments for me. It sounds fairly convincing when someone says 
that the only reason why she didn’t recognise Gilliard at first 
sight was that he had shaved off the beard he wore at court. 
Besides, eight or nine years had passed. Listen to some more 
of what Frau von Rathlef has to say: “T'hat day it seemed 
to every one of us that all doubts had been dispelled and she 
was the Grand Duchess Anastasia. Herr Gilliard asked me 
to go out with him into the corridor because he wanted to 
speak to me. He was very excited and said: My God, this is 
terrible. What has happened to the Grand Duchess? She is a 
wreck.’ ” 

“Gilliard simply let himself be taken in to begin with,” 
muttered Schwabe. 

Knopf shrugged. 

“The girl and Gilliard even corresponded for some time,” 
he said. “Here, for example, on 30th December 1925, he 
wrote to Frau von Rathlef: ‘My wife was very excited when 
she got the card you sent us. T'he handwriting is certainly very 
like that ofthe Grand Duchess when she was thirteen or four- 
teen years old.’ ” 

Schwabe stood up and walked nervously about the room. 

“Gilliard visited me,” he said. “He was here. He sat where 
you are sitting now and told me that this fraud must somehow 
have got possession of an example of the real Grand Duchess’s 
handwriting. She copied it. That is the only explanation—she 
copied it.” 

Knopf put Frau von Rathlef’s statement away again. 

“But there is only his word for it. Can he prove it?” 

“But there is no proof of what you have just read.” 

“Yes there is. The Danish Ambassador confirms in writing 
that what Frau von Rathlef put down on paper is a true 
account.” 


107 


“To hear you,” said Schwabe angrily, “people would think 
that you wanted to prove that Anastasia is genuine and not the 
contrary.” 

“But I want to prove the very opposite,” said Knopf with 
a confident smile. “I am merely saying nothing you or Baron 
von Kleist or Gilliard have said up to now could stand up to 
examination ina court oflaw. You are all against the girl these 
days and you fight her—but you will forgive me for saying 
that I find no trace of objectivity in your arguments. Why 
have you never considered how it is that she won’t speak Rus- 
sian— which is just nonsense.” 

“What answer can we give to the medical arguments? ’T'he 
doctors stick to it that it is possible—owing to wounds or some- 
thing.” 

Knopf nodded. 

“I know that is what the doctors say but you and the other 
emigres have never taken the trouble to find an answer.” 

“I never knew what to say.” 

“I came here in a taxi. On the way something happened to 
me. It was a pure chance. But never mind—the driver spoke 
Hamburg dialect. I can’t repeat to you a single word he said. 
To me Hamburg dialect is like a foreign language. Yet I 
understood every word he said. And even if I hadn’t under- 
stood every single word I still understood what he meant. Do 
you see what I am getting at?” 

Schwabe sat down. 

“I have no idea,” he muttered. 

“But you tried to speak Russian to the girl. You did, didn’t 
you?” 

“Naturally; often. We suddenly began to speak Russian in 
the middle of a conversation. T’hat was how we tested her. 
It’s true she went on speaking German but it was clear from 
her answers that she understood our Russian all the same. 
T'hat was what convinced us that there was something in the 
doctors’ arguments.” 


108 


*“That’s one possibility,” replied Knopf. ‘“T’'he other possi- 
bility is the idea I had in the taxi. I also understood the chau- 
ffeur without being able to speak Hamburg dialect myself.” 

“But you are only talking about a dialect. Russian is a 
foreign language after all.” 

Knopf bent forward. 

“Never mind,” he said. “What happened in the taxi was 
only the starting point of my thoughts. You are Russian. If 
you go to Poland can you speak Polish?” 

“No—that is to say I get along. I understand most of what 
is being said.” Schwabe’s face was suddenly excited. “So you 
mean ® 
“I mean that a Russian understands Polish even if he 
doesn’t speak it. And I mean,” he said, raising his voice, 
“that a Polish woman also understands Russian without her 
necessarily having had to learn the language. Am I right?” 

Schwabe sat there as if thunderstruck. "Then he nodded 
excitedly. 

“Yes, yes—of course—that’s possible,” he brought out. 
“Yes, that is the solution. She can’t speak Russian. She isn’t a 
Russian. She isa Pole. Really! Good God!” 

Knopf smiled contentedly and looked at his fingers. 

“You are very quick to accept a theory if it is presented to 
you with sufficient conviction,” he said ironically. “But for 
me that is still very far from being the solution. Perhaps she is 
Czech. Perhaps the whole explanation is quite different. ’T'his 
is only one possibility.” 

“Poland belonged to Russia. "T'hat’s more like it. I tell you 
she ıs Polish.” 

“Let’s stick to hard facts,” Knopf interrupted him coolly. 
“Excitement won’t get us anywhere. You should know that 
better than me. You were in the girl’s company often enough. 
Can you remember anything—did she say or do anything that 
would fit into my view?” 

Schwabe thought hard but could think of nothing. 


109 


“] don’t know—at the moment I cannot really say whether 
there was anything. You ought to go to Baron von Kleist.” 

“] intend to. All right—you can’t think of anything. I 
want to ask another question. Was there anything that makes 
it quite impossible for her to be a Pole? I mean did anything 
happen that makes the others say that she can only be a 
Russian?” 

Schwabe hesitated. 

“This nurse in Dalldorf,” he began. “As far as I know one 
or two ofthe nurses maintain they spoke Russian to the girl— 
that is to say, they maintain the girl herself spoke Russian.” 

“That will be women’s chatter. T'here is the girl in an asy- 
lum. Russians come along and say that she isa Grand Duchess. 
I can imagine how the nurses saw it. Each wanted to prove 
that she was on particularly good terms with the girl. Each 
wanted to show that she had always suspected something. But 
it may all be nothing but gossip. You, at all events, do not 
exclude the possibility that she may be Polish.” 

“Of course I don’t. In my opinion there is nothing—abso- 
lutely nothing—to contradict the theory.” 

Knopf stood up and Schwabe rose too. 

“Shall I find Baron von Kleist at home?” asked Knopf. 

“He is always at home at midday.” 

“Good. I may possibly have to call on you again in this con- 
nection,’ said Knopf. Schwabe looked at him with enthusiasm 
and held out his hand. 

“I have the feeling that the matter is in the right hands at 
last,”’ he cried. 

Knopf accepted the compliment with a smile. He saw no 
reason to contradict it. 


Baron von Kleist was already expecting Knopf’s visit. 


“Captain von Schwabe rang to say you were coming. He 
told me your theory. I think it is brilliant.” 


I1O 


They sat facing each other and smoked. Once the cour- 
tesies were over Knopf set off a fusilade of questions. But what 
Kleist had to tell him was not much help. Knopf wrinkled his 
brows. . 

“Considering the girl was in your house for ages you really 
haven’t much to tell me,” he said at last impatiently. “Noth- 
ing but expressions of opinion. Nothing but wish-fulfilments. 
Don’t be cross—but it is almost laughable. If you think how 
many people have been dancing attendance on this girl! I’m 
sorry to have to say it, but if the case ever comes into court I 
don’t think the judge will feel that he is dealing with very 
satisfactory witnesses. And it doesn’t matter whether they are 
for or against the girl. Who is there? "T’he Peuthert woman— 
a hysterical, ill-tempered creature. Captain von Schwabe—he 
gets swept away by anything. First of all he is overcome with 
respect and baptises his daughter Anastasia—now he slaps me 
in the back with enthusiasm because I think our girl is a 
swindler. Baroness Buxhoeveden—again not an ideal witness. 
She did not recognise a resemblance to any of the Grand 
Duchesses in our girl. But what good is that? Not much if it’s 
true that she let the Empress down in 1918 when she was a 
lady-in-waiting. I don’t know if that was so or not—but there 
are some doubts on the subject. I would very much like to find 
someone—anyone—no matter what side he is on whom the 
others have got nothing against just for once. And I cannot 
make an exception of yourself, Baron. You know yourself 
what they say of you—that you want to make yourself im- 
portant in loyal circles and that was the only reason why you 
took the girl in. You don’t need to tell me that you did so for 
purer motives. Why should I not believe you? But what I be- 
lieve doesn’t matter. Seen from the outside, your part in the 
matter is obscure. Try and do something to offset these pre- 
judices. T'hen there are the police—and it had to be Gruen- 
berg who took over the case. A nice man. A good man. But 
potty over the idea that he can provide the history scholars 


III 


with a sensation. I can tell you this, Baron, if our girl isa con- 
fidence trickster—and of that Iam firmly convinced—the best 
thing that could have happened to her was to fall in with this 
lot. The arguments for or against her were set out in terms of 
instinct and emotion but hardly ever objectively. She has been 
able to grow into her role of Grand Duchess. It has been going 
on since 1922—she has had five years to learn her lines. If she 
has the least talent as an actress she can speak her part. But 
perfectly.” 

Baron von Kleist let his visitor’s outbreak of temperament 
pass over him and said nothing. "T'here was a long pause. "Then 
Kleist cleared his throat. 

“What should I have done?” he said in a low voice at last. 
“How were we to know that things were going to take this 
turn?” 

“Let’s not talk about it,”’ said Knopf. His voice sounded a 
little calmer. “As far as the reliability or unreliability of the 
witnesses goes, the story is pretty messy. I can’t change that 
now. But tell me— what is the story of the clothes? I mean the 
clothes in which the girl disappeared from your flat in August 
1922.” 

“I gave the police an exact description at the time,” replied 
the Baron. 

“I have read it. A lilac cotton dress, a green felt hat and a 
yellow coat.” 

“It was a camel-hair-coloured coat,” said Kleist. “I bought 
it myself in a big store.” 

Knopf took note. 

“That’s something more at least,”” he muttered. “Can you 
think of anything else? What about shoes? Underwear?” 

“I can’t recall anything else.” Kleist stood up and went to 
the door. “I shall ask my wife.” He called the Baroness. 

“Her underwear?” she said. ‘““T'here was a monogram 


on it. Later she wore other things. The monogram was 
AB? 


II2 


“Anastasia Romanov,” said Knopf with a mocking smile. 
“Did you embroider it yourself? You must have been quite 
sure she was genuine.” T’'he couple did not answer. 

He asked a few more questions but he got no further. T’hen 
he took his leave, promising that they would be hearing from 
him. At the door Kleist asked whether he had spoken to the 
girl himself. 

“She isn’t in Berlin any more,” Knopf replied. “She is in 
Lugano. Convalescing. Isn’t that nice? She recovers from the 
effort of swindling people and the dupes pay for her stay. T'he 
money comes from Prince Waldemar of Denmark. No—I 
haven’t spoken to her. I’m keeping that to the last.” 

“Perhaps that is a good idea,” said the Baron softly. “Every- 
one is impressed by her when they meet her. You would be 
too.” 

“You mean that I would be taken in by her? Not a hope. 
'T'hat’s the funny thing about her friends. ’I’o begin with she 
is theirs heart and soul and then she quarrels with them. Now 
she has told Frau von Rathlef to go to the devil.” 

“Why?” 

“Because Frau von Rathlef is writing these articles about 
her in the evening papers. She says. she does not wish it. She 
wants to rest—you might also say that she is afraid of the light 
of publicity. Goodbye, Baron.” 

He hurried down the stairs and drove to the publishing 
house. He told his research assistants that when they were go- 
ing through the lists of householders they should keep a par- 
ticularly sharp lookout for women of Polish or Polish-German 
extraction. T'hen he went to his oflice and looked through his 
mail. One letter interested him particularly. It said that the 
person who had papers under the name of Anastasia ’T'schai- 
kovsky had long since left Lugano. She was now convalescing 
in Obertsdorf. She was in a sanatorium there run by a Dr. 
Saathof and was being treated by a Dr. Eitel. Among her 
visitors was a Frau 'I’atyana Melnik, who lived in France. 


H 113 


Frau Melnik’s maiden name was Botkin. This was the daugh- 
ter ofthat Dr. Botkin who had been the Czar’s personal doctor 
and was shot at Ekaterinburg along with the Imperial family. 
Frau Melnik, who had often met the Grand Duchess Anas- 
tasia, had without reservation recognised the patient as the 
Grand Duchess Anastasia. T'he letter ended by saying that the 
patients stay in Oberstdorf was being financed by the Danish 
Ambassador, who had been instructed to do so by Prince 
Waldemar. In the last few days, the sick girl had received an 
invitation from the Duke of Leuchtenberg to take up resi- 
dence in Schloss Seeon. It looked as if she was intending to 
accept the invitation from the Duke, who was a cousin of the 
Czar’s. 

Knopf read the letter through carefully. She leads them all 
by the nose, he thought, and shook his head. 

In the course of the next couple of days he made hardly any 
progress. His research assistants reported the names of several 
women and girls who had moved without giving their new 
address at the beginning of 1920. ’T'wo names—clearly of 
Polish origin— were marked in red: Franziska Schanzkovski, 
born on 16th December 1896 in Borowielas who had moved 
from c/o Wingender, 17 Neue Hochstrasse on ısth January 
1920 leaving no address, but had been reported missing to the 
police only on gth March 1920; and Elsa Makoviak, born on 
ıoth May 1900 in Gogolau, on whom there was no infor- 
mation after 22nd February 1920. 

Knopf possessed several copies of the photographs of the girl 
which had been published in Frau von Rathlef’s articles. He 
decided to go next day to the Neue Hochstrasse and show them 
to the present occupants. 

When he was on his way to Scherl’s to report on things he 
met Frau von Rathlef on the landing. He seized the oppor- 
tunity to address her. He said he had recognised her from her 
photograph, explained who he was and what he was working 
at. She received his revelations coolly. 


114 


“You do not know the girl,” she said. “If you were to meet 
her you would never say that she is a fraud.” 

“It’s odd that you stick by her so—after all you have just 
quarrelled with her—or so I am told.” 

“What has that to do with it? She is sick. Besides she is by 
nature capricious. She objects to the stuff I am publishing. She 
doesn’t see that her case must be brought to the attention of 
the public—which is perhaps the only chance of clearing every- 
thing up. At least that is how I see it. "T'he fact that I can’t 
persuade her of my motives and that she is cross with me makes 
no difference to the fact that for me she is, and always will be, 
the Grand Duchess. I have known for a few days what you 
intend to do. Chief Inspector Gruenberg rang me. You are 
getting excited about this change of clothes. "T'hat yellow 
coat % 

“T'hat camel-hair coat.” 

“Yes, a camel-hair coat. T'he girl had that when she was 
still in hospital. I saw it there. "That was in 1925. But accord- 
ing to you her things had disappeared as far back as August 
1924.” 

‘So she had the coat still when she was in hospital? And 
where is it now?” 

“How should I know? I never saw it again. Perhaps she 
still has it.” 

“You were always with her. She doesn’t have so many 
things. A camel-hair coat catches the eye. T'here are an awful 
lot of unsupported statements in the whole story. I’m sorry but 
my experience tells me that I must consider what you are say- 
ing one ofthem. Bring me the coat—then it would be another 
story. Baron von Kleist bought it, so he would know it again.” 

“Do you mean to say he would recognise an old, worn coat 
—not even genuine camel-hair—after five years,” said the 
woman vehemently. “I’d give a lot to see him do it. One coat 
looks very like another. I’m sorry, Herr Knopf, but I don’t 
see the sense of what you’re doing. Of course, I understand 


115 


what you are getting at. You are a private detective. You are 
given an assignment. You undoubtedly get a good fee. And 
now you want to have something to show for it. Something 
quite new! You not only want to demonstrate that she isn’t 
Anastasia, you want to prove that she is a fraud— what she is 
called, where she lived, what she was before all this. Everyone 
is trying to make something out of meddling in the girl’s 
affairs. Why don’t you go back to being a private detective for 
a change?” 

“My God,” said Knopf drily, “what a low opinion we have 
of each other. No one credits the other with any deceney— 
only him—or herself. Let’s forget about that stupid coat. You 
must have seen her underwear, too. Was there anything on 
it?” 

“What do you expect?” she asked half annoyed, half un- 
comprehending. 

“Was there a monogram on it?” 

“No— why?” she replied hesitantly. 

“Well, that disposes of the underwear, even if we can’t 
agree on the coat. Baroness von Kleist says there was a mono- 
gram on It.” 

“IT know the Kleists,” said Frau von Rathlef sharply. 
“Don’t take it badly, but I have my own ideas about the things 
they both say and do.” 

“You are quite at liberty to. But at least for the time being 
I have no reason to doubt that it is true about the underwear. 
It was marked with A.R.— Anastasia Romanov.” 

"The woman’s eyes flashed. | 

“So that’s supposed to stand for Anastasia,” she cried in a 
rage. “You haven’t examined the Kleist family very closely 
yet, Herr Knopf. You really haven’t used your eyes. Or do 
you know that the Kleists have a daughter? Do you know that 
she is called Anna? She is a nice young woman and is happily 
married. Her husband’s name is Rein. Didn’t you know? Per- 
haps you can work out now that the young lady is called Anna 


116 


„ 


Rein—A.R., Herr Knopf. The young people live in her 
parent’s house. Do you really think that the Baron— who has 
a thin time of t—would have dressed Frau T'schaikovsky up 
in new clothes from top to toe—a camel-hair coat, clothes, 
shoes? He fitted her out very nicely with things from his own 
family. ’I'hat you can believe. T’hat was how Frau T'schai- 
kovsky got her underwear in the first place—later she got her 
own. Do you realiy think that Baroness von Kleist always 
knew exactly what underwear the girl was wearing? Whether 
there was a monogram or not? But now she pretends to know 
exactly—five years after the event. As far as Iam concerned 
you can believe it. But don’t expect me to. If the girl came 
back with underwear with no monogram, at the end of the 
three days when she ran away from the Kleists, that means 
nothing at all.” 

She had spoken in anger with a loud, emphatic voice, and 
the undisguised scepticism with which he patiently listened 
excited her still more. 

“You can do what you like,” she shouted. She wanted to 
add something else but she swallowed it down, threw an angry 
glance at him and walked off. He watched her go with amuse- 
ment. One of the firm’s messengers came up to him and asked 
him to follow him. He led him into a little conference room. 
There was a young girl standing by the window. She turned 
round as he came in. 

“Herr Knopf?” she asked. He bowed slightly and looked 
her up and down. She was of medium height and extremely 
pretty. She wore her hair short and had a mouth that laughed 
readily.' 

“I was told I ought to speak to you. It’s about this girl who 
claims to be Anastasia. "T’hey tell me you are dealing with the 
case. I have read the articles by Frau von Rathlef. My name 
is Doris Wingender.” She spoke in a lively way and smiled at 
him. Her pretty face seemed to say that she was bursting with 
great news. 


117 


“Do sit down,” he said, and wondered where he had heard 
the name before. She sat on the edge ofa chair as ifshe wanted 
to jump up again at once. 

“This story by Frau von Rathlef in the evening paper— 
that can’t possibly be Anastasia. I have seen the photographs.” 

“You come from Berlin?” Knopf asked slowly. She was 
brought up suddenly. 

“es, of course I come from Berlin. I live in the Neue 
Hochstrasse. Anyway that simply can’t be Anastasia. I’ll tell 
you who she is.” 

Suddenly he smiled. She looked at him in amazement. 
He sat down opposite her. 

“Wingender, 17 Neue Hochstrasse,” he said; his face was 
tense. Now comes the solution, he thought, here comes the 
solution at last. 


118 


Il 


ea aaa 


The girl got out of the train and stepped gingerly on to the 
platform. She seemed to want to test the new surroundings 
amidst which she was making her first appearance. T’'he man 
who came up to her was tall and thin. He was in his middle 
fifties; his hair was grey and in his eyes there was both weari- 
ness and friendliness. He was the very model of the aristocrat 
who tries to accommodate himself with condescension and 
resignation to a state of affairs which he cannot grasp. He held 
himself very straight. ’I’here were ironical wrinkles round his 
mouth, as if he were used to laugh with a mixture of amuse- 
ment and wonder when fate brought him unpleasant surprises. 

“You are very welcome, Madam,” he said with a smile and 
kissed the girl’s hand. She looked at him with curiosity. T’hen 
he took her arm and led her to the entrance of the station. A 
porter dragged her trunk after her. She got into the car, which 
waited in the square in front ofthe station. T'he driver required 
no instructions but drove off. T'he girl did not see much of the 
town, which was soon behind them. She looked at the mea- 
dows on either side ofthe road. After a while she turned to the 
man who sat silently beside her. 

“It is very nice of you to invite me,” she said. “I wondered 
for a long time why? "Tell me why?” 

He smiled slightly and shrugged. 

“Why does anyone want to help anyone?” he replied. “Per- 
haps out of sympathy, perhaps because I am curious to know 
who you are.” 

“You have no reason to help,” she said softly. 


119 


nn 


“ And no reason not to,” he explained. “I know the Danish 
Ambassador well. He told me about you. That is how it 
began.” 

“It is not a good idea to help,” she said softly, “not a good 
idea. You have troubles and difhiculties if you help. Everyone 
who helps me has troubles and difhculties.” 

“T’m used to that,” he parried. 

“I know,” she said. 

“How?” he raised his eyebrows ironically. 

“] got them to tell me about the Duke of Leuchtenberg.” 
A smile flitted over her lips. 

“Then you will have heard a lot of things,” he said with a 
slightly mocking note. She nodded. 

“A great deal. People like to speak. And they say such a lot. 
"The Duke, they say, has a castle which is Russian although it 
isin Bavaria. T'he Duke is quite a poor man, they say. But he 
liveslike a rich man. He isa cavalier, people say, and he isa bit 
mad, they say, but nicely mad. He has a fine big car, no one 
knows how—or if it is paid for. Is this it?” 

“Naturally,” he replied gaily. 

“He has a big car, people say, but shoes only one pair. Are 
these the shoes?” 

“They are,” he laughed. ““T'hat’s delightful, Madam.” 

“I or the shoes?” 

“You.” Hepointed at her. “You yourself. But go on. What 
else do people say?” 

“They say I should take care. T’hey say the Duke has more 
charm than anybody. He is descended from Josephine de Beau- 
harnais, they say, and she had tremendous charm, for other- 
wise she would never have been Empress of France.” 

“Go on.” 

“The Duke, they say, is a wonderful mixture. He is the 
Bavarian Duke of Leuchtenberg and at the same time the 
Russian Prince Romanovsky. He has French blood, aGerman 
mind and a Russian soul. Is it true what people say?” 


120 


“r 


“T’m afraid so,” he sighed. He was thinking that she was 
enchanting. 

“Then I shall feel happy at Schloss Seeon,” she said. “Do 
you believe that Iam Anastasia Nikolayevna?” she asked. Her 
voice which a moment before had been low and soft sounded 
hard. 

He looked straight in front of him. 

“I believe so,” he said slowly. “But naturally I don’t know, 
Madam.” 

“What do you believe?” 

“Do you know who General Hoffman is?” 

“He made the peace treaty with the Soviets at Brest- 
Litovsk. He is a strange man.” 

“He is certainly not a strange man 

““He has made some strange statements. He says he knows 
I am Anastasia. He gives his word that he knows. But he 
says he cannot say what proof he has. He has said so to ofhcials. 
But he has said nothing to me. He refuses and I do not under- 
stand.” 

“He gave me his word, too,” said the Duke. “I wrote to 
him before I invited you. He replied that political reasons 
forced him not to give details.” 

“I do not want to know anything about that man,” she 
said vehemently. “He should say nothing if it is only half 
truths.” 

“T'hat doesn’t matter. I don’t care.” Her face twitched. 
““Suppose I am a fraud? What then? I may be a fraud, mayn’t 

I? So many people say so. Most people do. Suppose it is the 
case? Suppose I am bad and wicked and the people are only 
taken in by me? What then? You should not have invited me. 
"They will laugh at you. People will say the Duke of Leuch- 
tenberg shouldn’t have been so stupid to be taken ın. He is 
poor and has a big castle, he hasa car and a pair of shoes, he is 
nice and so stupid that he takes in a fraud. People will have a 
lot to say.” 


„ 


121 


He smiled calmly. 

“Then I won’t disappoint them,” he said. “A man like me 
can’t afford to disappoint people. You are charming, Madam 
—charming as only a real Grand Duchess or a delightful im- 
postor can be. I lost everything in Russia and here I haven’t 
much more. There is not much to enjoy. You are a pleasure 
at least. Look out of the window—that is pleasant too.” 

She looked ahead and saw a lake. Ona peninsula two towers 
with cupolas rose above some trees. 

“That is Seeon, Madam. It does not belong to the present. 
It is old—so old that I feel at home there. "The castle and I 
enjoy the respect of the public. "They find us very interesting. 
There are long, gloomy, winding corridors. "There are cool 
erypts in which lie the bones of holy men, their skulls decor- 
ated with beards made of coloured beads. ’I’'he public says that 
that is eerie and nice, Madam, and when they meet me in the 
corridors they greet me politely and try to imagine whether 
my skull will suit the beads. And the public watches me be- 
cause it is not quite sure whether I am the lord of the castle or 
only its ghost. Then the public makes its way back to the 
restaurant. Yes, Madam, I have a prosaic department in 
Schloss Seeon as well. I send prospectuses all over the world. 
“Pension and Cafe-restaurant Schloss Seeon, Upper Bavaria, 
1500 feet above sea-level, calm, picturesque setting, open 
all year round, excellent Viennese cuisine, full pension 5-7 
marks a day.’ "T'he ghost has to live, Madam.” 

She had listened with a slight laugh. ’T'he car was driving 
along a gravel path and stopped before a short flight of steps. 
"The driver opened the door. "The Duke got out and helped 
the girl to get out. She looked round and saw the garden, the 
old trees, and the lake, which was calm, smooth and dark. In 
the south rose the chain of the Alps; they were still covered 
with snow. ’T'he Duke made a sweeping gesture with his hand. 

“I should be delighted,” he smiled, “if you could feel that 
you were at home here.” 


122 


She nodded. The Duke made a slight grimace. 

“When I am driving in the car to Munich,” he said, “then 
I am Georg von Leuchtenberg. Here, Madam, Iam Georgy 
Nikolayevitch, the grand-nephew of Nikolas I. This is 
Russia, Madam, not Bavaria.” 

“Please, you will forget what I said in the car, won’t you,” 
she said quietly. ‘I am very glad that I was allowed to come. I 
am very grateful, Georgy Nikolayevitch.” 

Near the house there were vegetable plots with brown, 
freshly dug earth, surrounded by a fence. Now the little gar- 
den door opened and a woman appeared. She was of medium 
height, solidly built and wore wooden clogs. She leaned a spade 
against the fence. She wiped her hands on her apron, 
which was dirty from her work in the garden, and stared at the 
girl with her head to one side as she approached. ’T'hen she 
held out her hand. 

“Good,” she said. “Another mouth to feed doesn’t make 
any difference. Don’t be angry but I think it mad of him to 
drag you here. But now you are I don’t mind. You will laugh 
—-but I am his wife.” 

The girl looked at her in amazement. 

“I’m very glad ” she murmured. 

“Wait a bit,” muttered the Duchess. “Well, I must get 
back to the garden.” She gave a brief nod and went. The Duke 
laughed. 

“It amuses her to shock people,” he said. “She tells every- 
one that she is really an anarchist and that there is no room for 
Duchesses in this world any more. "T'he Bolsheviks kept her in 
Moscow for four years. She swept the streets. "Then they 
noticed that she was enjoying it and they let her go. She shocks 
everyone—even the Bolsheviks. Let us go in.” 

He led her into the house and she followed uncertainly. 


123 


12 


III 


The tension which suddenly reigned in the little room could 
be clearly felt. Knopf bent forward and stared at-Doris Win- 
gender. His face worked; then his features rrelaxed andhetooka 
deep breath. He smiled. ‘“Wingender, 17 Neue Hochstrasse,’” 
he repeated and it sounded as if he were very pleased. His voice 
became quite businesslike: “So you have come to tell me that 
the woman who calls herself Anastasia "T'schaikovsky and 
gives herself out to be the Grand Duchess Anastasia is really 
your lodger, Franziska Schanzkovski. Isthat what you wanted 
to tell me?” 

She looked at him in amazement. 

“Heavens,” she said breathlessly. “How do you know?” 

“So that is what you wanted to tell me,” he said with a 
smile. 

“Yes, naturally.” 

“It is wonderful that you have come. My God, it is 
absolutely marvellous.” He sprang up quickly. His fingers 
tingled with a feeling of urgency and restlessness. He rubbed 
his hands together, standing in front of her and looking down 
at her. 

“Don’t be afraid,” he said with a laugh. “I haven’t robbed 
you of the solution. It’s you who have brought it— you alone. 
It sounded just now as if I knew a lot. I know nothing. But 
now we can get to work properly. I’ll tell you how I got there. 
I had figured out that our bogus angel must be a Pole—or at 
least of Polish origin. Never mind why. So we looked for a girl 
like that. A few names came up.” He searched in his pocket 


124 


and pulled out a piece of paper. “Here itsays Franziska Schanz- 
kovski. Born 16th December 1896 in Borowielas. And it 
says that her last address was in Neue Hochstrasse—care of 
Wingender. Then you suddenly appear. You sit there and tell 
me that your name is Wingender. Wingender, I think—and 
then the penny drops. Listen—think it all over again very care- 
fully. Don’t try to put ideas in my head nor into your own. 
Are you quite sure? Are you firmly convinced that it is Fran- 
ziska Schanzkovski?” 

He was so excited that she could not help laughing. 

““Don’t be afraid,’’ she said, nodding her head. “I’m quite 
sure. "I’he photos were in the papers. Underneath it said that 
the woman in the picture was Frau Anastasia "T'schaikovsky 
and the woman in the picture was, and is, beyond all doubt, 
Franziska Schanzkovski. I’ll take any oath you like on that, 
do you understand? I shall stick to it.” 

“Good. Now I am going to put you through the mill. Don’t 
get excited if I take you on to thin ice with my questions. 
Everything must be quite watertight. Don’t forget that the 
others will come down on us like vultures. Right, then. Shall 
I ask the questions or will you tell me your story? I had better 
ask questions. ’I’'his Schanzkovski girl was your lodger?” 

““Yes—that is to say not my lodger but my mother’s. The 
house belongs to her.” 

“But you live there too, don’t you? I mean you know this 
woman yourself?” 

“Yes, I livethere. I was on very good terms with Franziska 
Schanzkovski.” 

“When did you see her last?” 

“I can tell you that exactly. It was the middle of February 
1920. I didn’t actually see her on the day she disappeared. My 
mother saw her leave. She remembers it perfectly. It was mid- 
day—just before twelve.” 

“Just before twelve? How is it you know that so exactly? 
It’s seven years ago... .” 


125 


“Of course I know exactly. Simply because Franziska had 
been going out at midday for days before. ’T’hat was a bit odd. 
She behaved very strangely. She appeared at midday and then 
went off. Ten minutes to quarter of an hour later she re- 
appeared.” 

“How was that odd?” 

“Well, she did it so mysteriously. She always made some 
sort of excuse. But she didn’t say where she was going. We 
thought she was meeting a friend or something like that and 
was making a lot of fuss about it.” 

“Did you ever ask her?” 

“My mother did.” 

“What did she reply?” 

“Ttold you Franziska was mysterious. She said she couldn’t 
speak about it yet. I still remember the actual words she used 
to my mother: ‘If I told you all about it you would only laugh 
atıme,!i% 

“Good. So you were struck by this odd behaviour. You say 
you weren’t there yourself the day she disappeared. What day 
was that?” 

“The ı5th of February.” 

Knopf gnawed his lip. He looked at the paper in his hand 
and sat down again. 

“That’s a snag,” he said. 

“Why?” asked the girl. 

“Here is the extract from the police report. She was re- 
ported as having left your address on gth March 1920. Ad- 
dress unknown, it says.” 

“We didn’t report it until March because we thought she 
would come back.” 

“Who reported it—you or your mother?” 

&1.did:® 

Knopf leaned back. 

“So you did,” he said slowly. “You have just told me that 
she disappeared on ıs5th February. "Then why does it say in 


126 


the report that she left your house on ı sth January? It’s there 
in black and white. T’hat’s a bit odd, don’t you think?” 

“Not a bit,”” Doris Wingender countered vehemently. “It's 
a mistake. I made a mistake with the date. T'hat’s all it is. I 
went to the police station in March and had to fill out the 
form. I wrote 15th January instead of ısth February. I’d like 
to know what’s odd about that.” 

“You got the date mixed up.” He stroked his chin. “Just 
after the woman disappeared you got the date mixed up. But 
now all this time after you know the date exactly. You even 
know that it was twelve noon.” 

“Are you trying to say that I am making things up? If you 
don’t believe me then forget all about it.”” She looked at him 
angrily. “If you are trying to put words into my mouth, you 
aren’t straight.” 

“I tell you you mustn’t get excited,” he replied calmly. 
“This is a weak point in the story. Now we must reckon with 
the people we are up against. I’m not trying to put words into 
your mouth. You must look at it like this. You bring me the 
solution to the case. It’s my job to make the solution absolutely 
clear. "T'he others will say that this Fräulein Wingender comes 
along and it suddenly occurs to her—seven years later—that 
she made a mistake.” 

“But it didn’t just occur to me seven years later,” the girl 
contradicted him. “I noticed it right away. "T'here were still 
ration cards for bread. I had to go to the Food Oflice and say 
that Franziska was gone and produce a document from the 
police. The girl in the oflice came down on me right away and 
asked why I hadn’t come until March if Franziska had been 
gone since January. She thought I had wanted to use Fran- 
ziska’s card a bit longer. So I corrected the error at once. I 
told her I had merely written the wrong date.” 

“Well, that’s one explanation. Why didn’t you go back to 
the station and have the entry altered there?” 

“If I had known how important it all was I would naturally 


- 127 


have done it. But put yourself in my place. Franziska simply 
disappears without sayinga word. I have to run from one ofhice 
to another. The police station was full the first time. And I 
had to queue at the food oflice. Would you have wanted to go 
back to the police station? I’d like to know. Besides, who could 
know that it was going to be so important?” 

“Franziska disappeared,”’ Knopf persisted. ‘““She simply was 
up and away. You noticed that she had been behaving oddly 
for some days. T'hen one day she is gone. Well, let’s assume 
she disappeared on ı5th February. But you didn’t report her 
missing till gth March. Three weeks were nothing to you. 
You didn’t do a thing about it. You must have thought to 
yourselves that something had perhaps happened to her. You 
must x 

“You do go on at people,” said the girl impatiently. “Of 
course we said to ourselves that something must have hap- 
pened. I went straight to the police a couple of days later and 
said she had disappeared.” 

“So you maintain that you reported her missing?” 

“Maintain? I don’t maintain anything. I did report her.” 

“How do you explain that the name Schanzkovski didn’t 
appear on the lists of the Bureau of Missing Persons? You say 
she disappeared on the ı5th. Our girl was fished out of the 
canal on the 17th. She would not give her name. ’T'he police 
set every wheel in motion—they looked for a missing person 
whose description fitted the girl they had saved. "T'here was no 
such person. But you maintain you reported it. How do you 
reconcile all this?” 

“How should I know? Perhaps this is an explanation—the 
people at the police station I told weren’t up to much. T'hey 
said they had heard that story before. Usually girls like that 
went off with aman. They came back in a day or two. So they 
didn’t set anything in motion. "T’hey must have known about 
her. I reported her. What else they did was no affair of mine. 
I simply didn’t think about it any more. She had often gone 


128 


away before without saying anything—for longer times too. 
One day she always came back. We thought she would do the 
same this time.” 

“How do you mean she was often away for longer periods?” 

“I had better tell you from the beginning. I first saw Fran- 
ziska at the end of 1915. She had come to Berlin from Hygen- 
dorf. T'hat’s near the Polish Corridor. I think her mother 
lives there. She has brothers and sisters too.” 

“Do they still live there?” 

“I don’t know— maybe. I think so.” 

“Good.” 

“Franziska moved into the same block of flats as us and 
took lodgings with a woman. She often came to our house. 
"Then she didn’t like it with the woman any more and asked 
my mother ifshe could have a room with us. So she moved 
112 

“Why did she come to Berlin at all?” 

“I think she wanted to live in town. Hygendorf is at the 
end of the world.” 

“You say that in February she always sat in her room. At 
midday she went away for a while and then came back. Didn’t 
she work? She must have had something to live on?” 

“She had never learned a job. In her village, so far as I can 
gather, she had helped the peasants. 'T'hen in Berlin she looked 
for a job. She started with the AEG. Wait a minute—yes, 
that was in January 1916. The AEG was making munitions. 
She got a job there as an unskilled worker. She wasn’t there 
long. Then she went into the asylum because 7 

Knopf started up. 

“T'he asylum?” he asked sharply. 

“Yes, the asylum. 'T'wo asylums in fact.” 

“Why did she go in?” 

“Various things all came together. As far as I know she was 
engaged. Her young man was killed at the very beginning of 
the war. T’'hat must have been quite a blow. Maybe that is 


I 129 


why she left Hygendorf for Berlin. She herself never spoke of 
it. But her sister mentioned it once by the by.” 

“Do you know her sister?” 

Doris Wingender nodded. 

“She is called Gertrud. When Franziska had got a job Ger- 
trud came to Berlin too. I got to know her. ’T'hen they fell out 
badly. Franziska thought Gertrud had told her mother tales— 
I don’t know what about. Anyway Franziska got more ex- 
cited than she need have. She had a nervous breakdown. Then 
there was what happened in the AEG. She had something to 
do with ammunition. Something exploded right beside Fran- 
ziska. 'T'hat did it. She didn’t hurt herself but she had a shock. 
Everything came together. Her boy killed, the quarrel with 
her sister and the explosion. She cracked up and they had to 
put her in an asylum.” 

“Which one?” 

“At first it was a private asylum. I suppose the firm paid. 
It was in Schönberg. "I’'hen she went to Neuruppin. "I’hat was 
another time we didn’t know where she had got to. And we 
didn’t want to start asking at AEG. Maybe she would have 
got into trouble. Later we heard what had happened. And that 
was why I wasn’t excited in February 1920— especially when 
the police didn’t think it was anything out of the ordinary.” 

“So she was in lunatic asylums—in Schönberg and Neurup- 
pin,” muttered Knopf. He took some notes. “When was 
that?” 

“The end of August 1916. Franziska didn’t turn up again 
until 1919—about October. She arrived quite suddenly. It 
was about nine in the evening. She told us she had a job near 
Berlin, working on the land. She brought us fruit and vege- 
tables. "T'here weren’t any to be had at that time. T'hen she 
went off again.” 

“When did she come to stay with you again?” 

“In November. "They had no work for her on the land in 
winter. She said she could start again in March. And then— 


130 


well, in the middle of February she was suddenly gone. At first 
we thought she had gone back to work sooner than she had ex- 
pected. "T'hat wasn’t anything to worry about. But I keep 
thinking I must be off my head when I see the photos in the 
papers and think she has suddenly become a Grand Duchess.” 

Knopf laughed and shook his head. 

“You are a wicked girl,” he said. “Here are the police 
searching for years. Princes and Dukes squabbling. Me turn- 
ing the police records upside down and getting on people’s 
nerves. And now you present me with.the solution like that. 
No effort. It’s a case of more luck than good judgment as far 
as I am concerned. Our angel is going to fall from heaven. 
And how she will fall! "T'here will bea big bump!” 

He spoke quickly and beamed at her with excitement over 
what she had told him. A pretty girl, he thought. 

“We will have photos taken of you,” he said. “Doris Win- 
gender, the vital witness. People had much rather see some- 
thing pretty than an old stick like me.” 

She laughed. 

“If you want to.” 

“We must put the whole thing on paper. "There must be a 
statement. With a lawyer and everything. I must see—there 
are still some things to do. I shall go to Hygendorf. Tell me— 
her mother and sister, didn’tthey do anything? I mean did they 
never make any inquiries of the police? She can’t possibly have 
disappeared without her family stirring a finger. So she’s gone 
— Amen. That sort of thing doesn’t happen.” 

“You’ll have to find out for yourself,” she replied. “I can’t 
say. T'here’s nothing more you can get from me—only a 
couple of things.” 

“What sort of things?” Knopf was off again. 

“Papers. We have her insurance card, her health card, and 
a postcard of the Imperial Russian family.” 

“ A what?” shouted Knopf. 

“A sort of photo. You could use it as a postcard. On the 


131 


front there was the Czar and the Empress and their children. 
She always had it on her bedside table.” 

Knopf could not keep seated. He went up and an the 
room. 

“She shouldn’t have jet it there,” he muttered. “She really 
shouldn’t. T'hat’s the kind of little mistake they make. Our 
clever young lady—she forgets to clear up properly behind her. 
Now think this over. Did she use to show a special interest in 
things connected with the Czar? Were there any other pic- 
tures? Did she say anything?” 

Doris Wingender shook her head. 

“No—nothing really.” 

“Did she read a lot? Did she read books—I mean books 
that would have told her details about the royal families of 
Europe?” 

“When she did read it was novelettes, magazines and so 
on. She devoured them. She liked to go to the cinema. She 
wept when there was a sad love-story. She was very primitive, 
you know. But later she got herself up very finely— very lah- 
dee-dah— with manicured nails and that sort of thing.” Doris 
Wingender laughed. ‘She was very funny those three days.” 

Knopf stood still as if he had been thunderstruck. He stared 
atitheigirl. Fox 

“What three days?” he asked hoarsely. 

“Yes, I forgot. She visited us once. "That was in 1922.” 

“In August 1922?” cried Knopf. “Three days in August 
1922. Ihe ı2th, ızth and ı4th August? Tell me. Were 
these the days?” 

“Do you know something about them?” asked the girl 
excitedly. 

“You answer first.” 

“I ccan’t tell you the date offhand like that. Anyway it was 
in the summer. It was a Saturday—that I do remember. On 
the Monday she was off again.” 

“She was off again on the Monday,” repeated Knopf. He 


132 


seemed to be absent-minded but his thoughts were busily at 
work. 

“She told us a long story,” said the girl. “All mixed up. She 
said something about living with a Russian family. Everyone 
had called her Anni although her real name was Franziska. 
She said she had had enough of these people. She didn’t want 
to see any of them any more. So she had run away. It looks as 
ifshe was always one for running away. She’s mad, you know. 
She kept saying they wanted to do something to her and that 
her life was in danger. She said she had to hide. Nobody must 
know who she was. She begged me to give her some of my 
clothes.” 

“What clothes?” 

‘““T'here was a dark blue costume 

“Anda cornflower blue hat with yellow flowers,” insisted 
Knopf impatiently. 

“You know a lot. ’T'hat’s right. "There were six yellow 
flowers on it.” She laughed. “It was a silly sort of hat.” 

“Yes, a silly hat,”” he murmured. ’T’'hen he stared at her and 
stuck out his underlip. “You got other things in exchange 
didn’t you?” 

“I still have them.” 

“You still have them!” Knopf ok a deep breath and rub- 
bed his forehead and eyes with both hands. Then he searched 
for his cigarettes and offered her one. 

“That’s a windfall,’” he said with a broad grin. “You des- 
cribe them to me—the things she left with you. I know what 
is coming.” 

“A camel-hair-coloured coat 


“A camel-hair-coloured coat,” he repeated with relish, 
” 


„ 


„ 


“anda 
“A green ’felt hat.” 
“A green felt hat,” he said, beaming. 
“A lilac cotton dress,”” she said and watched him eagerly. 
“It's light blue now—I had it dyed.” 


133 


“Underwear?” he asked. 

“A pair of white knickers with lace.” 

“With lace,” he grinned. “And with a monogram?” 

“Yes—A.R.” 

“A.R. That is Anastasia Romanov. All correct. That 
means Anastasia fell into the trap. You won’t have the 
things long, my dear. I shall fetch them this very day. "Then 
we’ll go round to Baron von Kleist. He will be pleased to see 
them, the old boy.” 

“Who is he?” 

“He paid for the things. Well speak about that later.” 

He went to the telephone and asked for the exchange. 

“An urgent call to Oberstdorf,” he demanded impatiently. 
“] want the head doctor at the Stillach House Sanatorium.” 
He hung up and smiled at the girl. 

“What would you say to a little trip to Bavaria at our ex- 
pense? "The mountains in spring—that’s something now. 
Spring down below, winter up above.” 

“What am I supposed to do there?” 

“Give the Grand Duchess a fright,” he grinned. “Well 
bring you faceto face. You mustagree—there’s no other way.” 

“It’s not very nice,” she said hesitantly. “But naturally it 
has to be.” 

“It certainly has. I hope she’s still there. She’s a fine lady. 
A room facing south with a balcony. We can’t compete with 
that. If we’re unlucky she may have grown even finer mean- 
time. A duke has asked her to stay, if my latest information is 
correct. She knows what’s what. Maybe she’s sitting in a 
castle already with a lady-in-waiting, a chamberlain and a 
bodyguard. In that case we’ll go there. Schloss Seeon is sup- 
posed to be very romantic. I'hat way you’ll meet a duke too. 
"T'hat’s something after all. I hope he’s genuine.” He laughed. 
He felt it was a wonderful day. 

The telephone rang. It was the long-distance call from 
Oberstdorf. Knopf asked to speak to the doctor in charge— 


134 


about Frau T'schaikovsky, he said. A woman’s voice came 
down the line. 

“She isn’t here any more—she’s in Seeon. I’Il put you 
through to Dr. Eitel.” 

“Hello. No. Listen—if Frau Tschaikovsky isn’t there it’s 
not necessary. I'hank you.” Knopf pressed down the receiver. 
He hesitated and then hummed a little to himself. 

“So there’s nothing doing at Oberstdorf,” said Doris Win- 
gender. He looked at her. 

“No, nothing doing,” he muttered and shrugged his shoul- 
ders. “So she’s managed it. Now she has graciously favoured a 
duke. It’s incredible how she manages it with people.” He 
took up the telephone again and dialled anumber. 

“Is that not so good for you?” asked the girl. 

“What do you mean, ‘good’?” he replied. “I’m afraid it 
makes everything more complicated.” "T'hen he spoke into the 
telephone. “I need some information—I need everything you 
can get about the Duke of Leuchtenberg. Yes, Leuchten- 
berg.” He spelt the name. “He lives in Schloss Seeon. As far 
as I know it is ona little lake just north of the Chiemsee. ’T’he 
Tschaikovsky woman is there now. What does the Duke do 
for a living? How is he related to the international royal houses 
of Europe? Is he related to the Czar’s family? Has he been 
making inquiries about the girl before he took her in as his 
guest? Does he think she is Anastasia? "T'hen I must know how 
the girl is living there. ’T'hat’s all. It’s urgent.”” He gave a few 
more directions and then ended the conversation. 

“You’re not in the best of humours,” she declared. “What 
has changed so much?” 

“I don’t know. I don’t like the look of things. After all he 
isa duke. He’s the first one to go as far asto take her up openly. 
That makes her position stronger. It makes any attack on her 
much, much more difhicult than before. And we must attack 
her.” He gave a worried look. 

“What’s going to happen now?” asked the girl. He had got 


135 


back his old mood; he seemed to put his unpleasant thoughts 
to one side. He laughed. 

“We carry on,” he said. “Of course we carry on.” He was 
speaking very fast. “Now I am going to sum up: you state 
that the woman who says she is Anastasia, the Czar’s daugh- 
ter, is in fact Franziska Schanzkovski, your mother’s former 
lodger. Occupation—agricultural worker. An extraordinary 
performance! Really an extraordinary performance to think 
than an uneducated girl from the country could carry it oft. 
Further— you state that she reappeared at your house for three 
days in August 1922. She left the clothes with you in which 
she ran away from Baron von Kleist. You will put the 
clothes at our disposal. I shall show them to Baron von Kleist 
so that he can identify them. You say you are prepared to re- 
peat the statements you have just made before a lawyer. Will 
you do that?” 

“Naturally. What I have said is true.” 

He nodded. 

“And you say you are prepared to assist in further investi- 
gations?” 

IE 

“Then I will see that our agreement is put in writing. You 
will also receive a fee. I do not think that the publishers will 
be mean.” 

She rose. 

“So our talk is over,” she said and smoothed her skirt. 

“It is,” he repeated with a smile. “You have done me a 
very great service.” T'hey shook hands. 

“That is to say,” he began, “I should like to fetch the things 
right away. If you don’t mind.” 

“Its all the same to me.” 

He drove with her to the Neue Hochstrasse. It lay in the 
north of Berlin—grey and depressing— with blocks of ats for 
workers and artisans. Number 17 was in no way different 
from the rest. 


136 


“You live better ina ducal castle,” he said under his breath. 
The girl said nothing but led him into the house. T'he rooms 
were simple, the daylight would not stay long in them. Old 
furniture—everything painfully clean. Everything extremely 
tidy to make up for the lack of comfort. 

Doris Wingender fetched the things from another room— 
a pair of high black laced boots, the camel-hair-coloured coat, 
a white knitted wool hood, the green felt hat. ““I changed the 
trimmings a bit,” said the girl. ’T’hen she brought the cotton 
dress and the documents. 

Knopf did not keep her long. 

“When shall I hear from you again?” asked the girl as he 
left. 

“T’ll keep in touch with you,” he replied. 

Next day Doris Wingender received a letter: 


“Dear Miss Wingender, 

With reference to our conversation of today’s date we 
confirm that we have made the following agreement with 
you: 

"According to your statements, the woman who is referred 
to in the articles in the ‘Berliner Nachtausgabe’ under the 
title ‘Is Anastasia, the Czar’s Youngest Daughter, Still 
Alive?’ as Frau Tschaikovsky is in reality a certain Fräu- 
lein Schanzkovski, born in Borowielas on 16th December 
1896. As proof of your statement you have placed in our 
possession: 


1. a work permit in the name of Franziska Schanzkovski 
born on ı6th December 1896 at Borowielas; 

2. an insurance card No. 1956 in the name of Franziska 
Schanzkovski, valid from 8th April 1918; 

3. a police certificate dated 20th November 1919, con- 
cerning her change of address to 17 Neue Hochstrasse, 
Berlin; 


137 


4. a police certificate dated gth March 1920, stating that 
she left that address for another unknown address on 
ı5th January 1920. 

You give us full ownership of the above documents, as 
also of the clothes and specimens of handwriting belonging 
to Franziska Schanzkovski at present in yourpossession. You 
will make further efforts to procure other papers or docu- 
ments not at present in your possession, or alternatively to 
make it possible for us to procure such documents. We note 
that you are ready at our expense to be confronted with 
the woman who claims to be Anastasia and is known as 
Frau T'schaikovsky for the purposes of identifying her. 

You will make your statement on oath before a lawyer 
to be named by us. You will collaborate further with us in 
the solution of this affair. You also grant us the exclusive 
publication rights in Documents ı to 4 above, as well as of 
any documents handed to us in future. 

We will pay you in settlement of all claims by you a 
single payment of 1,500 (one thousand five hundred) marks, 
payment to be made in two instalments—ı,000 marks 
when we are satisfied that your information is correct and 
that the woman who claims to be Anastasia and is known 
by the name of Frau T'schaikovski is in reality Franziska 
Schanzkovski, born at Boroweilas on 16th December 1896. 
'T'he remaining 500 marks you will receive when our press 
publishes these facts. Will you kindly confirm your agree- 
ment with our terms on the enclosed copy.” 


aaa aa aaa 


Martin Knopf stopped the taxi and got out. As he sauntered 
down the street the cool evening air felt good; he found the 
slight drizzle refreshing. He walked past the house where his 
oflice was, for he had no desire to go up to it. He was enjoying 
the flowing stream of men and women and the noise of the 
cars. Girls hung about the street corners, twirled their um- 
brellas coquettishly and made eyes, eager for pleasure. The 
shop windows shone and displayed goods which everyone 
looked at and few could afford. Knopf loved Berlin, he loved 
this romantic hour in the life of a great town. He breathed in 
the smell of the petrol and the scent of the trees. A few houses 
further on was the ‘Villa d’Este’, the night club where Dajos 
Bela, the ladies’ favourite violinist, had just made ‘I kiss your 
hand, Madame’ world famous. For some days he had been 
playing the ‘Anastasia T’ango’ with the sad refrain ‘No one 
knows you, unknown girl, but your smile and your looks en- 
chant me’. Knopf made an ironic grimace as it ran through 
his head. That hit tune won’t last long, he thought. A 
Polish farm-worker isn’t such a draw. ’T'here is no longer 
an unknown girl. T'he Berliners have had their melancholy 
fun out of it. A jeweller had put a tiara ä la Anastasia in 
his window. A cigarette firm had put a brand of Russian 
cigarettes called Anastasia on the market. It’s all up, thought 
Knopf, no one is going to smoke a cigarette called Franziska 
Schanzkovski. 

He rang up Baron von Kleist from a call-box only to learn 
that the Baron was out of town and would not be back for a 


139 


couple of days. “Then tell him, please, that I shall look him up 
in the evening the day after tomorrow. I want him to identify 
some clothes.” 

Martin Knopf continued his stroll. He got home late with 
his head full of plans for his next step. 

Early next morning he was sitting in the train for Bütow, a 
little Pomeranian town not far from the Polish Corridor. In 
Bütow he hired a car and rattled for two or three miles over a 
bumpy road. T'hen he reached Hygendorf and asked where he 
could find the Schanzkovskis. 

Knopf found the cottage. He knocked but no one an- 
swered. T'he door was open and he walked in. T'here was a 
woman Iying on the sofa, old and worn, with a tired face 
in which only the eyes were alive as they gave him a hostile 
stare. 

“Frau Schanzkoyski?” "The woman did not move. Knopf 
felt uncomfortable. He spoke more softly. “You are Frau 
Schanzkovski, aren’t you? "Ihe mother of Franziska Schanz- 
kovski. I am from Berlin. You must excuse me for coming in 
so unceremoniously. It is important— very important.” He 
waited for the woman to say something but she remained 
sılent. He tried again. “It’s about Franziska. You will be in- 
terested to know what has become of her. You are her mother? 
You are Frau Schanzkovski?” 

“About Franziska—she’s dead.” She had spoken at last. 
Her voice was hard and toneless. She was completely indif- 
ferent. “Who are you?” asked the voice. 

Knopf muttered his name. : 

“Your daughter is not dead. I am sure I have found her.” 
He was speaking quickly now in an attempt to conyince her. 
“She’s alive. It is quite certain that she is alive. In fact she’s 
quite well. You know the Wingenders & 

“That’s the people she lived with in Berlin. But she is 
dead.” It seemed as if the old woman’s lumbering memory 
was painfully beginning to function. “She disappeared in 


140 


1920. We don’t know anything further. She had no luck. 
She never had any luck. Why did you come?” "The woman 
sat upand put her feet on the ground. She sat there, small and 
hunched. 

“Why do you think that Franziska is dead?” asked 
Knopf. 

“Why did you come here?” repeated the woman. Knopf 
reached for a chair and sat down. 

“Because I want to speak to you about Franziska. Because 
she is alive. She pretends she is someone else. She has been liv- 
ing under other names since she disappeared. What makes you 
think she is dead?” 

“The police oflicer said so.” 

“What police oflicer? When?” 

“One from Bütow. She was murdered. She shouldn’t have 
gone to Berlin. She wouldn’t listen to me.” 

Knopf stared at the woman. 

“Did the police oflicer say she had been murdered?” 

The woman nodded. Knopf managed to contain his im- 
patience. 

“When did he say that?” 

“A year later.” 

“You mean in 1921?” 

“Yes—-Grossmann killed her. T'he police officer said Gross- 
mann killed a lot of young girls. She shouldn’t have gone to 
Berlin.” 

“Karl Grossmann, the mass murderer,’” muttered Knopf in 
astonishment. His thoughts were in a whirl. He tried to re- 
member what he could ofthe Grossmann case—a bestial man, 
an animal driven to murder by an abnormal instinct. Women 
and girls were his victims. He chopped up the bodiesand threw 
them into a stream on the outskirts of Berlin. ’I’'he number of 
victims had never been exactly determined. He used to look 
out for women who had just come to Berlin or whose address 
was not registered with the police—women whom no one 


141 


missed. He committed suicide in prison. But first he wrote a 
diary in which he described his activities. 

“That can’t be right,” said Knopf. “I have looked through 
all the police files in Berlin and there is nothing there about 
Grossmann and Franziska Schanzkovski. As far as the police 
are concerned she moved and left no address. "That’s all. 
There’s no suggestion that she might have been one of Gross- 
mann’s victims.” 

The old woman stood and groped her way over to a chest 
of drawers. She opened a drawer and rummaged about till she 
found a piece of paper. 

“This is what the police said,” she whispered in a broken 
voice. ““I’he man is supposed to have written it all down here. 
He wrote that he killed a girl on ı 3th August 1920. He wrote 
the name ‘Sasnovski’ beside the entry. "T’'he police ofhicer said 
that there was no doubt this was Franziska and he must have 
meant Schanzkovski.” 

Knopf jumped up and seized the woman by the arm. 

“These are all guesses. "I’he police were making things easy 
for themselves. Grossmann cut his victims up into little pieces. 
Most of them couldn’t be identified any more. I don’t know 
how the police in Bütow got this idea. I tell you Franziska is 
alive. Here, look at this.” He had produced the photographs 
showing the girl called Anastasia. ‘That is Franziska. You 
must see that it is Franziska.” 

"The woman took the photographs and looked at them for a 
long time. 

“She looks like Franziska,” she muttered. “ T'hat’s true— 
that’s what she looks like. I don’t know.” 

Knopf’s eyes gleamed. 

“So you recognise your daughter?” he cried. 

“Franziska’s hair was quite different.” 

“That’s not the point. How long is it since you saw 
her?” 

“Eight years.” 


142 


“Well, I ask you. Everyone changes in that time. She does 
her hair differently now.” 

“The girl in the picture isa fine lady.” 

Knopf could not repress a touch of irony. “She isa fine lady 
now—a very fine lady.” 

“But if Franziska were alive she would have written to us. 
She would surely have written to me.” 

“She must have had reasons for not writing,” said Knopf 
harshly. “Listen, you must give me a clear answer. Do you 
recognise your daughter in the photograph?” 

“Maybe. But she would have written.” 

A door was thrown open. Knopf turned round quickly. A 
young man stood in the doorway. 

“That is my son, Walter,” said the old woman. 

“What does he want?” the man asked his mother. Knopf 
took the pictures from the woman and held them quickly out 
to him. 

“Is that your sister Franziska?” T’he man gave only a quick 
glance at the photographs. 

“What is this about Franziska?” 

“He says she is alive,” explained his mother. 

“Well?” said the man indifferently. “Does she suddenly 
want to come back? As far as we are concerned she is dead.” 

“Is the woman in the pictures your sister?”” Knopf insisted. 

Walter Schanzkoyski shrugged his shoulders. 

“How do I know? Maybe she does look like that nowadays. 
But maybe she doesn’t. Does she want to come back?” 

“T'hat’s not the point,” groaned Knopf. 

“People talked enough when she disappeared,” said Walter 
Schanzkovski darkly. “We don’t need her here. I suppose 
people want something else to talk about. She needn’t think 
she can put her hand in our pockets. We have nothing our- 
selves. She always was too good to work here, our fine 
sister.”” 

“You mustn’t say that,” muttered the mother. 


143 


“But it’s true,” said the son rebelliously. “The woman in 
the photographs doesn’t interest us, do you understand?” 

“The matter needs clearing up whether you want to have 
anything to do with your sister or not,” Knopf tried again. “I 
have come specially from Berlin.” 

“Then go back again,” the man interrupted him. “T'here’s 
nothing to clear up here. Do whatever you like in Berlin. We 
have nothing to do with Franziska. I am telling you she 
doesn’t live here any more. ’T’hat’s enough.” 

““She’s alive. She says she’sa Russian Grand Duchess.”’ 

"T'he young man laughed bitterly. 

“And Iam the Emperor of China. Anything else you want? 
If not I hope you get home safely.” 

“You must say something,” said Knopf turning to the 
mother. 

“We are poor people,” whispered the woman uncertainly 
without looking at him. “I am a sick woman.” 

“What’s wrong with you? ’Tuberculosis of the bone?” 
Knopf asked sharply and looked across at Walter Schanz- 
kovski. “Is that what your mother has? ’T'he girl we are talking 
about has it too. I’m telling you she is your sister. She has even 
got the family disease.” 

"Ihe man made an unmistakable gesture towards the door. 

“All right, I’m going,” said Knopf furiously. “But I warn 
you I won’t let you fool with me like this. T'he whole thing is 
quite clear to me even if you don’t like it. It’s not as simple as 
that to disclaim a member of your family just because people 
might talk or because you think she might live on you if she 
turned up again.” 

He gathered up the photographs and rushed out ofthe room. 
As he drove along the uneven road he thought how under- 
standable it was that the girl who now lived in the Duke of 
Leuchtenberg’s castle did not want to be Franziska Schanz- 
kovski again. 


144 


"They were sitting in the Kleist’s living-room—the Baron, 
his wife and Martin Knopf. "T'he Baron stared eagerly at the 
suitcase which Knopf had laid near his chair. Knopf saw his 
glance and smiled a little. 

“Now we will do some magic,” he said. He stood up, 
opened the case and removed a black cloth. 

“That is the coat,” cried the Baron in high excitement, sit- 
ting bolt upright. “It is quite extraordinary.” 

“You simply don’t know whether it is the coat or not,” 
Knopf corrected him. “It isa folded camel-hair-coloured gar- 
ment. You really are not a very good witness.”” He took the 
coat out of the case, grasped it by the collar and held it up. 
“Now tell me.” 

““T'hat’s the coat. ’T’here’s no doubt about it.” 

Knopf looked at the Baroness. 

“What do you say?” 

“It must have been wornand washed,” she said slowly, look- 
ing at the coat carefully. “But that’s the kind of coat it was.” 

““T'here’s no question—it’s the right coat,” declared the 
Baron firmly. Knopf produced the underwear and showed 
them the monogram A.R. 

“Yes, I sewed it myself,”” answered the Baroness. Knopf 
unpacked the other articles of clothing while the Baron leant 
back and drew a deep breath. 

“These are the things,” he cried enthusiastically. “It’s in- 
credible what you have managed to do. T’hese are the things 
she ran away in.” 

Knopf laid them slowly back in the case and shut the lid, 
put the case down near his chair and sat down. 

“You realise that you may have to make a statement in 
court under oath?” he said deliberately. 

“Naturally,” said the Baron eagerly. “As far as I am con- 
cerned there is not the slightest doubt. It’s quite incredible. A 
Polish landworker. An uneducated girl. I can’t understand 
how she manages to play the part.” 


K 145 


“If ever anyone made things easy for a aeg 
it’s you,” said Knopf mockingly. “Don’t get excited. It’s true 
what I’m saying. You and the rest ofthe &migres. Where does _ 
she get it all from? How does she know all these details about 
the Imperial court that she staggers everyone with? T’he only 
place she could have picked them up was here. Here in your 
house. This is where she lived, this silent, mysterious girl. The 
emigres came and spoke to her, asking questions. And anyone 
who has any brains can guess the answers to questions. She sat 
here and used her ears. But she said nothing. She only spoke 
now and again. I bet that she picked up these fragments of 
wisdom out of the conversation a couple of days before. She 
collected it all grain by grain. What do you mean *unedu- 
cated’? She is the most talented woman I know. She has put 
together a mosaic of the past she is supposed to have lived 
through.” 

“We certainly told her nothing,” parried the Baron. 

“You must have simply provided her with everything she 
needed to play her part. "T’'here’s no other explanation. I’m not 
saying you did it consciously. ’I’o me the whole case is quite 
clear. I visited her family in Hygendorf yesterday. You’ll find 
the whole explanation there. She is suffering from an in- 
feriority complex—a terrible, torturing complex. She wants to 
deal with it by over-compensation. She has lived through a joy- 
less childhood which was full of privations. Her love affair was 
a bitter disappointment. Her fiance was killed. She has always 
wanted to get away from her confined life. Now the way of 
escape through marriage was barred. She comes to Berlin. 
Another disappointment. ’T’he great city wasn’t exactly wait- 
ing to welcome her. She had to work just as hard as at home. 
The great world turns out to be a room in a working-class 
district. T'hen comes the accident in the factory. Shock. She 
goes into the hospital for nervous diseases. She is discharged. 
She works on the land—the same old, hard work on the land. 
She can’t get away from it. But she doesn’t want to be Fran- 


146 


ziska Schanzkoyski any longer—she has too much imagina- 
tion to be contented. She wants to get away from this life. She 
spends the winter at the Wingenders. T'he city again. She has 
to go back to farm work in the spring but she doesn’t want to 
any more. She runs away and makes an end of it by jumping 
into the canal. She is saved and taken to Dalldorf. She won’t 
say who she is. She doesn’t know who she wants to be. She 
only knows that she doesn’t want to be Franziska Schanz- 
kovski any more. She likes it at Dalldorf. Her spirit is at peace 
there for two years. Don’t forget that she isn’t normal. For her 
the asylum was an island on which she had been washed upand 
where she was quite happy. "Then the Peuthert woman 
arrives, hysterical and a great talker. Undoubtedly the girl has 
an incredible resemblance to the Grand Duchess Anastasia. 
Perhaps Peuthert really believed she had made a great dis- 
covery. For nights she talks at the girl while the others slept. 
The girl has enough imagination to follow what Peuthert is 
saying—to imagine how it all was and how it might all be.” 
Knopf was talking faster and faster, speaking insistently and 
convincingly. He had a clear picture of it all and he described 
it to the Kleists, who listened breathlessly. “Do you under- 
stand how it all came about? Do you see that that is how it 
must have been? ’T'here is no other explanation. ’T’'he girl who 
didn’t want to be Schanzkovski any more suddenly saw her 
chance to be someone else. She didn’t need to live on her island 
any more. She could go back among other human beings. You 
know there is a vast difference between lack of education and 
a capacity for education. I don’t find it at all puzzling that an 
uneducated girl from the country can play the Grand Duchess. 
She is capable of being educated. She is clever. She feels instinc- 
tively what she must do. She iseven cunning enough not to fall 
into Peuthert’s hands. I can assure you that that mad woman 
wasn’t anything like capable of dealing with your girl. "The 
girl found the ideas she suggested excellent but she pretended 
not to fall in with them. She said nothing. She never said any- 


147 


thing. Not to say anything, I can tell you, was the master trick. 
She said nothing when she was living with Peuthert and noth- 
ing when she was here with you, Baron. It was only when she 
felt more sure of herself, when she had mastered the details she 
had picked up sufliciently to make a whole adventure story out 
of them that she spoke. "T'hat was at Gruenberg’s house. ’T'hat 
was the first time she herself stated that she was Anastasia. She 
told her story about this man ’T'schaikovsky who was supposed 
to have saved her from Ekaterinburg and then raped her—by 
whom she had a child. "T’'he man she is supposed to have forced 
to marry her to make the child legitimate. "These were the 
erotic wish-fulfilments of the girl, Franziska Schanzkovski, 
who had longed for marriage and a child—who kept imagin- 
ing what it would have been like if her fianc€ had not been 
killed. She mixed them all up together. She mixed her own 
dreams with the story of Anastasia, the daughter of the Czar. 
She said her saviour, 'T'schaikovsky, had been killed in 
Rumania. After all he had to disappear from the story. He 
couldn’t be there for people to lay hands on because he doesn’t 
exist. "The same goes for the child she had. It is supposed to 
have stayed in Rumania. "I’he poor, hunted mother whom fate 
tore from her child! I say that there is no child.” 

Knopf fell silent with exhaustion. He dabbed his brow with 
a handkerchief and smiled weakly. 

“You must excuse me,” he murmured. “I got carried away. 
But don’t you think that that is the only explanation?” 

"The Baron looked at him in fascination. 

“The only one,” he said hoarsely. ““T'hat is the only ex- 
planation. "T'here is no other.” 

Knopf got up. 

“The case is quite clear. "There is not much more to 
do.” 

“What are you going to do?” asked the Baron. 

“The last touches. I shall go to Seeon with Fräulein Win- 
gender.” 


148 


“And confront the two of them?” said the Baroness. Her 
voice shook a little. “It will be terrible for Anastasia.” 

“You still say ‘Anastasia’,” replied Knopf ironically. “Of 
course it will be terrible. Every fraud finds it simply terrible to 


be unmasked.” 


149 


14 


DIN 


It was the evening before Easter. "The clear bell of the castle 
chapel was ringing to say that it was midnight and the feast of 
the Resurrection. T'he girl came down the stairs. The Duke 
was waiting in the hall. He took her hand. 

“Come,” he said and his smile seemed to be forced. 

“We are celebrating Easter at home,” he said, nodding. 
They went across the courtyard. It was a cold, clear night. 
The stars stood over the dark trees. "T’'he girl breathed in the 
scent rising from the earth. 

“God hears the bell,” she said softly. "The Duke looked at 
her face, which was calm and relaxed. He had had a letter from 
Berlin. It isn’t true what the letter says, he thought: it can’t 
be true. 

The girl who called herself Anastasia had got used to Seeon 
and its inhabitants. She radiated a strange charm. An unrest, 
too—the impatience ofa person who is grievously ill; and then 
again smiling merriment and great charm which she gave 
freely to all—to the Duke, the Duchess and the servants. ’T’he 
room they had allotted to her was on the second floor with a 
view over the garden, the park and the lake. T'here was an old 
church across the still water and now and again the sound of 
its bell reached her. "Then the people in the castle would see 
the girl standing at the window listening. And they saluted her 
respectfully. When they spoke about her they thought she was 
a guest who heightened the unique atmosphere of the castle. 

"The Duke treated her with pleasant, old-fashioned charm. 
He always called her Anastasia Nikolayevna and smoothed 


150 


the prickliness of the Duchess as much as he could. The 
Duchess of Leuchtenberg, who was by birth Princess Repnin, 
was the same inside and out—angular, stocky, tough and loud. 
The girl’s delicate ways went against the grain with her and 
drove her to ironical sallies. All the same—almost against her 
will and secretly, so that the Duke could not see it and tease 
her—she took a motherly interest in the girl, fed her with 
cakes and sweets, saying that damn it all you had to put some- 
thing inside the waifs and strays you picked up off the streets. 
Often the girl and the Duchess quarrelled as their diverse 
characters clashed. 

“I not eat,”” complained the girl. “I won’t. I won’t.” 

“Listen, miss,” objected the Duchess gruffiy. “Here you do 
what I want. Do you understand? I’m the one you have to pay 
attention to here. You should help me in the garden. That 
gives you an appetite. Come on, now we’re going to eat.” 

“I want to be alone, I want peace.” 

“You have no right to want anything. What is all this 
about? Be glad we took you in.” 

“I did not ask the Duke to take me. I did not want it. I go 
away again. Very willingly.” 

“Where, may I ask? Where will you go? Into the woods, I 
suppose. And live on berries and herbs, you silly child.” 

“It not matter where I go. That is all the same. All the 
same whether I live or die. I do not ask to live.” 

But then she had to eat after all and the Duchess left the 
room still scolding but triumphant. She appeared in front 
of her husband, who listened to her with tolerance and 
courtesy. 

“T’d like to know what the girl wants. "T’hat’s a fine show 
she puts on. How can we tell whether she is the Czar’s daugh- 
ter? No one here has any duty towards her. We have sym- 
pathy—that’s all. A daughter of the Czar! Ifshe isshe ought 
to stop all her talk. T'here aren’t Czars nowadaysand a daugh- 
ter of the Czar is less than nothing. She ought to learn a job 


I5I 


and work. Then she’ll get well. Always contradicting me—a 
girl like that! Thhat’s the sort of person you bring into the 
house!” 

“She likes you,” said the Duke with a smile. 

“So what?” The Duchess was pleased to hear it. Her 
mouth, normally so argumentative, attempted a slight smile. 

“And you like her too,” said the Duke. 

"The smile was gone. 

“Nonsense. She must pay attention to me. "I'hese sensitive 
plants get on my nerves.” 

Visitors arrived. People who had been at the Imperial 
court. Each in his or her own way—insistently or difhdently 
— made attempts to discover whether she was Anastasia or not. 
The widow of General Hesse came; he had been the com- 
mander of the Imperial Palace Guard. She looked the girl up 
and down mistrustfully. 

“Who is Conrad?” she asked. "T'he girl smiled and, raising 
her hands, made a motion as if they were gliding over the keys 
of a piano. 

"The General’s widow, a big, forceful woman, hurried into 
the library. She found the Duke there. 

“That is really remarkable,” she said. “You know it means 
nothing to me whether she is Anastasia or not. But just now 
—that was remarkable.” 

“What?” 

“Only very few people at court knew the pianist, Conrad. 
His name was hardly ever mentioned. He gave the Grand 
Duchesses piano lessons. An insignificant man. Of no im- 
portance. I wouldn’t have known of his existence if the Em- 
press had not given orders that he was to teach my daughter, 
too.” 

“And she knew him?” asked the Duke eagerly. The woman 
nodded and told him how the girl had reacted to the question. 

Another visitor came—-a delicate creature with a mild face 
and big eyes. She was Vera von Klemenz. She too had been at 


152 


Tsarskoe Selo. She made friends with Anastasia T'schaikovsky 
and spent many hours a day with her. She felt herself strongly 
drawn to the mysterious girl, but at the same time kept a sharp 
watch for sign or word which might confirm her identity. 
Fräulein von Klemenz reported to the Duke each evening. 

“She likes playing the piano,” she reported, “she says she 
used to play but she has forgotten how to read music.” 

“Today we played the piano,” she related next evening. 
“To begin with she found it difficult. I played her a nursery 
tune. She repeated it easily by ear.” 

“She is gradually coming to play better and better. It is very 
odd to watch. When she tries hard, she is quite incapable of 
getting her fingers properly on the keys. But when she plays 
automatically, without thinking about it, then she gets along 
very well. It is quite obvious that she must have played well 
once.” 

“Today she spoke about Finland. She talked about picnics 
there and how they baked potatoes in the woods.” 

“We didn’t manage to have any music today. She was fairly 
depressed. She would like so much to have a little house of her 
own. She said how terrible it is not to have anywhere which 
she knows belongs to her alone. Always with strangers, she 
said—that is terrible. She said too: “When I am not in hos- 
pital Iam on the street. I cannot always be a burden to the 
Duke and Duchess.’ ” 

“Today she spoke about her Aunt Olga, the Czar’s sister. 
She said that in the evening, when it was dark, she and the 
Czarevitch always lay on the floor behind the nursery door so 
that their aunt would stumble when she came in. 'T'hat had 
been a great joke. She said that Aunt Olga had known of 
course that they were behind the door. But she pretended not 
to know about it. She had been wonderful at pretending to 
stumble.” 

“I had a letter from a friend which mentions ’T'yutsheva. I 
asked the girl whether she still remembered Tyutsheva. She 


153 


wäs quite excited. “Is she still alive?’ she asked. And she said 
that T'yutsheva had been taken on specially to teach the 
Grand Duchesses and that she lost her post because she took 
sides against Rasputin.” 

The Duke listened with excitement as Fräulein von Kle- 
menz told him these things evening after evening. For him 
they were tiny, insignificant proofs which gradually convinced 
him, for they demonstrated, by their very triviality, his pro- 
tegee’s intimate knowledge of family life at T'sarskoe Selo. 

Spring had come early. T'he girl went often for walks, com- 
ing back in a gay mood with an armful of flowers she had 
picked. She filled her room with innumerable bunches. Often 
she got the Duke to row her on the lake. He rowed as well or 
as badly as a man who did not practise it as a sport. But she 
laughed at the way he used his oars and said they would get 
nowhere like that. She told him in detail the rules of the Im- 
perial Yacht Club and advised him laughingly to follow them 
if he wanted to be any good at it. 

In the midst of the preparations for Easter, the greatest 
festival of the Russian Orthodox Church, there came the 
bombshell of the letter from Berlin, which troubled the Duke 
deeply and awoke strong doubts in him. In it a private detec- 
tive, called Martin Knopf, asked for permission to present 
himself at Schloss Seeon with a woman witness, whose name 
for obvious reasons he could not give, in order to confront her 
with Anastasia ’I'schaikovsky, who gave herself out to be 
Anastasia, the Czar’s daughter. As far as he, Knopf, was con- 
cerned it was beyond all doubt that one of the greatest and 
most refined swindlers in criminal history was concealed under 
the name T'schaikovsky. In the public interest and, not least, 
in the interest of the Duke, it was necessary to clear things up 
once and for all bya confrontation. He requested the Duke to 
treat his letter confidentially since any hint to the girl of what 
was about to happen might endanger the experiment. 

The Duke read the letter over and over again. He hesitated 


154 


but then gave his assent. Scarcely had he sent off his letter to 
Knopf than he felt he had betrayed his protegee. He got out 
of his desk the documents he had collected on the ‘Anastasia’ 
case. The latest testimony was from Dr. T'heodor Eitel, one 
of the leading doctors in the sanatorium at Oberstdorf, where 
the girl had last been. "The Duke knew it almost by heart, he 
had read it so often. T'he girl’s condition—the gravity of her 
illness, her bodily and nervous exhaustion— was described in 
detail with sober medical thoroughness. “. . . there is no damage 
to the brain... the patient was timid and frightened, but very 
correct, self-controlled and pleasant. When asked about her 
illness she gives hesitant and incomplete answers and her face 
becomes taut with an expression of deep sorrow and exhaus- 
tion...” “... she made no attempt to make the acquaintance 
of the other patients and did not ask for books or newspapers. 
She spoke German very badly with a typical Russian accent. 
Her German vocabulary is verysmall... her memory behaved 
as described in previous reports: there are great gaps in recol- 
lection which are not typical of an organic injury to the brain 
or ofa true psychosis. An improvement only set in after a long 
period of weeks... she acquired confidence in her immediate 
surroundings, felt more secure and began, in connection with 
little daily occurrences, to talk spontaneously and quite un- 
forcedly of childhood memories of her parents’ home, the Im- 
perial court. First she told of events at court itself—about her 
parents and brothers and sisters, about journeys which she 
made with her parents to the Crimea or Germany, described 
a visit Kaiser Wilhelm II made to Petersburg ... . her stay in 
Dalldorf and the subsequent period had, she said, made her 
deeply suspicious of her fellow men. Her mistrust had been in- 
creased by the fact that she had frequently taken people into 
her confidence but often had met with falsity and undisguised 
exploitation.” 

The Duke had asked the doctor whether it was possible that 
the sick girl had involuntarily persuaded herself that she was 


155 


the Grand Duchess Anastasia. T'he report said on this sub- 
ject: “As far as the question concerning a state of auto-sug- 
gestion is concerned, no evidence could be found for it in the 
course of six months of regular and objective observation. In 
the course of these months I continually tested any statements 
which the patient made to those most closely in contact with 
her and was able to establish that she never made a contradic- 
tory statement. It is out of the question for a person who is so 
sick in body but who has no psychopathic symptoms, to assume 
a false position without ever deviating from the line she has 
adopted. It must therefore be assumed that she lived through 
the experiences she recounts. T'here is absolutely no sign in the 
patient of any symptom of hysteria or deceit. In Frau T'schai- 
kovsky one sees a woman with an extremely high moral code. 
Her high standards, her nobility of character, her very marked 
sincerity in large and small things, the refined detachment 
which she showed to everyone from the first day, force one to 
the conclusion that Frau ’I’schaikovsky has lived in unusually 
exalted circles from her earliest youth. Our observations, to- 
gether with the statements made by Professor Rudneff and the 
confrontation here with Frau Melnik-Botkin, the daughter of 
the Czar’s personal physician, lead us to the conclusion that 
Frau 'T'schaikovsky is the Grand Duchess Anastasia.” 

Renewed reading of the medical certificate increased the 
confusion which the Duke had felt ever since the receipt of 
Martin Knopf’s letter. 

Now as he crossed the dark courtyard of the castle to take 
part in the midnight Easter mass, he was suddenly quite sure 
once more that the woman at his side could not possibly be a 
fraud. He suppressed all heretical thoughts and did silent pen- 
ance for the scepticism which had caused him to waver. 

"The bell calling to mass had fallen silent. 

“This is the first Easter service just as it was with my 
parents,” the girl whispered, and with emotion the Duke saw 
an expression of childish joy in her narrow face. T’hey entered 


156 


the chapel and their entry was.a sign for the ceremony to begin. 
The organ began to play. ’T'he congregation sang lustily and 
with devout joy the Russian chorale for the Resurrection of 
the Lord. 

“Christ is risen,” cried the priest three times. 

“Risen indeed!” replied the faithful and the girl’s quiet 
voice whispered along with them. She stood bolt upright as if 
she were frozen in prayer. "Tears hung in her dark lashes but 
there was no sadness in her eyes. "T’'hey all stared at her, openly 
or surreptitiously. “Risen indeed,” she whispered. Like all the 
others she held a candle in her right hand. TT’he slight trem- 
bling of her hand communicated itself to the flame. T'he heavy 
scent of incense enveloped her. She saw everything as if 
through a veil—the priest’s measured gestures, the faces ofthe 
faithful, the Duke, the Duchess, the candles burning in the 
wreaths of incense like stars peeping through the clouds. 

The priest walked down the aisle to the doorway. 'T’he 
others formed up behind him in procession. "Then they re- 
turned to the chapel. "I'he unleavened bread was dedicated and 
the faithful received the sign. ’T'he last hymn was full of 
earthly contentment: “Eat and drink. Let all creatures re- 
Jölce:” 

It was over. 'T'hey laughed and wished each other a happy 
Easter. An estate worker stepped forward and offered the 
Duke a wooden platter with bread, eggs and bacon. 

“Christ is risen,”’ he said cheerfully. 

“Risen indeed!” answered the Duke. "Ihe man embraced 
him and kissed him on both cheeks. "Ihe Duke went up to the 
girl and gave her the Easter kiss. She thanked him with a 
smile and turned to kiss the Duchess who stroked her shoul- 
ders with a gesture at once difident and tender. 

They went back into the castle. All followed the Duke, 
talking and laughing. Lent was over and life was beginning. 
In the hall a great table stood ready. Impatiently they fell on 
the good fare—turkeys, goose pätes, eggs of all colours and 


157 


white Easter cheese, stood there along with hams, and an 
Easter cake with an Easter lamb on it, into which a little flag 
was stuck with the words: “Christ is risen!”” "Then there was 
wine and innumerable bottles of ‘nalivka’, the drink distilled 
from fruit juice which burns so devilishly that only a good 
Christian can stand it. 

They sat down at table and fell upon the good cheer. The 
girl took a full glass and emptied it at a gulp. She laughed. She 
is no fraud, thought the Duke, she cannot be. 'T'he estate 
workers stood up in one corner of the room. Each had a glass 
in his hand. T'hey drank and began to sing in a heavily marked 
rhythm. ’T'hey seemed to be sampling the song, relishing it 
carefully. "I'hen from one verse to another they seemed to be- 
come surer, as if they found the song to their liking. They 
wanted more and sang more quickly. High piercing shouts 
mixed with the dark urgency of the melody. ’T'heir shoulders 
twitched. "Their feet stamped softly, then louder and more 
challengingly. The girl leapt up and beat time with her hands. 
Her eyes shone. She stood still but it seemed to them all as if 
she were dancing—caught in the power ofa controlled, magi- 
cal impulse. 

It was a night such as would not be repeated. It wasa night 
in which the girl forgot everything that usually filled her 
thoughts. They went to bed late. T'he girl slept through that 
imperceptible moment when her heart became once more dis- 
trustful, gloomy and shut off. 


158 


ea a\a\a\aNa 


The car raced along the main road; the windscreen-wipers 
fought with the pouring rain. It was a cool April morning. 
"The Duke sat huddled beside his chauffeur, staring out of the 
window, silent, restless, chilly. When they reached the out- 
skirts of Munich he sat up and looked at his watch. It was 
Just before eleven. ’T'he chauffeur saw the gesture and acceler- 
ated as much as he could. 

“We are on time, Your Excellency,” he said. "The Duke 
nodded silently and attempted to concentrate on the meeting 
which awaited him. He did not succeed. ’T'he chauffeur 
brought the car to a stop at an hotel in the main square. T'he 
Duke started up in his seat. "T’'he hotel porter opened the door 
smartly. Slowly and against his will the Duke got out and 
stretched his limbs. "Then he went resolutely towards the en- 
trance and up to the reception desk. 

“Herr Knopf is staying here?” he murmured. ’T'he recep- 
tionist made a stiff bow. 

“You are expected, Your Excellency,” he said, and coming 
briskly out from behind the desk he led the Duke through the 
hall and knocked at a door. 

“Here—in the conference room, if you please.” 

T'he Duke went in. He saw two men and a young girl, who 
rose as he appeared. Knopf came to meet him. 

“T regrettheoccasion which brings ustogether, Your Excel- 
lency. Iam Martin Knopf. This is Fräulein Wingender = 

“The lady who is supposed to settle everything,” said the 


159 


Duke softly. His eyes were fixed on the girl in a reserved and 
almost hostile stare. 

“And this is Herr Lucke from the staff of the “Berliner 
Nachtausgabe’,” said Knopf continuing his introductions. "T'he 
two men bowed gravely. T’'here was a short uncomfortable 
silence. T'hey sat down and looked each other up and down. 
They had fallen into two opposing parties before a single word 
had been spoken about the real problem. Knopf cleared his 
throat. He felt uncomfortable. He felt that the Duke was 
hostile to himself, to his companions and to the purpose which 
had brought them there. 

“I thought you would bring Schanzkovski so that we could 
get it over here in the hotel.” 

"The Duke interrupted him curtly. 

“Let us leave out the name Schanzkovski. We do not wish 
to anticipate things. My prot&gee cannot leave Seeon. And I 
see no reason why she should come here.” 

“We had agreed on it,’” Knopf began. "The Duke raised his 
hand in a tired gesture. 

“You suggested carrying out the confrontation here in the 
hotel,” he parried. “I cannot agree to that.” 

“But I had assumed 2 

"The Duke’s voice became low and soft. 

“It is quite remarkable. One would think she had a pre- 
monition. She cannot leave Seeon. She is very low and de- 
pressed. She is sick. "T’he doctor is with her. It is as if she felt 
that someone was working against her.” 

Knopf ’s lips were tightly pressed. 

“Since 1920 she has had to reckon with the possibility that 
someone would stand up to her and the truth come to light,” 
he said harshly. “Excellency, our evidence is overwhelming. I 
cannot believe that our journey to Munich has been in vain. 
T'he confrontation must take place. You must allow it. If you 
knew our evidence!” 

“What sort of evidence?” 


160 


“The evidence of straightforward recognition. Fräulein 
Wingender unmistakably recognised in the photographs of the 
woman who calls herself Frau Tschaikovsky, Franziska 
Schanzkovski. You know thestory of Baron von Kleist, Your 
Excellency. Baron von Kleist has recognised clothes which he 
gave the girl under the name of Frau Tsschaikovsky—clothes 
she then left in the Wingenders’ fat under the name of 
Schanzkovski.” 

Knopf did not allow the Duke to say another word but told 
him all he had discovered. He reported on his first visit to 
Gruenberg and his quarrel with Harriet von Rathlef. He told 
him of his cross-examination of Baron von Kleist and Captain 
Schwabe. He told of his visit to Hygendorf. 

“You should have seen what it was like, Your Excellency. 
"The old woman—she has tuberculosis of the bone just like the 
girl. I am sure her mother has tuberculosis. Anyone can see 
that who knows anything about the disease. "T’hat your pro- 
tegee has the same disease shows that she hasn’t inherited the 
family ailments of the Romanovs or the house of Hesse- 
Darmstadt. But it zs evidence that she has got the family ail- 
ment of the Schanzkovskis.” 

“Both are possible,” the Duke interrupted. “You are un- 
able to see any alternative to the Schanzkovski theory.” 

“That is not so. It is only a link in my chain öf evidence. 
You should have seen what her brother was like. He is shy. 
He has difhiculty in expressing himself so he is generally silent. 
Then he goes to the other extreme. He gets angry and aggres- 
sive. He talks in a blind rage and at great speed. If he were a 
rich man people would say he was eccentric. In the village 
they say he is not quite right in the head. Just like the girl we 
have come about.” 

“] don’t understand one thing,” said the Duke and an ironi- 
cal smile played round his lips. “All that you say sounds very 
fine. But I don’t understand why you and your companions 
are here and not the Schanzkovski family—her mother and 


, 161 


brother. They ought to be the persons chiefly interested in see- 
ing their daughter or sister. If I learn that my child, after hav- 
ing been missing for years, has been found again I naturally 
want to see it again. T'hat’s the first thing I would do. "T'here’s 
no other possibility. Why is the family not here?” 

Knopf raised his arms resignedly. 

“] knew, Your Excellency, that you would raise this ob- 
jection. Had you been with me in Hygendorf you would 
understand it. I admit it is dificult for an outsider to under- 
stand the attitude of the family if he has not encountered it. 
"They are simple people, Your Excellency, and in a certain 
sense primitive. No strong feelings come into play, and if they 
do, then they are so deep down that they are never visible. 
Feelings disappear in the daily grind, in misery, in a doltish life 
which knows only eating, drinking and sleeping. And above 
all, work. "The daughter has disappeared. ’T'hey have got used 
to that. Suddenly she is supposed to have reappeared. ’I’'hat’s all 
too difhicult for these people to takein, Your Excellency. T'hey 
think only of their immediate problems. "T'hey think that if 
she has really come back she will be a drain on their pocket. 
People’s tongues will wag. 'That’s the way they think in 
Hygendorf.” 

“You mean that family ties don’t take one very far,” said 
the Duke sceptically. “I don’t know. When everyone still 
thought that my prot&gee was Anastasia a few people had 
doubts—if they doubted at all, because her princely relatives 
—the Duke of Hesse, the Princess of Prussia and goodness 
knows who besides—would have nothing to do with the girl. 
"This handful of doubters had to listen while other people told 
them that family ties in princely houses had to be measured in 
other terms than in the bourgeois world, where aunts and 
unclesare nice people and haven’t got to reckon with intrigues, 
politics and dynastic considerations. Now we are dealing with 
the world of simple folk. T’he Schanzkoyskis aren’t wicked 
princes, after all, or members of a royal household. So they 


162 


must be loving relations. But you tell me that for this very 
reason they don’t want anything to do with the girl—because 
they are simple people and a bit primitive, because their feel- 
ings are unawakened somewhere deep down and never get ex- 
pressed because of the daily grind. It isall so complicated, Herr 
Knopf. So confusing. Everything has to be laboriously ex- 
plained and interpreted. Nothing is clear. Where does one find 
feelings then? It seems we can always find reasons why blood 
ties are of no account either in high society or among simple 
people. You can turn and twist the argument any way you like 
—there will always be an explanation to hand. But don’t for- 
get, Herr Knopf— when the princely relatives failed it was 
only a question of uncles and aunts. In your version of the 
story, however, Herr Knopf, you submit that a mother failed 
her daughter. You are trying to demonstrate to me that in this 
case the mother is too lukewarm and indifferent to come right 
away, even if there is only a faint hope that she will find her 
child again. That I don’t believe, Herr Knopf. If this old 
woman in Hygendorf had been convinced by your evidence 
that my protegee is her daughter, she would have come, She 
doesn’t believe that Anastasia T'schaikovsky is her daughter, 
Franziska. And I don’t either. Never, Herr Knopf!” 

Knopf let the Duke’s outburst pass over him. Nor did 
he say anything when the Duke had finished. He glanced 
across to Doris Wingender and the journalist, who shrugged 
their shoulders. ’I'hey refused to be drawn into the contro- 
versy. 

“You tell me,” the Duke began again, “that I should have 
been in Hygendorf and then I would understand you. You 
have never seen Frau T'schaikovsky. With as much justice I 
say to you that you should have been in Seeon, you should 
have lived in the girl’s company—and then you would under- 
stand me. And all the other people who are convinced she is 
Anastasia. She is not a fraud. T’ell me, please, this Schanz- 
kovski girl of yours, what is her religion?” 


163 


“Catholic,” replied Knopf who was astonished at the 
question. 

“] am Orthodox. We practise our religion according to the 
Russian Orthodox ritual. We have an Orthodox priest at 
Seeon. Every religion has its rules—in external things too. 
Anyone who is not at home with these rules would give 
himself away—beyond any question, and particularly with 
our priest who, God knows, is over-scrupulous. Anastasia 
Nikolayevna has had long conversations with him. She has 
often enough doubted in God and his righteousness. She 
has wrangled with God. She told our priest all about it— 
even the most dificult things. He has declared to me that 
she can only have been brought up in the Russian Orthodox 
faith. T’here are things which must be in one’s bones be- 
cause one learns them as a child or not at all. T'hey aren’t 
something one can acquire, you can’t just pick them up. 
You should have been here at Easter. She is deeply religious, 
even if she is often at odds with God. No one can act that 
part—not even with the greatest talent. She cannot be a 
fraud.” 

“I will prove it to you,” said Knopf quietly. He looked at 
the ground and then looked calmly atthe Duke. “Why do you 
oppose the confrontation? You say she is not a fraud. I say she 
is. If you are so sure, Your Excellency, why do you put up so 
much resistance?” 

"The Duke was confused for a moment. 

“T admit that I did agree to it at first,”” he muttered. 

“Because you too have doubts,”” Knopf interjected. “Be- 
cause you thought that this man Knopf, who had written from 
Berlin, might be right.” 

“All right,” the Duke admitted reluctantly. “I am too ob- 
jective in my way of thinking to exclude any possibility a 
priori.” 

Knopf concealed an ironical smile. He had his own views 
about the Duke’s objectivity. T‘o him this elegant, somewhat 


164 


nonchalant, tired man was the kind of person who preferred 
fantastic variations on life to the sober reality. 

“Very well then,” he said unrelentingly, “I ask you once 
more to make it possible for us to see the girl.” 

The Duke stood and looked at the three of them with 
knitted brows. They watched him expectantly. He still hesi- 
tated. 

“She is so ill just now. Never mind who she is—the excite- 
ment, this confrontation, must have terrible consequences.” 

Knopf said nothing but looked at the Duke. 

“You are forcing me to do something I shall never forgive 
myself for,” said the Duke in a low voice. 

“So we may come?” 

With a resigned wave of his hand the Duke abandoned his 
resistance. T'hey left Munich in his car in the afternoon. 'T’he 
weather had changed. A warm spring sun shone from the blue 
sky. It was a silent journey. Knopf had his own definite ideas 
about things. He said to himself that here in the midst of 
Bavaria he had come across a piece of Russia. He said to him- 
self that the Duke had taken the girl into his castle to protect 
her behind his thick, cold walls from all attacks from without. 
He thought that the man in the castle believed firmly in 
Anastasia and was obsessed by the fear that Bolshevik spies 
might penetrate into itand finish the work that—to their way 
of thinking—had been left incomplete at Ekaterinburg. 

Evening was coming on when they reached Seeon. 

“So you have let yourself be browbeaten,” was the 
Duchess’s welcome for her husband. She turned her back 
brusquely on the visitors. The Duke saw to it that their rooms 
were ready for the night and then had them taken up. Later 
he invited all three into the library where they also found the 
Duchess. T'he conversation lasted seven hours. Knopf had to 
repeat all his arguments once more. ’I’'he Duchess interrogated 
Doris Wingender. When they parted late at night, the atmos- 
phere was chillier than ever. 


165 


Next morning Knopf insisted that the confrontation must 
take place at once. The Duke walked restlessiy up and down. 
Then he hurried upstairs without a word to Knopf. Doris 
Wingender and the journalist followed him. At the door of a 
room near the main staircase the Duke stopped with a helpless 
air. 

“] shall go in and say that there are visitors. Wait here.” 

After a brief knock he disappeared through the door. A 
minute had passed before he came out again. 

“I have told her that there are visitors. Someone she knows. 
She—she is glad that there are visitors, she said.” His voice 
sounded constricted. He stared at Doris Wingender. “Come 
in. Only you.” 

He opened the door and let Doris Wingender enter, then 
he followed her. "I'he girl was lying on a couch, wrapped in 
blankets and lost in thought. She turned her head slowly to- 
wards the door where Doris Wingender had halted. Her eyes 
were looking fixedly at her visitor. Doris Wingender swal- 
lowed. She searched the sick girl’s face and took a step 
forwards. 

A shadow rose and sank over the eyes of the girl on the 
couch like a dark curtain. 

“Good day,” said Doris Wingender. ’The tension within 
her almost choked her voice. "That is Franziska, her thought 
hammered out, that must be Franziska. T’hat is what she 
would look like now. 'T'hat is her. 

The sick girl took her fixed gaze from the visitor. The 
shadow vanished from her eyes, which became extraordinarily 
clear and transparent, and showed mistrust, fear or cold repul- 
sion—it was dificult to say which—and the Duke interpreted 
it differently from Doris Wingender. 

“T'hat person must leave,” said the sick girl harshly. 

Anger flared up in Doris Wingender. She took another step 
forward and opened her mouth but did not utter a word. 

“She must leave the room,” the sick girl repeated. T’'he 


166 


Duke made a movement as if he wanted to pull Doris Win- 
gender back by the arm. She looked into his eyes and hesitated, 
and then—as if under some compulsion—she turned away. 
He held the door open. She went past him and up to Knopf, 
who was waiting on the landing with a glance full of interro- 
gation. She walked as ifshe was dragging a ball and chain. She 
heard the door shut. "The Duke was close to her. She felt his 
eyes, Knopf’s eyes and the eyes of the journalist from the 
“Nachtausgabe’, who stood there in the background. She shook 
off the load which weighed her down and suddenly her 
thoughts were free. She took a deep breath and looked at the 
men in great excitement. 

“That is Franziska—that is Franziska—1 can swear it is!” 
Her voice trembled a little but it was evident that she spoke 
from conviction and according to her best knowledge and 
belief. 

"The Duke’s reaction was cool. 

“How can you say that? I testify that the sick girl did not 
recognise her.” 

“But Fräulein Wingender recognised her,”” Knopf inter- 
rupted. “How much longer are you going to aid and abet a 
swindler, Your Excellency?” 

He seized Doris Wingender by the shoulder. “What did 
she say? "Tell u— what did she say in there?” 

The Duke replied for her. “She said: “I'hat person must 
leave.’ 'T’hat’s all. “T'hat person must leave.’ ” 

“She must have recognised me,” said Doris Wingender ex- 
citedly. “It’s not possible otherwise.” 

“She sent you out,” said Knopf in a low voice. “She could- 
n’tstand the sight of you. I can well believe that she was at her 
wits’ end when you suddenly stood there in front of her. I can 
well believe it. She threw you out. A simple way of dealing 
with it.” 

“Don’t distort everything,” said the Duke vehemently. 
“She didn’t know what to do to deal with your witness. T’'hat’s 


167 


all. I told her that an acquaintance was coming. 'Then Fräu- 
lein Wingender was standing there in the room. She didn’t 
know who she was. It was quite evident that she didn’t know 
what to make of the visit. And she is distrustful—always dis- 
trustful and is always afraid of strangers. T’hat was why Fräu- 
lein Wingender had to go.” 

“That is your analysis, Excellency,”’ Knopf replied coolly. 
“ Mine is different.” 

“What do you say?”’ asked the Duke angrily, turning to the 
girl. Doris Wingender shrugged her shoulders helplessly. 

“It’s the first time in my life I’ve been through anything 
like this. What am I supposed to say? I can only say what I 
think. To me she is Franziska Schanzkovski. I recognised her 
before from the pictures in the papers and she looks just like 
the pictures. T’hat’s all I can say.” 

“Of course that’s all you can say,” Knopf said to calm her. 
“Did you speak to her? Did you say to her that she is Fran- 
ziska Schanzkovski?” 

“I didn’t manage to say a word,” replied Doris Wingender 
angrily. “Before I could say anything I was outside again.” 
She looked atthe Duke furiously. ‘I wasn’t allowed to intrude 
any longer.” 

Knopf gnawed his underlip. 

“Schanzkovski has won the first round,” he said. 

“I do not wish to hear that name in my house again,” said 
the Duke icily. 

“All right,” Knopf agreed, “the ‘invalid’ has won the first 
round.” He pronounced the word ‘invalid’ with biting irony. 
““Tam sorry, Your Excellency, but we must repeat the experi- 
ment. We must!” 

“I will not stand for it fr 

Knopf raised his voice just enough to silence the Duke. 

“We must repeat it. There are two possibilities. Do you 
want me to make a statement to the police? Do you want me 
to put my proofs on the table for the police to see? T'he ‘in- 


168 


valid’ has papers in the name of Anastasia Tschaikovsky. I 
have suflicient evidence which—to put it mildly—indicates 
that she may be Franziska Schanzkovski.” 

“But nothing more,” the Duke interrupted angrily. 

“That will be enough for the police to take an interest in 
the girl,”” Knopf went on calmly. “Do you want the police to 
turn up here? ’T'hey won’t treat her as gently as us.” 

“You are very gentle,” said the Duke fiercely. 

Knopf did not allow himself to be led away from the point. 

“All right then— either the police or else you allow me to 
speak to her.” 

‘The Duke looked at him with contempt and squared his 
shoulders. 

“Then come this way, Herr Knopf,” he said, controll- 
ing himself with difhiculty. “You know what I think of 
you.” 

“That I cannot take into consideration, Your Excellency,” 
Knopf replied coldly. “It is not a question of sympathies.” 

The Duke said nothing but went to the door on which he 
tapped quietly, as if asking pardon for the fact that he had not 
been able to spare the invalid this scene. He entered the room 
with Knopf. In astonishment, he watched how calmly the girl 
looked the detective up and down with a slight expression of 
curiosity. Knopf smiled an insolent smile and went right up to 
the couch. 

“How do you do, Fräulein Schanzkovski,” he said still 
smiling. “I am a relation of Frau Wingender. T'he Frau Win- 
gender you lived with such a long time in Berlin. Do you still 
remember?” He held her gaze. His smile seemed to have 
frozen on his face. Her glance wandered over to the Duke. 
She looked at him questioningly. Her eyes said: “What does 
this man want—I don’t understand.” 

“Wingender?” she said softly. “That name—I not know.” 
She looked at Knopf again. A feeble, impersonal smile passed 
over her lips. “Please, what do you want?” 


169 


Knopf bent down and brought his face close to hers. His 
words beat down upon her. 

“] was in Hygendorf. You know it, don’t you? I was there. 
At your mother’s. Frau Schanzkovski—your mother. She 
sends her greetings. And your brother too— your brothers and 
sisters send their greetings. "T’hey say you ought to come home. 
"T'hey would be very glad if you came home. Or if you want to 
go back to Berlin you could live with Frau Wingender. In 
Neue Hochstrasse—you remember? You are ill, Fräulein 
Schanzkovski. But everything will soon be put right again.” 

She directed a glance at him before which he was powerless. 
He stopped in the middle of a sentence and straightened him- 
self up. His hands were tight clenched. She looked at him as 
if she had infinite patience—-as if she was trying to say that he 
could go on and talk this nonsense if it made him feel better. 
Impotent rage rose within him. He felt like hitting her in the 
face to wipe out that look, that self-possession, which to him 
were both evil and wicked. He felt the Duke’s eyes looking at 
him ironically. He clenched his teeth till his Jjawbones pro- 
truded. 

“You are not Anastasia,” he said loudly and wildly. “You 
are lying when you say you are. You are Franziska Schanz- 
kovski.” 

She remained calm. Her eyebrows rose in infinite astonish- 
ment. She looked at the Duke. “But yox think you took the 
daughter of the Czar as your guest,” she said. 

"The Duke smiled at her. 

“TI did not know whether you were the daughter of the 
Czar or not,” he said softly. “I saw in you a sick woman on 
whom one must have pity. What I believe does not matter.” 

“This man— what does he want? He is saying something— 
I do not know what. 'T'here is never peace. I never have peace. 
Always questions. Always doubt. I did not want help. I said 


if you help you will have only worries and sorrow. I said that 
at once.” 


170 


“I know,” the Duke assented. 

“I will pack things tomorrow,” she suddenly whispered in 
despair. She seemed to be talking only to herself. “I will go to 
Dalldorf—there is peace there. ’I'wo years of peace for me.” 

"The Duke went quickly up to Knopf. 

“Now go— you must go. Do you understand me?” 

Knopf’s face became tired and sagged. A strange power 
which he did not understand had contrived to take all the 
energy out of him, like the air from a burst tyre. He gave in 
and left the room quickly, without another word. 

"The Duke sat on the edge of the couch. A wave of com- 
passion passed over him. With a tender gesture he passed his 
hand over the girl’s hair. She looked at him sadly. 

“You said that it was people I knew that were coming,” 
she murmured. “All strangers—I do not understand.” 

“I will explain it all to you,” he said hoarsely and rose. “I. 
will never forgive myself that this had to happen to you in my 
house. I will explain it all. I shall ask you to pardon me. You 
must stay here, Anastasia Nikolayevna. I entreat you to stay.” 
He went towards the door and turned round once more. “I 
must send these people away. I will explain everything. You 
must forget today.” 

He left her alone. 

The day on which it happened was "Tuesday, sth April 
1927. 

On Saturday, gth April 1927, the newspaper vendors were 
shouting the headlines in the “Berliner Nachtausgabe’: 

“The unmasking of the bogus Czar’s daughter, Anastasia. 
Result of the Berliner Nachtausgabe’s investigations. Doris 
Wingender recognises Franziska Schanzkovski in the woman 
who calls herself Frau T'schaikovsky. Confrontation at Schloss 
Seeon. A cleverly thought out plot. A hysterical woman’s bril- 
liant display of acting. Her part is played out.” 


171 


16 


ED EIIIDIITITIIITITITITIEN 


The young man was about twenty-seven years old. He was 
tall and slim and broad in the shoulders. His fair hair was 
brushed straight back. His eyes, which generally had a dreamy 
or meditative look, glanced curiously at the old walls of the 
castle. His face was well modelled, the mouth soft and always 
quick to give a friendly or gay smile although sometimes it 
tended to have a sulky look. 'T'his his friends attributed to the 
fact that his good nature had often met with disappointments, 
while his enemies thought they saw in it a weakness which 
prevented him from meeting the challenge of life with the re- 
quisite toughness. "I'he chauffeur, who had fetched him from 
the station in the Duke’s car, took his luggage from the boot. 

“I shall take everything up to your room, Mr. Botkin. His 
Excellency is waiting for you in the library.” 

“What? Yes, thank you.” Gleb Botkin nodded absent- 
mindedly and his eyes ran along the windows. She lives behind 
one of these, he thought. 

“T'hrough the hall—the last door on the right,” he heard 
the chauffeur say. Slowly he climbed the steps to the entrance. 
He knocked at the door which had been indicated. T’he Duke 
came to meet him and looked at him enquiringly, then his eyes 
became friendly as if the examination had been satisfactory. 

“Take a seat,” said the Duke in Russian. T’'hey made them- 
selves comfortable, each with a cigarette and a glass of nalivka. 

“Russian nalivka,” said Botkin with a smile. “It’s ages 
since I last drank it.” "They spoke for a while of unimportant 
things. 


172 


“It’s a long way from New York to Seeon,” saidtthe Duke 
at last, rising from his seat. “You will need some rest. Every- 
thing is ready in your room. We will talk about things this 
evening.” 

At dinner Botkin met the Duchess, but the mysterious 
girl, whose acquaintance he was so anxious to make, did not 
appear at table. After the meal the Duchess left the two men 
alone. 

“You must pardon my curiosity,” said the Duke, “but all 
I know of you is that you are the son of the personal physician 
to His Late Majesty the Czar.” 

“I am more curious about the girl than you about me,” 
laughed Botkin. ““T'here’s not much to say about myself. T’'he 
usual &migre story. Bitter for those who live through it, boring 
for those who are not affected. "T'here are eleven months be- 
tween Anastasia and myself. We often played together as chil- 
dren. T'he last time I saw her was in Tobolsk when she and 
her family were taken away to Ekaterinburg. My father was 
taken with them. He stayed with them to the bitter end—as 
you know. My sister and I were kept in ’T'obolsk. It was only 
months later that we learned that our father had been killed on 
that terrible night at Ekaterinburg. T’'hen came a time of mad 
confusion. Sometimes the White Guards had control of the 
town, sometimes the Bolsheviks. I made my way through the 
front line and reached Ekaterinburg when the place was in the 
hands of the Whites. I saw the room in which they were all 
shot down. I was convinced that no one could have got away. 
You should have seen it—the walls were pitted with shots. In 
March 1920 we managed to reach Vladivostock—my sister, 
Melnik who was to be my brother-in-law, and myself. You 
know that my sister and her husband now live in France. In 
Vladivostock I found some Japanese who took me to Yoko- 
hama. In 1922 I went to America. I can’t claim that things 
are very rosy for me. I work in a publishing house—I often 
write for the papers.” A bitter smile passed over his lips. “I 


173 


am, so to speak, a Russian expert. Generally they don’t need 
my knowledge. So I don’t get much in the way of fees. If I 
want to write about something else, they turn it down. I first 
heard of the girl in 1925. T'here’s a paper called the ‘New 
York World’. Its Berlin correspondent, Sam Spivack, sent a 
despatch saying that the Czar’s daughter, Anastasia, had ap- 
peared. T'he editor rang me to ask whether I thought it pos- 
sible that someone had survived the Ekaterinburg massacre. I 
have told you, Your Excellency, that I saw the room where 
the killings took place. I told the paper that no one could have 
survived. At the beginning of 1926 I saw a photograph of the 
girl in the ‘New York 'Times’. Underneath it said “This is 
Anastasia’. On the strength of the picture I was at once con- 
vinced that she was the girl I played with as a boy. I wrote 
straight away to the Czar’s sister, the Grand Duchess Olga, 
and to Gilliard, the tutor. I never had any reply from the 
Grand Duchess. Gilliard sent me only a brief letter, saying 
that the girl who claimed to be Anastasia was a fraud and that 
I must not be deceived by a superficial resemblance. "T’'hen 
came Frau von Rathlef’s articles in the “Berliner Nachtaus- 
gabe’. Once more I was sure that this must be the real Anas- 
tasia. T'hen in April, in the same paper, there was the ‘un- 
masking’ by Knopf, the private detective. T’he whole thing 
caused a greatstirin America. It was just what the newspaper 
readers asked for—an endless debate. Then we read in our 
press that you, Your Excellency, still stood by the sick girl; 
that you were still convinced of her authentieity. Suddenly I 
felt that I must do something. I knew Anastasia. I used to play 
with her. The last time I saw her she was seventeen. There 
are some details I remember. If the girl knows them too, then 
she can only be Anastasia. I told you that my finances are not 
in a very good state. I have the backing ofa news agencey—the 
“North America Newspaper Alliance—which has financed 
my Journey. I am here oflicially as a reporter. T'hat is the 
whole story, Your Excellency.” 


174 


When he had finished he looked attentively at the Duke. 
Georg von Leuchtenberg was silent. T'houghtfully he blew 
the cigarette smoke through protruding lips. 

“Good,” he said at last. “I was very pleased when you sent 
word from New York that you were coming. I shall arrange 
for you to be able to speak to Anastasia Nikolayevna.” 

“She doesn’t know anything about my visit, does she?” 

'T'he Duke shook his head. 

“I have become cautious about announcing visits since— 
since what happened in April. She is more distrustful and shut 
up in herself than before. She scarcely leaves her room.” 

“Did you not answer the article in the ‘Nachtausgabe’? It 
reads as if the confrontation had been a complete success for 
her opponents.” 

The Duke made a resigned gesture. 

“] hate taking up cudgels in public. "T’he confrontation was 
in no way a success. "T’he report in the paper is wildly falsified 
and twisted. It says there that when Fräulein Wingender 
came into the room, Anastasia started up in a rage and ordered 
her out of the room. It says I was completely overcome be- 
cause I realised that the woman whom I had taken to be the 
daughter ofthe Czar must be the swindler, Franziska Schanz- 
kovski. T'here’s not a word of truth in it. I didn’t realise any- 
thing—except perhaps that she couldn’t possibly be the 
Schanzkovski girl. T’'here was no question of Anastasia start- 
ing up in a rage. She sent Fräulein Wingender out of the 
room. She wasn’t in a rage because she felt she had been dis- 
covered. It was genuine and understandable astonishment at 
this stranger who had drifted in. Perhaps Doris Wingender 
made an odd impression on her—that was why she said she 
must go. ’I'hat’s the only reason.” 

“But why did you not put matters right? You should have 
put things right publicly. You should have sent the paper 
an answer.” 

“My answer was that Anastasia Nikolayevna could stay 


175 


here,” stated the Duke calmly. ““T’hat was a clearer answer 
than any other.” 

Gleb Botkin did not share his attitude. 

“It’s an open fight now,” he said vigorously. “We must 
fight with the same weapons as our opponents. We mustn’t be 
too delicate. "T'he damage which has been inflicted cannot be 
made good by courteous silence. What do the people who have 
read about the “unmasking’ know about the truth and your 
attitude to it. You must speak out.” 

The Duke smiled a little. 

“You must have taken sides very firmly. But you haven’t 
seen Anastasia. Perhaps you will discover that she is not Anas- 
tasia. T’hat has happened often before this.” 

Gleb Botkin could find no answer. "The Duke laughed 
when he saw his face. 

“Never mind,” he said. “I am not quite so defenceless as it 
might seem. You have come at a very opportune time. You 
talk about fighting—I have a good fighter on my side—one 
who is straining at the leash. It is Frau von Rathlef. She has 
been making enquiries for some weeks now. She has written 
to say that the outlook is quite good. She is coming one of 
these days. Then we will find out what she has brought to 
light.” 

“Yes, but months have gone past. The effect % 

““Don’t let us make the effect of Knopf ’s visit worse than it 
is,” the Duke interrupted. “The people who matter have not 
been led astray. They stick by Anastasia. You know that pay- 
ments are made to her by the Danish court—even if they are 
in a way quite unofhcial. "T'he payments have not stopped even 
temporarily. Do you think Prince Waldemar of Denmark 
would have more money sent through the Danish Ambassador 
if he had been convinced by the nonsense about unmasking? 
And the Ambassador, who is now a big man in the League of 
Nations at Geneva, still carries on a friendly correspondence 
with her. "T'he ‘Berliner Nachtausgabe’ made me out to be a 


176 


fellow who was touched with the Russian weakness for mysti- 

cism and superstition. I don’t care. T’hey can’t say the same of 

the Danish Ambassador. He is a sober diplomat.” The Duke 

went to his desk and fetched a letter. “Here, read this—it is 

his last letter to Anastasia. A man whom the Schanzkovski 

story had shaken however slightly would not write like this.” 
What Gleb Botkin read was the following: 


Berlin, 15th August 1927 
Dear Frau von ’T'schaikovsky, 

Yesterday I had a photograph of you from Seeon but no 
accompanying letter. It wasa great pleasure for me that you 
look so well. Please accept good wishes from my wife and 
myself. I am leaving for Denmark in a few days and then 
travel to Geneya as usual. Kindly remember me to Duke 
Georg von Leuchtenberg. 

Lam, 
Yours sincerely, 
Herluf Zahle. 


“You are right, Your Excellency,” said Botkin. “A person 
who did not believe in her would never write like that.” 

"They sat on together for a long time. It was not until late 
that Gleb Botkin went to his room. He was filled with a feel- 
ing of excitement which would neither let him sleep nor think. 
He put out the light and, going to the open window, looked 
out into the garden. It was a mild, warm summer night. He 
saw a light throwing the outline of a window, a bright rec- 
tangle on the dark turf. ’T'he slim, immobile shadow of a 
woman fell across it. "I’he girl, he thought. 

"The morning was fresh and misty; the mists provided just 
enough resistance to the rising sun to make it do its best to 
promise a particularly warm day. Gleb Botkin ran down to the 
shore of the lake and looked back at the castle, searching for a 
good view. He had his sketch-book with him, for drawing had 


M 177 


long been his passion and he had attained a certain skill in it. 
The garden lay dead and deserted; Botkin was the first to be 
out and about. T'he rest which the night had denied him now 
came to him from the morning— from the calm lake and the 
sight of the romantic castle. He laid a rug on the grass, which 
was wet with dew, and sat down with a tree at his back. "T’hen 
he made a few thin lines on the paper—the vague outline of 
the tower which rose before him. 

He did not notice the girl until she was almost upon him. 
She came up with a mixture of curiosity and diffidence, with a 
shy smile on her lips, but with a calm look of security in her 
eyes. He was so astonished that he forgot to get up. She walked 
up to him and looked at the drawing he had begun. 

“Oh, that ispretty—alittlebitsquint.”” There wasa momen- 
tary sparkle of merriment in her eyes. Botkin took in with one 
glance her carriage, the fluttering motion of her hands, the 
handkerchief, which she clasped in her fingers and then raised 
quickly to her mouth as if she were taking refuge behind a 
fan. 

He knew the gesture. He knew the eyes and the shy smile, 
which was not really so reticent but seemed merely to be wait- 
ing for an occasion to expand into open laughter—although it 
clearly did not often succeed. 

It is she, thought Botkin. She is Anastasia Nikolayevna. 
His eyes proved it to him as did his instincts and his memory. 
"The act of recognition was over in a single overwhelming 
second. He sprang up. She felt his excitement and looked at 
him with astonishment. 

“Who are you?” she asked. 

He was confused. He did not know what he should do. He 
attempted unsuccessfully to smile. 

“Wait, please wait—wait, won’t you? Wait.” He stam- 
mered and was already running away. He had thrown his 
sketch-book onto the rug. She watched in wonder as he ran 
back to the castle. He stormed through the hall and went up 


178 


the stairs three at a time. In his room he pulled his suitcase 
from the wardrobe and fished out a stout paper folder tied with 
a black ribbon. T'hen he hurried back to the garden. 

She hadsat down on the rugand held the sketch-book before 
her with outstretched arms, her head on one side, to compare 
the drawing with the original. 

He knelt down beside her on the grass. His breath came 
quickly. She looked into his face; her eyes suddenly became 
troubled but the expression quickly disappeared. 

“I want to show you something,” he said breathlessly. 

“Who are you?” she said, repeating her question. 

“Don’t you remember? We have known each other for a 
long time—a very long time.” 

With nervous fingers he pried open the ribbon round the 
folder. Once more she looked thoughtfully into his face. He 
had drawings in the folder—mostly caricatures. He took a 
great delight in drawing caricatures by giving men animals’ 
heads. He pushed over the open folder. 

“Drawings,” he said. His excitement strangled his voice. 
“Would you like to see them? I think 2 

She stared at the drawings which he spread out before her. 
His eyes hung on her face in hope and expectation. On top 
were drawings which he had done recently in New York. She 
looked at them carefully. It seemed that the style of the execu- 
tion awoke memories in her. She became troubled, taking up 
sheet after sheet, and then laying them down, as if she were 
looking for something definite. 

She found it. Holding up a drawing, she looked at him as if 
she were in the power of a spell. 

“That— you did that a long time ago,” she whispered. He 
nodded. "There was a lump in his throat. 

“In Siberia?” 

“Yes.” T'he lump allowed only a little squeak. Her fingers 
went over the drawing as if she wanted to feel what it repre- 
sented—figures in human dress, in morning coats and uni- 


179 


forms, but with heads. Her groping finger came to rest on a 
lion’s head. 

“That is Papa,” she whispered. “And that,” she tapped a 
pig’s head, “is Chvostov, the Minister for the Interior, and 
that is the Minister for War, Suchominoy.” She raised her 
eyes from the drawings and stared at him. His breath came 
back and there was an immense feeling of relief in his voice. 

“You saw the drawings once before, Anastasia Niko- 
layevna,” he saidsalmost casually. 

“You are Gleb,” she murmured. "Then added out loud: 
“Gleb Botkin.” 

He looked at her and beamed: “I knew you would recog- 
nise me. I knew it.” 


180 


aaa aaa aaa aaa aa aaa 


The boat glided over the lake; Gleb was rowing. The girl 
leaned back in the stern and let her arms hang down so that 
her hands trailed in the water. 

“Shall I keep on rowing?” he asked with a smile. “On and 
on, right over the lake? I will if you say so.” 

“To the promised land of America,” said Anastasia. “T'he 
place you are always speaking about. What should I do there?” 

“You would have a lot of friends there—nothing but 
friends.” 

“Friends? I am always a disappointment to my friends. 
"There are plenty of them already who say that I am ungrate- 
ful. And that is something I don’t want to be. It is dificult— 
even for friends—to understand what I am like. Often I do 
not understand myself. You keep saying that in America I 
would have no more worries. I belong nowhere. ’I'hat is the 
real truth.” 

“You Just imagine it. You belong to life like everyone else. 
Not to your previous life—that’s gone and done with. Every- 
one who tried to help you up to now thought they were doing 
you a good turn ifthey brought back something dead and gone 
—-or at least the reflected splendour of it. As for their op- 
ponents, they cling even more desperately to the past. I'hey 
are simply terrified that someone might turn up with whom 
they might have to share their own pitiful remnant of the past 
— the old useless pomp, old useless privileges, maybe some old 
useless money which has plenty of heirs lying in wait for it 
already.” 


181 


“] am not interested in money,” she replied. “There is 
money in London. In the Bank of England. Papa said so in 
Ekaterinburg. He said there is money there for every child. A 
man has seen to it that there is an account there. Papa told 
him to do it. A man with a German name. I don’t remember. 
A short name. Only one syllable, I think. But it doesn’t 
matter.” 

With a powerful stroke of the oar he turned the boat to- 
wards the bank. 

“But it does matter,” he said vehemently. “You could live 
on the money—Jlive a reasonable and secure life. Forget the 
past and live like everybody else these days! You need money 
for that. State your claims. I have heard the story about the 
mysterious account. All your relatives are interested in, is get- 
ting at the account, although they keep shouting at the tops of 
their voices that the account doesn’t exist. "T'hey are simply 
afraid that you will show the justice of your claim.” 

“In a year’s time they won’t need to be afraid,” she said in 
a tired voice. He looked at her quickly. 

“How? What do you mean? What will happen in a year’s 
time?” 

“T'he account belongs to the Czar’s children 

““T'hat means to you as the sole survivor.” 

“But next year ten years will have passed. On 17th June 
1928.” 

“Ten yearsaftertheassassination?””hemuttered,takenaback. 

“Yes, ten years will be up. T’hat was laid down by Papa. 
If none of his children turns up within ten years after his 
death, the money is available for the next heirs. T’hen they 
need be afraid no more.” 

"The possibility roused him to excitement although she men- 
tioned it so dispassionately and seemed prepared to submit to it. 

“But you must do something.” 

“Let us not speak about it.”” She knitted her brows. “Please, 
let us not speak about it.” 


” 


182 


He rowed in silence, weighing up a thousand arguments 
which might make her change her mind. T'hen he became en- 
thralled by her face, which was calm and peaceful. He felt an 
urgent wish to help her always. ’T'he boat struck the bank. 
"The girl looked over to the castle. 

“T give the Duke much trouble,” she said softly. “I keep 
thinking I give him much trouble.” 

She took his hand as she stepped ashore. T'hey went to- 
wards the house. 

“You should think less and laugh much more,” he said 
challengingly. Her lips moved a little. 

“I do already.” 

“More yet.” wi 

She could not resist laughing. 

“You are a silly man.” 

“Only people who like me are allowed to say that.” 

“You are a silly man,” she repeated with a smile. 

He accompanied her to the door of her room. 

“Shall I see you at dinner?” 

She nodded and the door shut behind her. Whistling con- 
tentedly, he went down the stairs into the hall. 

“Hello, Gleb.” He turned round. 'I'he Duke was standing 
in the door of the library. ‘“T'here isa visitor here.” Gleb went 
over to him. 

“Who?” 

The Duke pushed him into the room. 

“Gleb Botkin,” said the Duke, introducing him to the thin 
woman who stood in the window. 'T'hen he turned to Gleb. 
“This is Frau von Rathlef. She has news that will please you.” 
He smiled to the woman. “Tell him.” 

Gleb saw the hectic spots in the woman’s excited face and 
the smile of triumph in her eyes. 

“The Schanzkovski story is dead and buried,” he heard her 
say and her voice had an extraordinary undertone. “It is all 
over.” 


183 


Gleb stared at her. 

“What have you learned?” he asked hoarsely. 

“That woman Peuthert was behind it all. "T'he hysterical 
woman who started everything in Dalldorf. "T’'hat’s a surprise, 
isn’t it? T'he Peuthert woman.” 

Frau von Rathlef disregarded Gleb’s astonishment which 
she took in with a quick, gleaming sideways glance, before she 
let loose the torrent of her story. It wasa flood in which Gleb 
had difficulty in keeping his head above water. He looked im- 
ploringly at the Duke but the latter did not move a muscle. 
He had already heard most of the story and bore its repetition 
bravely. 

“Wherever you turn,” Frau von Rathlef said vehemently, 
“this Peuthert woman has a finger in the pie. T'he story about 
the Polish landworker isn’t new at all. Clearly Knopf wasn’t 
the first to think of it. It was first mentioned in 1925 before 
Knopf came into the picture. T'he wife of Captain von 
Schwabe began it—back in 1925—Just imagine. At first she 
couldn’t do enough for Anastasia. She baptised her daughter 
in her name. ’T'hen suddenly she got cold feet and her enthu- 
siasm was over. Why? Because she saw that by being so en- 
thusiastic about Anastasia she was going against the ofhcial 
view in &migre circles. And they had changed their minds, too. 
So she told the Peuthert woman, yes, the Peuthert woman, 
who was always visiting her—a fact she wisely didn’t tell 
Knopf—she told the Peuthert woman that perhaps Anastasia 
wasn’t Anastasia, but someone else. "T’he Peuthert woman took 
it up because she was furious with Anastasia since she hadn’t 
managed to achieve her ends with the poor girl. The Peuthert 
woman said thata Polish landworker had disappeared from the 
house of some friends of hers just about the time that Anas- 
tasia was taken out of the canal. Do you hear that? Friends of 
the Peuthert woman. I'll tell you how it all hangs together. 
"The Wingenders—Doris, the perfect witness, and her mother 
—-were very friendly with someone who lived at ı Schumann- 


184 


strasse. T'hey happened to tell their friend that their lodger, 
Franziska Schanzkovski, had disappeared. "T’hey described the 
girl to her. Butthe Peuthert woman also lived at ı Schumann- 
strasse. An unlucky chance. Very. And the Peuthert woman 
knew these friends of the Wingenders. She heard about 
Schanzkovski’s disappearance and the story stuck in her 
memory. 'T'hen she went to Dalldorf, discovered Anastasia 
and started all the commotion, but suddenly she realised that 
she wasn’t the centre of the picture. She wasn’t playing the 
part she had cast herself for. So she began to hate Anastasia. 
When Frau von Schwabe said she had doubts, the Peuthert 
woman made the malicious remark that perhaps Anastasia was 
a Polish landworker—she knew of a girl like that who had 
disappeared. You never could tell. And so on. 

“ Gradually she built it up very nicely intoan awful warning. 
"Then she told her neighbours in the Schumannstrasse and said 
that this girl Anastasia who had taken refuge with her for a 
while in 1922 perhaps wasn’t the Czar’s daughter after all. 
Hadn’t they noticed how like Franziska Schanzkovski she had 
been—the girl who had disappeared and whom the Win- 
genders had described so carefully? I am sure that’s how it was! 
"Ihe Peuthert woman spat out her poison in small doses and 
then her neighbours told the Wingenders in all innocence, 
Frau von Schwabe, for her part, whispered the story in &migre 
circles, so that when Herr Knopf set to work he found that the 
ground had been well prepared. I wrote my articles to help 
Anastasia and bring her sufferings into the public eye. I 
thought that witnesses would come forward and then her 
identity would be finally established and her relatives give in 
and recognise her. ’I'he Wingender girl saw the photographs 
published along with my disclosures. Clearly there is really a 
certain external resemblance between Anastasia and the 
Schanzkovski girl. Why not? Now the seed the Peuthert 
woman had sown took root. Doris Wingender runs to the 
“Nachtausgabe’ and swears on the photos that this is beyond 


185 


all doubt her missing lodger. Knopf is enthusiastic over the 
clue. He follows it up stubbornly, looking neither to right nor 
left. Anything that doesn’t fit it, is twisted until it looks as if it 
did fit. In the story of the “unmasking? it says that Franziska 
Schanzkovski was reported to the police by Doris Wingender 
in March 1920—but the date of her disappearance, according 
to the records, is 15th January. T'hat doesn’t fit very well. So 
the paper says that when she was filling up the form Fräulein 
Wingender mistook the date—it should have been ı 5th Febru- 
ary. T'hat’s very clever, isn’tit? In the spring of 1927 Fräulein 
Wingender remembers in detail how she mistook a date in the 
spring of 1920. What a wonderful memory! Any court would 
throw her evidence into the wastepaper basket. If you read it 
quickly in a newspaper you don’t notice it. But I did! T'hey 
can’t bamboozle me!” 

A long pause for breath, which could no longer be post- 
poned, interrupted the unending stream. "I’'he Duke seized his 
opportunity. With a mild smile he opposed a small dam to the 
torrent and from its shelter dared to raise an objection. 

“What you say seems to clear up a few things,” he said, 
and went on in spite of a look of mingled astonishment 
and injury: “I don’t know this woman Peuthert, but in the 
light of all I have heard of her, I can believe quite a lot of 
her ® 

“You certainly can,” interrupted Harriet von Rathlef em- 
phatically. 


“Of course, but—if you will excuse my saying so—you 
seem to tar the Peuthert woman and Fräulein Wingender 
with the same brush.” 

“Well—isn’t that right? "This young woman exploited 
Peuthert’s suggestions very cunningly—after all she got 
1,500 marks from the ‘Nachtausgabe’. T'hat’s a pretty good 
tip.” | 

“She gave the paper a scoop and got a fee for it,” said the 
Duke calmly. “I don’t find that at all reprehensible.” 


186 


EG 


“You are very cautious, Your Excellency,” said Harriet 
von Rathlef sharply. 

“All I want is clarity. I agree with you that there is a plot. 
I will even go to the length of saying that it isn’t the newspaper 
that’s behind it—or at least it’s not the only agent behind it— 
there’s also the Grand Duke of Hesse. Her relatives want to 
get rid of the girl at all costs. T'he girl says that the Grand 
Duke wasat the Imperial court incognito during the war, try- 
ing to make a separate peace—not a peace between the Ger- 
man Empire and Russia, but a peace between Russia and 
Hesse-Darmstadt, Saxony and Bavaria. General Hoffmann, 
who negotiated the peace of Brest-Litovsk and knows more 
about things than we suspect, hinted as much to me. The girl 
says the Grand Duke was in Petersburg in 1916. If she is 
recognised as Anastasia then the Duke’s visit is also conclu- 
sively proved. And today that visit is more than a little painful. 
So he does everything to prevent her recognition. I have 
grounds for believing that the Grand Duke is behind the cam- 
paign by the “Nachtausgabe’. He very wisely keeps himself in 
the background. I told you I am all for clarity—and that is 
why I do not wish Fräulein Wingender to be brought into the 
matter any more. I saw her here. I have no cause to spare her 
if I thought she had acted out of malice. She made a good im- 
pression on me. Our friend Botkin knows everything by hear- 
say. I should like to give him a clear picture of the enemy posi- 
tions and our own so that he has no mistaken ideas. T'hat is 
why I must repeat that I am sure that Fräulein Wingender’s 
statements are not consciously invented. Perhaps Knopf put 
ideas into her head. How can I check that? But when she says 
she thinks she recognises in Anastasia her lodger, Franziska 
Schanzkovski, then she is, subjectively speaking, telling the 
truth. She lives in that belief. T’'hat is our misfortune. Natur- 
ally it is just what Knopf was looking for. "The fact that he 
exploits Doris Wingender’s honest conviction to the full is also 
our misfortune.” 


187 


There was a depressing silence for a time. T'hen Frau von 
Rathlef pulled herself together. 

“That is a very pessimistic point of view, Your Excel- 
lency,”” she said reproachfully. 

"The Duke shrugged. 

“Just because I am convinced that my prot&gee is Anastasia 
I respect other people’s convictions too.” 

Gleb Botkin had gradually assimilated the woman’s wild 
statements and the Duke’s mildly expressed observations. He 
looked across at Harriet von Rathlef, who sat there, her face 
knitted into an expression of distrust. 

“I have a couple of questions,” he began hesitantly. 

“‘Certainly,” she replied, somewhat unwillingly. 

“You say—if I understood you rightly—that this Peuthert 
woman and the Wingenders have common acquaintances in 
the house at ı Schumannstrasse.” 

Seel 

“How do you know?” 

“I have had plenty of time to find out. I used my ears.” 

“So you gathered it from ‘what people say’?” 

“Yes, from ‘what people say’. You don’t need to use that 
expression either. I asked people in the Neue Hochstrasse. 
Neighbours of the Wingenders told me that Frau Wingender 
has friends at ı Schumannstrasse.” 

“Did you ask Frau Wingender herself? Did she confirm 
this to you? I can well imagine that she wouldn’t like admit- 
ting it.” 

“I took good care not to go near the Wingenders. Just to 
warn them that we are going to hit back, I suppose!” Harriet 
von Rathlef shook her head at such lack of understanding. 

“So there is no corroboration,” stated Gleb unmoved. 

“But the Peuthert woman confirmed it.” 

“Peuthert?” asked Gleb in astonishment. ‘Did you go to 
see her?” 

““Thhat’s another clever twist in the “Nachtausgabe’,” said 


P) 
188 


Frau von Rathlef, producing another triumph. “To read their 
story you would think there is no way of laying hands on that 
woman. She doesn’t live in Schumannstrasse any more. If 
Knopf had applied as much pressure to her as to all the other 
witnesses she would have had to confess things that would have 
upset the straightforward story of the “unmasking’. Knopf was 
very pleased that he didn’t find her at her old address. At least 
she couldn’t contradict him. So the ‘Nachtausgabe’ says flatly 
that she has left Berlin for an unknown address. But she hasn’t 
disappeared at all. She has moved house. All that was needed 
was an enquiry at the housing department. But Herr Knopf 
wisely did not make one. I did! ’IT'he Peuthert woman is living 
in Hufelandstrasse. I got hold of her and didn’t let go until 
she admitted that she and the Wingenders had these common 
acquaintances.” 

Gleb looked at the floor. 

“I don’t want to hurt you,” he murmured, “you are fight- 
ing for Anastasia with a fervour which puts us all to shame, 
but—how shall I put it— you must see that the woman’s state- 
ments are not much use to us. First of all you deliver a deva- 
stating verdict on her and then you produce her as a reliable 
witness.” | 

“I am quite capable of distinguishing when the Peuthert 
woman is deceiving me and when she is telling the truth,” 
raged Frau von Rathlef. Gleb gave up his attempts to contra- 
dict her. 

“There are still the famous three days in August 1922,” he 
said, changing the subject. “Fräulein Wingender says that 
Franziska Schanzkovski spent them in the Neue Hochstrasse. 
Then there’s the change of clothes. Baron von Kleist declares 
that he recognises in the things left at the Wingenders the 
clothing he got for Anastasia.” 

“Even Herr Knopf can tell you a few things about the 
Baron’s value as a witness,” replied the woman mockingly. “I 
have spoken to him and he admitted that Kleist and the 


189 


Schwabes aren’t exactly ideal witnesses. Whenever I hear 
about that wretched camel-hair coat I get furious. One camel- 
hair coat looks just like another. How can Kleist positively 
identify a worn coat five years later? He can’t tell me that 
that’s possible. Ren, he has personal reasons for wanting to 
harm Anastasia.” 

“Let’s leave Baron von Kleist out of it,”’ Gleb agreed. “So 
far as I know the clothing was also described by the police 
when she went missing in August 1922. I he clothing which 
Fräulein Wingender has produced corresponds exactly with 
the police description.” 

“If I am not allowed to say anything against Doris Win- 
gender because Your Excellency has taken her under your 
wing,” said Frau von Rathlef vehemently, “it naturally gives 
Anastasia’s opponents a big advantage.” 

The Duke smiled weakly. 

“Don’t pull your punches,” he said. “What is your theory?” 

“Let’s go back to the Peuthert woman. Anastasia was with 
her for those three days. "T'here is no evidence to the contrary. 
Even Baron von Kleist hinted to the police at the time that 
Anastasia had probably slipped off to Peuthert’s flat. ne that 
was where she was finally found.” 

“On the third day,” Gleb interrupted. “What about the 
time in between? It doesn’t mean she was there the whole 
time.” 

“The police didn’t search the flat. T'here is no evidence that 
she wasn’t in Peuthert’s flat those three days. "T'here are a 
number of possibilities. Why couldn’t it have happened this 
way? Peuthert is frightened the place is going to be searched, 
so she sends Anastasia away—to the Wingenders, for example. 
She knows their address from their friends in the Schumann- 
strasse. In that case Your Excellency is quite right in thinking 
that Doris Wingender is convinced that she is telling the truth. 


Even as regards the three days. Perhaps Anastasia was really 
there.” 


190 


Gleb suppressed a sharp retort. ““Don’t go chasing will-o0’- 


the-wisps,” he felt like saying, but all he muttered was— 
“Thhat’s a bit far-fetched.” 


“It has just occurred to me,” Frau von Rathlef admitted. 


“T’m not so soft-hearted as you about the Wingender ladies. 
This is my explanation. T'he whole thing is a plot in which 
Doris Wingender has a definite part to play. T’'he Peuthert 
woman reads my articles in the papers. Her hatred for Anas- 
' tasia is reawakened. She remembers the story about the land- 
worker who disappeared. She looks up the Wingenders and 
says there is surely a resemblance between the photos in the 
papers and the lost girl. Doris Wingender looks at the photos 
and finds the resemblance is there. Perhaps she is convinced 
that it is Franziska Schanzkovski. But Peuthert knows the 
weak points in the story. She knows that bare statements are 
not enough—there must be material proofs. "I’'hese fatal 
clothes have been Iying in her flat since August 1922, along 
with the camel-hair-coloured coat. Peuthert persuades Doris 
Wingender that it would be better if she said that the un- 
identified girl had been staying in Neue Hochstrasse in August 
and had left the clothes there. Only.then, she persuades her, 
will it really look as if the girl in the photos were the Polish 
girl—otherwise the paper mightn’t believe her. She gives the 
clothes to Doris Wingender who then goes to the newspaper 
and serves up the whole story to Knopf. "The Peuthert woman 
gets her share of the nice fat fee. What do you say to that? I 
am sure that’s what happened.” 

Gleb Botkin and the Duke were forced to admire the 
woman’s ability to construct an edifice of theory. 

“It is certainly a possibility,” said Gleb. “A strange possi- 
bility, but you can never prove it.” 

“Yes, you can,” cried the woman eagerly. “By confessions. 
Peuthert and the Wingenders must be forced to confess before 
acourtandto make a statement on oath. If we can only collect 
enough evidence that our prot&gee is Anastasia then every- 


191 


4 


eN 


= 


thing else goes down before it. Including the Schanzkovski 
myth. I have been in Hygendorf. I saw her family. "They are 
convinced that Franziska was killed by Grossmann, the mass 
murderer.” 

The Duke started. 

“What are you saying?” 

Frau von Rathlef gave a satisfied smile. 

“Yes—there is nothing about that in the “Nachtausgabe’. 
This theory of her family’s has wisely been lost sight of. But 
it isa crying scandal—a complete falsification.”” 

“] always wondered why her family didn’t come here to 
discover for themselves whether I had their daughter—or sister 
— here or not,” muttered the Duke. "The scepticism with 
which he had countered his over-excitable visitor’s suspicions 
gradually vanished. Frau von Rathlef felt that she was begin- 
ning to gain ground. 

“ And here’s another simple fact,” she said. “Just a trifle. I 
asked the Schanzkovskis what size of shoes Franziska wore. 
Size 39 was the answer.” Harriet von Rathlef paused to enjoy 
the effect. ‘“T'he girl whom you have taken as your guest, 
Your Excellency, takes size 36. I have bought her shoes my- 
self in Berlin. Of course a person’s feet can grow in the course 
of the years. But did you ever hear of them getting smaller?” 

The enthusiastic applause they accorded her was balm to 
the wounds which their previous objections had inflicted. 

“We will soon have an even stronger piece of evidence in 
our hands to prove that she cannot be the Schanzkovski girl,” 
she said calmly. “We can takea leaf out of Herr Knopf’s book. 
"Tomorrow Felix Schanzkovski is coming. I have arranged for 
him to come here. He is one of her brothers.” 

'T'he next day passed but Felix Schanzkovski did not arrive. 
Harriet von Rathlef had confidently expected him. T'he fact 
that he did not turn up made her nervous. Her restlessness 
transmitted itself to the Duke and Gleb, who found it difhicult 
to put on an untroubled, cheerful air during the hours he 


192 


passed with the girl. He had noticed—and the Duke had con- 
firmed his impression— what a good effect he had on the girl’s 
spirits. T’'he weeks following on the confrontation with Doris 
Wingender had not been very pleasant for the Duke. He had 
tried to explain to the girl why he had announced Knopf and 
Doris Wingender as ‘old friends’; but his explanations sounded 
lame. ’T'he girl listened to them with a look of uncomplaining 
patience which gave him more grounds for self-reproach than 
if she had attacked him in righteous anger. She crept away in- 
to her room and would see no one. Ifshe went into the garden 
or on the lake she did so very early so as not to meet anyone. 
"That was how she had come unsuspectingly on Gleb Botkin, 
yet—as the Duke gathered from Gleb’s report on their first 
meeting—she had not displayed that chronic mistrust which 
had become a characteristic trait of her character. She had 
taken to Gleb and walked and went picnics with him; the 
Duke breathed a sigh of relief because, now that she had Gleb 
to cheer her up, she once more made herself accessible to him. 

Frau von Rathlef sent a telegram to Felix Schanzkovski, 
who worked as a miner in the Ruhr, asking what had become 
of him. From his prompt reply it emerged that either he or 
Frau von Rathlef had made a mistake over the date. He 
thought he was to come in a week’s time. “I was beginning to 
fear the worst,” said Harriet von Rathlef with a sigh of relief. 
"They were all very confident again. Gleb told them what the 
girl had said to him: ““I'here must be money there, but she 
can’t remember exactly. An agent of the Czar’s opened an 
account with the Bank of England. She remembers that he 
had a short German-sounding name. A short, one-syllabled 
name, she says. We must find out what it was. In her own in- 
terest. She is much too indifferent about such matters. "T’he 
account will be closed on the tenth anniversary of the assassi- 
nation. 'T'hat is next year. We must do something.” 

Frau von Rathlef was all afıre. It was part of her tempera- 
ment that she was prepared to use every possible method. ’I’'he 


N 193 


“a 


Duke often wondered doubtfully whether they were the right 
ones. He himself was more inclined to let things take their 
course. His point of view was pessimistic, but deep in his heart 
there slumbered a kind of happy, careless optimism—a little 
eternal lame for domestic use only— which always made him 
hope that everything would turn out for the best, if not in this 
world then in the next. 

“What are we supposed to discover?” he asked. “Anastasia 
is right not to worry about such things.” 

When they were discussing how the girl had recognised 
Gleb from his caricatures with the animals’ heads, Harriet von 
Rathlef was electrified. 

“Caricatures with animals’ heads?” she cried. “Good 
Heavens, yes. Of course you are called Gleb.” And she went 
on in full spate: “Gruenberg told me all about it. Wait— yes, 
that was in 1922, the day she told him how she had been 
saved.” 

““What’s that?” asked Gleb hastily. 

“Gruenberg made notes about it all. He told me what hap- 
pened. She was sitting in the garden and trying to draw a rab- 
bit on a stump. She said there was someone in Russia who had 
drawn animals far better than she could. She mentioned the 
name ‘Gleb’ and said she had often laughed over his drawings. 
"Thhat’s you, Gleb Botkin. I remember Gruenberg saying to 
me that we ought to find this Gleb. Now you have come along 
yourself.” 

"The fact that the girl had spoken of Gleb and his drawings 
five years before was for her a new proof of Anastasia’s authen- 
ticity. Nothing could shake her in her belief—not even 
the opinion of Professor Bischoff, which they found in the 
newspapers next morning. Professor Bischoff was the director 
of the Institute for Forensic Science at the University of Lau- 
sanne. His opinion was naturally of some weight in oflicial 
circles. Gilliard, the former tutor at the Imperial court, had— 
on instructions from the Grand Duke of Hesse—sent him 


194 


photographs ofthe Grand Duchess Anastasia and thegirl. The 
professor had gone to work using scientific methods of identi- 
fication. In his report, which the papers now printed, it said 
that the outline of the two faces was not the same. “In the 
Grand Duchess Anastasia the maximum width is in the fore- 
head, whereas in the case of Frau Tschaikovsky the maximum 
measurement is at the level of the ears. Frau T'schaikovsky’s 
mouth is considerably larger than the Grand Duchess’s. The 
only definable resemblance lies in the flattening of the nostrils. 
A scientific analysis points to no objective resemblance.” T'he 
dry scientific verdict was: “There is no possibility of identity 
between the Grand Duchess Anastasia and Frau T'schai- 
kovsky. Signed M. A. Bischoff.” 

Harriet von Rathlef read the statement out loud. T'he Duke 
and Gleb listened in silence. When she had finished the Duke 
took the paper and looked carefully atthe photograph of Anas- 

tasia which the professor had used for his report. It showed a 
_girl’s cropped head taken from a group photograph of the 
Czar’s children. 

Gleb looked over his shoulder. 

“T'he Czar’s children had measles then,” he said. “Compli- 
cations set in. I'hey suffered from severe loss of hair. My father 
suggested that they should all have their hair cut short to stimu- 
late the growth.” 

“ And the photograph?”’ 

“It was a joke. T'he children stood en: a black curtain 
so that only their cropped heads could be seen. I remember 
they nearly died of laughing when they saw the picture.” 

While Gleb was speaking the Duke had been staring fixedly 
at the picture. His voice was calm when he spoke. ‘“T'he pro- 
fessor has been unlucky with his photograph. "The cropped 
head he has picked is not Anastasia. It is the Grand Duchess 
Olga—no one else.” 

Harriet von Rathlef sprang up. 

“Gilliard knows the Czar’s children as well as you do, 


195 


Your Excellency,” she cried vehemently. “He picked this 
head out of the group and made it available for scientific in- 
vestigation. Why did he choose the wrong head? Can you give 
me an answer to that, Your Excellency? I know of none. No 
wonder the professor had to come to a negative verdict.”’ 

Her rage found vent in a flood of bitter words. She would 
nail the conscious substitution of a false photograph, she 
cried. 

“They will see what happens if they use such methods. T’ll 
deal with this scandalous nonsense. "T'he lies they have thought 
up as evidence against the girl will become evidence in her 
favour.” 

But the quarrel over the photograph was never to end—not 
even to this day. From the moment when she saw the picture 
in the papers, Harriet von Rathlef was to go from one person 
to another with the question: “Is this Anastasia or not?” 
Prince Yussupov, the murderer of Rasputin, would answer: 
“Never—I think the Duke of Leuchtenberg is right; it is 
Olga.” The widow of the Commander of the Palace Guard, 
Frau von Hesse, would reply: “It is Olga—the professor had 
the wrong photograph.” Frau Barbara Kotschubey would 
also declare that it wasthe Grand Duchess Olga. Harriet von 
Rathlef was to publish the results of her enquiries in a book. 
In September 1955 Julia Lilli von Dehn, who lived in Vene- 
zuela, was to come across the book, see the photograph and de- 
clare on oath before the representative of the Federal German 
Republic in Caracas, that the shorn head in the photograph 
they were all quarrelling over was certainly not Anastasia, as 
Gilliard and his supporters maintained, but not Olga either, 
as Frau von Rathlef and her friends thought. It could only be 
the Grand Duchess Tatyana. 

"The Duke stood up, took the paper containing the report 
and shut it in his desk. “We had better not say anything to the 
girl about it.”” He looked wearily at Frau von Rathlef. “Let 
us not worry about it any more. It doesn’t matter whether the 


196 


public believes in Anastasia or not. T'here will be a constant 
argument to and fro.” 
He could not know how prophetic his words were. 


"The girl remained untouched by itall.’I’he gay, relaxed mood 
"which everyone who came in contact with her noticed, re- 
PN undisturbed. She knew nothing of the confusion that 
\ her very existence aroused in men’s minds. She knew nothing 
Nr odd picture with the shorn head which had triggered off 
sich serious quarrels. She knew nothing of the courteous ex- 
change of letters which had begun weeks before and which 
aimed at discovering whether Anastasia’s ears resembled those 
of Frau T'sschaikovsky or not. Letters went to and fro between 
the castle from which Graf Hardenberg wrote on behalf ofthe 
\ Duke of Hesse and the police office in Darmstadt. 


Darmstadt Schloss, 
ıst April 1927 
"The Chief of Police, 
Dr. Unsinger, 
Darmstadt. 


Dear Sir, 

Now that the so-called Grand Duchess Anastasia has 
been revealed to be Franziska Schanzkovski, born illegiti- 
mately at Borowielas on 16th December 1896, further re- 
search is unnecessary. I therefore wish to thank you sin- 
cerely in the name of H.R.H. the Grand Duke for the 
trouble you have taken over the matter. If the comparison 
of ear measurements can still be made, however, H.R.H. 
would be grateful, since they are required to provide the 
final piece of evidence in our records. With sincere regards, 

Yours faithfully, 
Graf Hardenberg. 


197 


Darmstadt, 
ııth April 1927 
His Excellency Graf von Hardenberg, 
Darmstadt Schloss. 


Your Excellency, 

Very many thanks for your kind letter of ıst April. The 
praise contained in it—which must go in the first instance 
to the work done by my oflice—gave me great pleasure. It 
has been a pleasure for me to do everything possible in the 
matter and I can assure you that, if necessary, the same assis- 
tance will be put at your disposal in future. "Ihe compara- 
tive examination of ears is being dealt with. 

I am, etc., 


Dr. Unsinger, Chief of Police. 


Darmstadt, 
2nd May 1927 


His Excellency, etc. 


Your Excellency, 

I have the honour to enclose, together with a pictorial 

key, the report drawn up by our experts on identification on 
the comparison of the women’s ears. I hope that Your E 
cellency is satisfied etc. ... 
Report: “I'wo photographs of human ears were submitted 
to me with a request to report whether they were identical. 
"T'he contours of the ear make ita very important element in 
the identification of human beings. It isalmost impossible to 
find ears which are identical in all points. It is only because 
the ear, being immobile, plays less part in the expression of 
the face, that less attention is given to it than to any other 
feature.” 

The report turns its searchlight on to the examination of 
the “ears presented for identification’, wanders along the rim 
of the ear, passes over the ear muscle into the orifice of the 


198 


ear, feels its way along the lobe and comes finally to this con- 
clusion: 

“It is therefore firmly established that the ear of the per- 
son claiming to be the Grand Duchess Anastasia has no re- 
semblance to the ear of the real Grand Duchess Anastasia 
of Russia. It follows that there can be no identity between 
the owners of the two ears.” 

Signed: Riesling, 
Detective Inspector. 


Darmstadt Schloss, 
3rd May 1927 
Dear Sır, 

I should like to thank you most sincerely in the name of 
H.R.H. the Grand Duke for the report rendered by the 
Criminal Department of your oflce. 'T'he work done is so 
excellent, scientific and comprehensive, that it has caused 
general excitement at the Palace. 

In the hope that we may shortly meet, 

I remain, etc., 


Graf Hardenberg. 


"The girl at Schloss Seeon, on whose ears a verdict had been 
passed in Darmstadt, knew nothing of all this. On the evening 
ofa carefree day she made Gleb Botkin happy beyond all mea- 
sure by suddenly saying: “If you go back to America, I think 
I should perhaps go too.” 


199 


IS 


ee 2 22 222.222 22 


Summer had descended mercilessiyon New York and held the 
city in a tyranny of heat and sweat. It was a heat that crept 
through the streets, crawled into every corner and laid men 
low. Lazy and immobile, Gleb Botkin crouched in the taxi 
which was taking him to Oyster Bay. He had opened the win- 
dow and held his arm outside so that the wind raised by the 
taxi blew up his shirt-sleeves into hisarmpits. When he reached 
his destination he paid off the driver and went slowly towards 
William Leeds’ house. It was a pretty bungalow, hidden away 
ina garden—a tiny, bright-coloured dot on the wide sweep of 
the bay. Breathing deeply, Botkin became aware of the feeble 
breeze which was blowing in from the Atlantic. He buttoned 
up thesleevesand collar of his shirt, pulled his tie straight with a 
resigned sigh and slipped on his jacket. "T'he gravel on the path 
crunched beneath his feet. "The cool face of the servant who 
opened in reply to his ring was in itself refreshing. 

“Mrs. Leeds is expecting me,” muttered Botkin. 

“Mr. Botkin?” 

Gleb nodded and the servant glided at his side to the door of 
the drawing-room. It was a small room. The broad low win- 
dow giving on to the garden was open; the lowered blinds dim- 
med the harshness of the sunlight. ’T’here was a huge, rust-red 
couch and flowers everywhere—outside in the garden, and in- 
side on the delicate, thin-legged tables. "T'he chairs had thin 
legs too. Gleb dubiously lowered his weight on to one of the 
seats but rose again immediately. "The woman who had asked 
him to visit her had come in. 


200 


She was tall and thin. Her brown short hair lay thickly 
round her small face in which her big, dark eyes gleamed. Her . 
lips were painted deep red; they were fulland curved in an un- 
ending, sweet—almost too sweet smile. She wore a light dress 
which did not conceal the perfection of her body. She knows 
she is extraordinarily pretty, thought Gleb. He bowed over 
her hand and breathed in the faint aroma of perfume and ex- 
pensive soap. 

'Theysatdown,he on a delicate chair, she onthecouch with 
her beautiful legs displayed as she lay back in a sea of cushions. 

“Your invitation took me by surprise, Your Highness,” he 
said. 

She came to the point at once. 

“You will have guessed what I am interested in. T’ell me 
all you saw in Europe. "Tell me everything about Anastasia. 
Are you convinced that she is my cousin?” 

Xenia Leeds was in her early twenties. By birth she was 
Princess Xenia Georgyevna of Russia. Her mother was a 
Greek princess. Her father, the Grand Duke Georgy Mihailo- 
vitch, had been shot in Petersburg in 1918. She had reached 
America by adventurous routes. Like many other young men 
from rich American families, William Leeds, himself a mil- 
lionaire and heir to an industrialist who swam in money, had 
discovered he had a weakness for the uprooted Russian aristoc- 
racy. He was a small, erect man, with a sympathetic smile, a 
tendency to buy great tubes of brilliantine for his stubbly hair 
and a weakness for a big bottle of whisky to wet his throat, 
which was alwaysdry. He had asked Xenia whether she would 
be his wife. His smile enchanted her. Since he was smaller than 
herself she looked down indifferently on the brilliantine and 
his thirst she did not find disturbing. So she said yes. But since 
then society had been full of gossip about quarrels between 
husband and wife and constant threats to separate. 

Gleb told her everything that had happened to him in Ger- 
many. She listened without interrupting him. 


201 


“And shortly before I left Seeon,” he said, “this Felix 
Schanzkovski arrived—the one we had waited for in vain. It 
was short and painless. Anastasia didn’t know what to make 
of him nor he of her. It certainly wasn’t his sister, he said. So 
that the opposition couldn’t find anything to twist in his state- 
ment, the Duke of Leuchtenberg made a number of conces- 
sions. T’'he Schanzkovskis in Hygendorf hadn’t moved a finger 
when they heard from Knopf that their daughter Franziska 
was supposed to be alive and Knopf had told the Duke that 
their lack of interest was quite easily explained. "I’hese simple 
people, he said, were frightened that they would have Fran- 
ziska asa burden round their necks and have to look after her. 
So the Duke prepared a written statement. In it he said that, 
if Felix Schanzkovski recognised the girl as his sister and was 
prepared to say so on oath, then he must do so in the cause of 
truth. But he must not be afraid that the family would then 
have to look after the girl. He, the Duke, was still willing to 
look after her because he saw in her only a sick girl, whoever 
she might be in reality. But even that did not persuade Felix 
Schanzkovski to make any further statement. He said he could 
not take an oath upon anything that wasn’t true. ’T’he girl 
simply wasn’t his sister and that was that. T'hen he left. T'hat 
was the end of the Schanzkovski story.” 

“And what does Knopf say to that?”’ asked Xenia Leeds, 
snuggling down among the cushions as if she felt the need to 
be warmer. 

“Nothing more has been seen or heard of him, Your High- 
ness. I take it that as far as he is concerned the matter is settled. 
He had the job of determining the girl’s identity. From his 
point of view, he produced the best possible witnesses. T'he 
paper printed the result of his inquiries. He was paid his fee— 
what further interest should he have? He has got the affair off 
his hands and now he watches other people fighting things 
out.” 

“What other people?” 


202 


“There’s a whole series of lawsuits going on. A couple of 
police ofhicials have been charged with allowing Knopf to see 
the records illegally and—worse still—in return for payment. 
Some people say they did, others say they didn’t. When the 
confrontation with Doris Wingender took place in Seeon 
there was.a journalist from the *Nachtausgabe’ there too. T'he 
Duke of Leuchtenberg and his wife say they kept at the man 
until he accidentally let slip that it was the Grand Duke of 
Hesse and not the paper which was behind Knopf’s assign- 
ment. ’T'he “Tägliche Rundschau’, which is the ‘Nachtaus- 
gabe’s’ rival, printed this. "T’'he journalist said it was all lies and 
a wicked imputation; he hadn’t said a word. Of course, he had 
to sue the “Tägliche Rundschau’ for libel. There were long 
negotiations but neither side would give in. At last the court 
insisted that the Grand Duke himself should be asked to ap- 
pear and declare on oath what actually happened. He was 
lucky. Before the case came up again the “Tägliche Runds- 
chau’ went bankrupt. The man from the “Nachtausgabe’ 
withdrew his suit because, as he said, he couldn’t get anything 
out ofa bankrupt defendant. T’hen the Duke of Leuchtenberg 
said this was a pretty poor excuse. "I’he suit had been with- 
drawn because the Grand Duke of Hesse naturally didn’t have 
the slightest wish to have to tell the truth in court. "T’hat is how 
things stand. And so slowly but surely everything is getting 
bogged down.” 

His report was finished. He looked at her anxiously, won- 
dering to himself whether this spoilt woman had asked him to 
her house merely to hear the story ofa nice, mysterious scandal 
at first hand. She leaned forward and reached for a cigarette- 
box on the table beside her couch. ’T’'hen she offered him one 
ofthe Russian cigarettes which had become fashionable in the 
neighbouring villas since her arrival at Oyster Bay. He held 
out a light. Both smoked for a while in silence. He had the 
impression that she was thinking things over very thoroughly. 

“You know my relationship to the Grand Duchess Olga in 


203 


Copenhagen and the Grand Duchess Xenia in London, don’t 
you?” she asked finally. 

He nodded. 

“Yes, they are your aunts.”” He could not see what she was 
getting at. 

“And you know my aunts’ attitude to the matter?” 

“Yes,” he answered calmly. “Grand Duchess Olga visited 
Anastasia when she was in hospital in Berlin. She wrote her 
delightful postcards—I don’t know whether you know this, 
Your Highness—and then she went over to the enemy camp. 
Grand Duchess Xenia was against the girl from the start— 
she thought she was an impostor all along.” 

“Aunt Xenia,” muttered the woman on the couch. “At 
Tssarskoe Selo she was always called ‘big Xenia’ because she 
was the Grand Duchess and I was ‘little Xenia’.” A bitter 
smile passed over her red lips—the shadow of a memory of 
times past. “Yes,” and the smile disappeared, the tone of her 
voice became businesslike, “my aunts are against the girl.” 
She hesitated. “But Iam on Anastasia’s side.” 

He stared at her in astonishment. This was the last thing 
he had expected. 

“Don’t ask me why, Mr. Botkin. But you can be sure that 
Ihave my reasons— very important reasons. Whether my aunts 
like it or not. I want to bring Anastasia over—to be with me.” 

Gleb had regained control of himself and was beaming. 

“That is wonderful, Your Highness,”’ he almost shouted. 
“That is the solution. If you only knew how I have been run- 
ning around for weeks to raise enough money for her passage. 
My own means are limited—that is, to be quite honest, I 
haven’ta cent. One thing became clear to me in Europe. Anas- 
tasia will never be able to win recognition there. The hostility 
of her relatives and their influence and connections are so 
powerful that a girl in her situation can do nothing against 
them. This is a free country. No one worries what aunts and 
uncles think, however high-ranking they are. I shall bring the 


204 


matter into court. T’hat is the only way to do it. We will get 
the very best lawyer. We will put our evidence on the table. 
The court will decide whether she has the right to call herself 
Anastasia Nikolayevna. And the court will not deny her her 
rights. T'hat I can guarantee.” 

From outside there came the noise of a car braking sharply. 
Doors banged; there were loud voices and laughter. Xenia 
raised her head. 

“My husband,” she said in a low voice. ’T’he frown she sup- 
pressed betrayed itself in the tone of her voice. She looked at 
Gleb. ‘“We have agreed then that Anastasia must come to 
America,” she said quickly as if she wanted to finish business 
before her husband came into the room. “But I don’tthink we 
should go to law. I have been thinking about things already. 
I have another plan. I have always been on good terms with 
the Dowager Empress. She has no idea that anyone has turned 
up calling herself Anastasia. She is never told anything. "T’hey 
keep everything from her. She knows nothing of what goes on 
in the world outside. Anastasia will come and get better here. 
I will arrange everything very carefully. When the time is 
ripe I will go to Copenhagen with her to see Maria Feodo- 
rovna. 'I'he grandmother will recognise her granddaughter. 
She always worshipped Anastasia. "T'hat is the right way, Mr. 
Botkin. "The only way.” 

Before Gleb could reply the door opened. William Leeds 
rushed in. He was small and wiry and was wearing tennis 
clothes; there was a broad grin on his flushed face and his eyes 
shone, betraying that he had already taken enough of his 
favourite drink to be in a good humour. He was followed by 
a large, fat woman, whom Gleb judged to be about seventy. 
He knew her from the society columns of the newspapers 
where one was always reading that Miss Annie B. Jennings 
was to be admired for the youthful enthusiasm she had pre- 
served into advanced years. With this same youthful enthusi- 
asm she banged the door shut. 


205 


“That was a bit of a bang,” she laughed. 

“That’s O.K., Honey,” said Leeds with a grin. 

His wife made the introductions. 

“] have heard about you, Botkin,” said Leeds. “I read your 
articles on this girl, Anastasia. Xenia wants to bring her over. 
Has she told you already? You’ll be astonished, Annie B. 
We’re going to have a genuine hundred carat Czar’s daughter 
in the house. A whisky, Botkin?” 

He was already making towards a cabinet in the wall. 

“No, thank you—with this heat,”’ murmured Gleb. 

“But we’ll have one, won’t we?” said Leeds and the old 
lady did not refuse. She tossed her glass off and Gleb began to 
see where she derived her high spirits from. Prohibition had 
awakened the rebel in her and given her a taste for alcohol. 

“A real daughter of the Czar’s—coming here?” she twit- 
tered. “Xenia, you’ll be an angel if you do that. A daughter of 
the Czar’s—wonderful!” 

Annie -B. Jennings was a millionairess. She had avoided 
men and never married because she had a low opinion of hus- 
bands, she said. It was rumoured in society that even Annie 
B.—as her friends called her— would have said yes if only a 
man had actually come along and asked for her hand. She was 
a woman who drew frequently on her bank account and liked 
doing so. She had a splendid house on Park Avenue and a 
country house in Connecticut. Once a year she went to Paris 
and once a week she did not drink a drop. 

“If Anastasia comes,” she went on loudly and enthusiasti- 
cally, “she must stay with me for a bit. You must promise 
that, Xenia. "The poor child! She has lost everything. Her 
parents and family murdered! World history is very cruel, 
isn’t it, Mr. Botkin? When I think [; 

“Don’t,”” shouted Leeds. "They were both very nice, very 
noisy people. “Do you agree with Mr. Botkin? Is she coming 
over?” he asked his wife. 

“That much we have agreed,” answered Xenia coolly. 


206 


“Your Highness’s assistance will be a very great help,” said 
Gleb stifly. “I would have had difficulty in raising the money 
for the fare. I saw a lot of &migres. Only Rachmaninoff was 
prepared to pay her passage if necessary.” 

“Who is this Rachmaninoff?” asked Annie B. curiously. 

““Thhat’s something you ought to know, honey,” grinned 
Leeds. “My wife toldme. Serge Rachmaninoff—a great com- 
poser, a great pianist and a great Russian. He lives in New 
York like all sensible Russians.” 

“Does he play the piano?” said the lady enthusiastically. “I 
will give a party and engage him. He must play when Anas- 
tasia is with me. ’T’'he poor child will be so glad. Music soothes 
people.”” She hummed an unidentifiable melody. 

*“It’s her relatives who will need music if you invite Anas- 
tasia over,” said Leeds drily. ““I just hope you aren’t going to 
regret it.” 

““That’s my business,” Xenia replied calmly. 

“What do you mean?” asked Annie B. 

“Allthe Romanovs are against Anastasia,” Leeds explained. 

“Not all of them,” said Gleb Botkin. “The Grand Duke 
Andreas is on her side.” Xenia looked at him in astonish- 
ment. 

“I had a letter from him a few days ago,” Gleb explained. 
“He says that in view of all he has heard he is convinced that 
she is genuine.”’ An ironical smile played round the corners of 
Gleb’s mouth. “But he would like to make some enquiries 
himself. He says that if he got the money for them the whole 
thing would be child’s play. He wanted to know if I could 
raise fifty thousand dollars.” 

William Leeds laughed. 

“Grand Dukes certainly put up the costs. I can tell you, 
Annie B., that I have met a lot of princes. ’T'hey come to see 
Xenia and to give my wallet the once over. ’I'here’s no dif- 
ference between a tough American business man and a Rus- 
sian prince. T’hat’s to say, the princes make it sound nicer 


207 


when they want something.” He filled up the glasses. “What 
does the Grand Duke Andreas want the money for?” he said 
turning to Botkin. “T'he Revolution didn’t make him poor. 
Maybe his little dancer has, though.” 

“He isn’t poor,” Gleb replied. 

“Then it means he doesn’t want to put his hand in his 
pocket.” 

“What kind of dancer?”’ asked Annie B. eagerly. “Isshe his 
mistress?”’ 

“I don’t know,” said Leeds with a grin. “She is his wife. It 
is a wonderful story. You can try it out at your next party. 
When the last Czar wasn’t the Czar yet—just the Czarevitch 
— he was a nice-looking young man. A bit shy, with big, soft 
eyes. A wonderful morsel for an experienced woman. His 
father had had him trained by the best teachers in everything 
a future Czar ought to know. ’I'he boy learned quickly but 
when it came to women he blushed till his ears were red and 
never seemed to learn. "Then Kschessinskaya came to Peters- 
burg—she was a Polish dancer. "The Czarevitch stared at her 
legs and his papa tipped his adjutant the wink. So the Czare- 
vitch’s regiment gave a mess dinner with everything thrown 
in—including the dancer. She was put next to him. Her eyes 
did the rest. Next morning the Czar gave orders that she had 
to leave. Now that he was initiated the Czarevitch must learn 
to keep his feelings on the straight and narrow.” 

“You are sweet,” crowed Annie B. “Isn’t William sweet, 
Xenia?” 

Xenia’s face was icy. Botkin looked straight in front of him. 
But Leeds finished his story without turning a hair. 

“Then the Czarevitch himself became Czar. And it was 
his cousin’s—the Grand Duke Andreas’s—turn to look at the 
dancer’s pretty legsand eyes. He married her. T'hat was a mis- 
take. Nicholas knew from his one personal experience what his 
cousin found in the lady. But he stuck to the rules of the Im- 
perial household and he gave orders that Andreas and his wife 


208 


were to leave the country. So with colours flying they left for 
the Riviera taking their fortune with them and, ifthey haven’t 
died meantime, they’re still there.” 

“They’re still alive,” murmured Botkin. 

“And all the other Romanovs,” said Leeds, “the ones who 
stayed at home and lost all their money in the Revolution, are 
very sore with Andreas, who may have made an irregular mar- 
riage but can now live a regular life, whereas their wives have 
to scrimp and save.” He grinned. “Perhaps Andreas is only on 
Anastasia’s side because the others who cut him dead because 
of his wife are against her. Don’t I know my Russian history 
well, Annie?” 

“He must be a wonderful man,” said Miss Jennings. ““He 
gave up his position for the woman he loved. Can I make his 
acquaintance? I must meet him next time I’m in Paris. You 
must give me a letter of introduction, Xenia. What are you 
going to do, darling?” 

Xenia slid from the couch and stood there, slim, beautiful 
and cool. 

“Why not?” she said. Her eyes rested on Botkin, who had 
also got up. “Well, that’s arranged. I am ready to have Anas- 
tasia as my guest. Will you see to everything?” 

“I shall write to Seeon today,” he replied and took his 
leave. 

“Is she pretty?”’ asked Annie B., as she shook hands with 
him. “I shall ask lots of young men. From the best families.”’ 
She found her idea intoxicating. ““I’'hat would be it, wouldn’t 
it? She will get married here. Shell forget all her troubles in 
marriage. 'IT’hat would be something.” 

Dazed and bewildered, Gleb stepped into the open air and 
blinked in the harsh sunlight. He found a taxi. All expenses— 
so Xenia had assured him— were to be charged to Leeds. With 
mixed feelings he drove back into the oven that was New 


York. 


o 209 


Two things happened concurrently at Seeon: the arrival of 
Gleb’s letter and the visit of Felix Dassel, a Russian cavalry 
officer. 

The girl listened with a smile as the Duke of Leuchtenberg 
read to her how good prospects were in America, how much 
Princess Xenia was looking forward to meeting her cousin 
again, and how very shortly the money would be sent for her 
passage. When Gleb left Seeon, the girl had stood at her win- 
dow as he got into the car which would carry him to the 
station. A glance on his part, a hesitant motion ofthehandon 
hers, had been all their leave-taking. 

The Duke looked at her. 

“You would like to go to America, wouldn’t you?” he 
asked quietly. m 

The smile still hovered on her lips. 

“I don’t know.” 

He said no more. When Gleb was there she had been gay. 
When he left she was sad. He thought he knew what took her 
to America. 

Captain Dassel’s visit was to assume great importance. For 
all those who believed in the girl his evidence was to be strong 
proof of her authenticity. Felix Dassel wasa Balt. In 1916 he 
was severely wounded and was sent to a hospital at T'sarskoe 
Selo, patronised by the two youngest daughters of the Czar, 
Maria and Anastasia. The Grand Duchess Maria was the 
Colonel-in-Chief of Dassel’s regiment. With the permission 
ofthe Czar, Dassel, when convalescent, was detailed to accom- 
pany Maria and Anastasia on walks. Anastasia was then fif- 
teen years old. The ‘unmasking’ in the ‘Nachtausgabe’ and 
the desire to form his own opinion—and thus perhaps help the 
girl—had induced Dassel to come to Seeon. He had left the 
questions he wished to put to her, and the correct answers to 
them, with a Berlin lawyer. In order to have a witness to the 
girl’s replies he had brought a friend of his with him called 
Bornemann. Immediately he saw the girl Dassel declared that 


210 


he recognised her beyond all doubt as the Grand Duchess 
Anastasia. But Bornemann insisted that the questions must be 
put to her. T'here were catch questions among them and deli- 
berate false statements to test the girl’s reactions. 

“At Christmas 1916,” said Dassel to the girl, “you remem- 
ber—in the hospital—I had just gone on convalescent leave to 
the Caucasus. My comrades in the hospital got presents. 
Sabres, watches, cigarettes. But of course I didn’t get anything 
because I was away.” 

And the girl replied, yes, she and her sister had given the 
wounded watches and cigarettes—and even cigarette-cases. 
But sabres? She could not remember any sabres. She did not 
think that she had given anyone a sabre. 

And the witness, Bornemann, noted: Question correctly 
answered. Dassel had deposited the true answer in Berlin 
which was that watches and cigarette-cases were distributed 
but no sabres. 

“You remember that we were very keen on billiards,” said 
Dassel to the girl. “We always had a lot of fun. "T'he room on 
the first floor was a little small for the big billiard table.” 

“No, the billiard table was on the ground floor,” she inter- 
rupted him eagerly, “not upstairs. I know it was. But I didn’t 
play well. Maria was better.” 

"The witness noted: Question answered correctly and even 
enlarged upon by the accurate observation that the Grand 
Duchess Maria was the better player. 

Dassel stayed several days at Seeon. He kept sprinkling his 
conversation with questions from his stock and Bornemann 
ticked one answer after the other. 

The Duke’s joy at the positive result of the visit was trou- 
bled by the disappointment he had to give the girl because of 
Gleb’s next letter. Gleb wrote saying that difficulties had 
arisen in America. Prince Christopher of Greece, an uncle of 
Xenia, was putting pressure on his niece to give up what he 
called ‘this mad idea’ of inviting the girl. Xenia had begun to 


211 


waver. A long period of uncertainty followed. T'hen towards 
the end of 1927 he cabled: “Everything O.K. Get passport 
and tickets.” 

The local authorities issued a passport in the name of Anna 
Tschaikovsky. Some oflicials said cautiously that one should 
first make enquiries of the police since the “person in question’ 
was said to be an impostor. In reply, the Darmstadt police said 
that she was a swindler and that the Berlin police had estab- 
lished that she was in fact Franziska Schanzkovski. 'I’he Ber- 
lin police, on being asked, said that they had done nothing of 
the sort. T'he police had made no enquiries. T’hey had been the 
work of a private detective. To which the Darmstadt police 
replied that they had not made any official enquiries either. 
They had therefore nothing to add. "They had merely pre- 
pared, unofhcially, a report on her identification—based on 
ear measurements—at the request of Graf Hardenberg, 
secretary to the Grand Duke of Hesse. 

"The local authorities took note that the police knew noth- 
ing of any ofhcial action against an impostor and that it was 
simply a case of large-scale personal vendetta, the course of 
which the police had merely recorded without judging the 
evidence on either side strong enough to oblige them to step in. 
T'he local authorities saw no reason to deny the applicant a 
passport. The American consulate granted a visa and every- 
thing was ready at Schloss Seeon. 

But it was not until the middle of January 1928 that the 
money arrived from America, together with the news that a 
first-class cabin had been booked on the Berengaria. The boat 
sailed from Cherbourg on ıst February. A Scots nurse, Miss 
Agnes Gallacher, would take care of the girl. 

The departure from Seeon was sad. T'he gruff Duchess 
wept. "T'he staff stood round in silence. T'he car with the girl 
in it drove off into a dull, cold morning. 

"The Duke accompanied her to Paris. The girl felt that he 
was unwilling to let her go and she herself suddenly doubted 


212 


e 
J 


whether she was doing the right thing. What decided her was 
the hope that in America, where the same forces did not make 
themselves felt, the matter would be settled—that and the fact 
that she did not wish to impose further on the hospitality of 
the Duke. 

She stayed two days in Paris. Immediately she arrived the 
Grand Duke Andreas appeared in her hotel and embraced her. 
He showered her with flowers and gifts and called her ‘his 
little darling’. He had brought with him General Sassyevitch, 
the former Chief of the Cheka, who with tears of emotion in 
his eyes gave her all the honours demanded by court etiquette. 


\T'he three of them travelled with her to Cherbourg. Miss 


Gallacher was waiting for them at the station. She wasa talka- 
tive person who began a long speech from which it emerged 
that she greatly treasured the privilege of being allowed to at- 
tend on Her Highness. 

"They stood on deck, targets for the curiosity of the other 
passengers. "Ihe only one to speak was Miss Gallacher. "Then 
the signal was given for all visitors to disembark. "T’'he General 
stood to attention. T'he Duke kissed the girl on both cheeks 
and wished her every happiness. "T'hen he bowed silently over 
her hand. 

She watched him go down the gangway and felt she was 
losing a friend. She stood at the rail as the ship slipped its moor- 
ings and glided slowly out of the harbour. ’T'he band struck up 
on board. T'he figure of the Duke on the quayside seemed to 
shrink into a tired old man who raised his arm as if he wanted 
to hold her back. She was never to see him again. "Ihe first 
news that reached her in America from Seeon was that Georg 
von Leuchtenberg was dead. 

She went to her cabin and shut herself in while Miss Gal- 
lacher, with cheeks aglow, asked passengers, oflicials and crew, 
whether they knew whom they had on board. “I'he Czar’s 
daughter,’ she whispered and laid her finger meaningly on her 
lips. Europe was left behind. With it she left behind an old, 


218 


pensioned police official who bred rabbits and grew roses— 
Dr. Gruenberg, whose one hope was that his conviction that 
the girl was really Anastasia might be proved true. She left a 
querulous wreck of a woman—-Fräulein Peuthert, who read 
with.pursed lips the items in the press about the Berengaria’s 
ımysterious passenger. She left behind a pretty young girl, 
Doris Wingender, who asserted unshaken: “I still think she is 
Franziska Schanzkovski.” She left a tireless, over-zealous 
woman, Harriet von Rathlef, who was preparing to make in- 
vestigations in Rumania on the period which the girl said she 
had spent there with T'schaikovsky. She left in the archives of 
the Grand Duke of Hesse the negative report on her ear. She 
left a puzzle, doubt, and quarrels. 


214 


. 


IAIN (ee ee anne 


Gleb rushed into the customs shed to be surrounded by repor- 
ters. He raised his hands to defend himself. The questions 
rained down. 

“What isthesstory? Isshea Grand Duchess or an impostor? 
What are your proofs? Have you a photo of her? Are you go- 
ing on board? "The Berengaria has been held in the fog and 
can’t come into harbour. Are you going out to her? We could 
go in the customs cutter. Are you? "Take us with you. You 
must!”” Gleb fought his way through the crowd and dis- 
appeared into the customs office. Questions, shouts and ham- 
mering fists beat against the door at his back. 

“My God,” said Gleb half laughing, half angry. “Who put 
them on to it?” 

“Someone must have opened his mouth in Europe,” grinned 
the customs ofhcial. “T’'hey know she’s on board.” 

“Can I come on the cutter?” 

“]’m easy. What about them?” 

Gleb hesitated. 

“I wouldn’t put their backs up,” said the oflicial. “The girl 
had better have them on her side.” 

“Thhat’s true,” said Gleb. ’T'he official nodded contentedly. 
He went to the door and opened it. 

“You can come too, fellows. You’d better say how easy I 
am to get on with. My name’s Fledder, Ray Cornell Fledder.” 
They granted his wish and took a note of his name. 

The fog lay like a heavy white cushion over the docks. 
Hooting, the cutter worked its way forwards. "I'he reporters 


215 


stood packed close together. Next to Gleb was Kreisler’s 
manager, a man called Foley. 

“You must introduce me to her,” he insisted. “Kreisler is 
on board too. He cabled that they had this mystery girl on the 
Berengaria.” 

“T’]] see what I can do,” muttered Gleb. 

Out of the milky bands of mist a huge black wall loomed. 
The cutter began to lose way. They glided along the side of 
the ship until they found the gangway. ’T'he reporters stormed 
on board. "T’'hey seemed to disappear into the clouds. Gleb fol- 
lowed slowly. He felt his knees shaking. 

In the gangway to the luxury cabins there was complete 
confusion. ’T'he reporters and photographers were busy, push- 
ing their way forward, shouting, firing questions. 'T'hose 
photographers who had got left behind held their arms high 
and their cameras swayed above the crowd. A steward stood 
hopelessly crushed against the wall. 

"They hadn’t been able to get to the heart of the matter— 
the mystery, the puzzle. But they had a bird in the hand— 
Miss Gallacher. “Who is that? The Grand Duchess? Isn’t 
worth a shot. Keep quiet. Who is she? "T'he nurse. Who says 
so? 'I'he steward.” Disconnected phrases crossed each other. 
Miss Gallacher’s cheeks were red. She set her lips in a constant 
smile. She couldn’t tell when they might take a shot of her. 
“Gentlemen,” she said primly, “I can say nothing,” and 
prayed God that they would ask more questions. Dudley 
Nichols of the ‘New York World’ set himself up as spokes- 
man for them all. 

“Are you the nurse?” 

“Yes, the most wonderful job of my life.” 

“Who took you on?” 

“Princess Xenia, the present Mrs. William Leeds.” 

“Isthe Grand Duchess pleased to be coming to America?” 

“She thinks of nothing else.” 

“How do you know Russian?” 


” 


216 


“What do you mean? I know no Russian.” 

“Well, German, then. Did you speak German to her?” 

“No, English. She speaks English Auently.” 

She speaks English, thought Gleb, and a feeling of triumph 
went through him. Now her enemies will have something to 
try their teeth on. T'hey will say that Franziska Schanzkovski 
has been taking English lessons in secret. Since they maintain 
she is a simple peasant girl they will have a job to turn her into 
a genius for languages. 

Gleb was standing behind the wall of journalists. He turned 
round and hurried along the deck to ask a ship’s oflicer if:there 
were another way to the girl’s cabin. ’T’he oflicer showed him 
the way and Gleb slipped into her cabin. 

“Gleb.”” It was said with a sigh of relief. "T’'he girl was lean- 
ing by the porthole. 

“Welcome to America, Your Highness,” said Gleb cere- 
moniously. He laughed. 

“I won’t set foot outside the cabin,” she cried. 

“They’ll get tired,” he said comfortingly and looked her up 
and down. She looked well—the trip had done her good. Her 
face, which was usually so pale, had got some colour. He had 
a thousand questions to ask, but before he could say anything 
there wasa knock at the door. It opened and an ofhicer hastily 
shoved in Foley and Fledder, the customs and immigration 
oflicers. 

“Mr. Foley, the manager of Fritz Kreisler,” said Gleb, 
frowning a little as he made the introduction. What is he do- 
ing here? he thought crossly. The customs ofhicial drew him- 
self upand laughed loudly. 

“Ray Fledder of the customs and immigration. We won’t 
take long. Your passport, Madam.” 

She took her passport from her purse. Fledder really did not 
take long. 

“Your name is Anna T'schaikovsky? Yes, that’s right. You 
are coming in asa tourist for a six months’ stay? "T’hat’s right, 


219 


isn’t it? Your papers are O.K. Staying with Mrs. Leeds, 
Oyster Bay. Everything in order.” He produced a tin box 
from his trouser pocket and unpacked his official stamp from 
a piece of paper. With great gusto he brought it down on the 
passport. 

“O.K., Mam—good luck in the United States. I’Il get rid 
of the boys out there. I’Il say you crept through the porthole 
and swam ashore.”” He enjoyed his joke immensely. "Then he 
went off. 

Mr. Foley smiled. 

“] had a word with him. Otherwise they pester the passen- 
gers for hours with questions. Our oflicials are like that.” 

“T'hank you for all your trouble,” said the girl. Her English 
had a delightful Slav accent but she spoke correctly. 

“It was a pleasure to be of service to you, Your Highness. 
I hope we may meet again.” He hesitated, but then said to him- 
self that it was perhaps better to go. Making a most correct 
bow, he left the cabin. 

"T'he mist held up their entry into the harbour for twenty-_ 
four hours. "The captain of the Berengaria gave Gleb and 
Foley a cabin together. ’T'he reporters hung about in the gang- 
way all night, squatting on the steps leading to the upper deck. 
None of them knew which was the girl’s cabin. Even Miss 
Gallacher had not given this away. ’I'he photographers lay in 
wait for the women passengers as they passed during the night 
on the way to the toilet in negliges, dressing-gowns or morning 
coats. After innumerable complaints the steward had to run 
to the captain, whose patience gave way at three in the morn- 
ing. He appeared on the spot. 

“Get away from here, gentlemen, for heaven’s sake. What 
does this mean?” 

“Welre going to catch the Czar’s daughter,” they grinned. 

“Madame T'schaikovsky has a luxury cabin,” said the cap- 
tain coldly. “You can draw your own conclusions.” So the 
photographers gave up. 


218 


Next afternoon the Berengaria slid into harbour. Under the 
protecting arm of Gleb the girl hurried ashore. T’he crowd of 
pressmen surrounded her. ’I’he photographers ran backwards 
before them, cursing, stumbling, pleading for a smile, until the 
girl, with a push from Gleb, disappeared into a big saloon car. 
"The door banged and the car drove off. 

“That’s how it is,” sighed Gleb. "The girl smiled weakly 
and leaned back in the cushions with relief. 


She had been in America six weeks. At the very beginning 
there was a disappointment. Xenia was not there. “She has 
gone ttothe West Indies—for her health,” Gleb explained. ’T'he 
girl was at once suspicious. “Why is she not here? Particularly 
now. She is avoiding me. I think she invited me. Admit she is 
avoiding me!” 

Gleb tried to talk her out of it. His explanations sounded 
lame. He himself did not know why Xenia had gone off. ’T'he 
‚thought occurred to him that she was sorry now that she had 
let herself in for the affair. Perhaps her relatives in Europe had 
bombarded her with letters. Perhaps .. . he did not reveal his 
thoughts but attempted with all his powers to persuade the girl 
that Xenia’s absence was of no importance. 

Annie B. Jennings had taken the girl into her house. It was 
she who had sent the car to the dock and had stood in the im- 
posing entrance to her house in Park Avenue, wonderfully got 
up and with a couple of whiskies in her to give warmth to her 
reception. 

“I am delighted, Your Highness. Gee, how delighted I am. 
Welcome.” She touched only the tips of the girl’s fingers and 
forced her squat figure into a kind of curtsy. “I am Xenia’s 
best friend. I am glad Xenia couldn’t postpone her trip. Mr. 
Leeds insisted. He can’t take his leave any other time. A = 
busy man. But whata break! I so wanted to have you here.” 

Six weeks of trips round town. “Look here, look there!” 


219 


cried Miss Jennings. Clothes were bought—dresses, shoes, 
pretty elegant things. Thegirl becamean extremely chic young 
person, good to look at, ripe for seduction, and Miss Jennings 
would whisper to her shoals of visitors: “T’'hat is my Grand 
Duchess. Isn’t she sweet?” 

Coffee-cups were passed round. 

“T'here’s no coffee in them,” whispered Annie B. and she 
explained to the girl how those stupid prohibition laws pre- 
vented people from being really gay— “I can’t imagine what 
Washington is thinking about, Your Highness’”—and how 
wonderful it would be when you could drink a toast in cham- 
pagne-glasses again instead of in coffee-cups. 

It was Oliver Jennings who generally sat next to the girl. 
He was Miss Jennings’ nephew. A good-looking young man 
but somewhat overawed because his aunt had said to him he 
must try to win the Grand Duchess as his bride. He seemed a 
bit simple and, since words always failed him, he was unable 
to dispel this impression. "T'here was an old rou&, Mr. Alger 
Arch. He wasin a state of advanced decayand only hisdinner- 
jacket held him together. His eyes were dead and only his 
monocle sparkled. But his imagination seemed to be still alive. 
“Would you marry an old man with a couple of million?” he 
said dully between his thin lips one evening. Miss Jennings 
twittered. “T'hat is America, Your Highness. You have made 
a conquest. "I 'hat’s wonderful.” And she threw Arch a poison- 
ous look, for she feared for her nephew. 

Gleb scarcely showed himself. Sometimes he rang and said 
he didn’t have much time—he had so much to do. The girl 
was never alone and yet she felt abandoned. She was sorry she 
had left Seeon. She missed the nice quiet ways of the Duke, so 
she sat down and began a letter to the Duchess, saying that it 
was lovely in America, very impressive, that people were very 
nice and that she often thought of Seeon. She wept as she 


wrote; then she tore the letter into little bits and threw it 
away. 


220 


Suddenly Xenia Leeds arrived. T'here was a knock, the 
door opened and Miss Jennings called triumphantly: “Look 
who’s here!” 

Xenia went up to the girl and stared at her. T'hen she 
laughed. “Anastasia Nikolayevna.” 

She took the girl in her arms. It was a greeting full of ten- 
derness, but Xenia had not brought peace with her. 

“You must come atonce. You will like our house at Oyster 
Bay. My husband is looking forward to seeing you. Look 
what I have brought you.” 

Miss Jennings came into the room carrying, with difh- 
culty, a huge cage with two parrots in it. 

““Aren’t they heavenly? Your cousin has always such char- 
ming ideas, Your Highness. And you like animals.” 

‘““T'hat was very nice of you, Xenia,” she said quietly. So 
Xenia had not been avoiding her. It had been an ordinary trip 
which couldn’t be put off. The girl smiled. 

“It is lovely to have you here at last.” 

Her cases were packed. Miss Jennings was wringing her 
hands. 

“Must you go so soon? But you will visit me again. You 
will, won’t you?” 

'There was a hasty leave-taking. A hasty drive to Oyster 
Bay. Then came the flowers, the garden, the white bungalow, 
the sound of the sea, the friendly ease with which William 
Leeds shook the girl warmly by the hand and Xenia’s warmth. 
The girl was suddenly glad to have come to America, even if 
everything was so overwhelming. 

“You will get well here. Really well,” said Xenia with a 
smile. “And do you know what we will do then?” 

The girl nodded gaily. 

“Gleb told me your plan. We will go to Copenhagen to 
Grandmama.” 

“Yes,” replied Xenia, “you were always her favourite, She 
will recognise you. I am sure she will.” 


221 


20 


aaa a\a\2.2.2.2\2.2.2.2\2.2\2\ 2.2.2.2 


Edward Huntington Fallows, the son of Bishop Fallows ofthe 
Reformed Episcopalian Church, had his office on the 13th 
floor of a skyscraper. He had a flourishing business and the 
reputation for being a good lawyer. If occasionally he seemed 
to be talking a bit pompously for a really tough lawyer, his 
clients attributed it to his father, who had held forth from the 
pulpit for years. 

Fallows was a robust man in the prime of life. He had an 
energetic chin. His eyes had a shrewd look and he had accus- 
tomed his lips to wear a good-natured smile. Gleb had met 
him some months before at an art exhibition. Now he had been 
sitting opposite him for an hour; he had been telling him the 
girl’s story. 

“Good, Mr. Botkin,’ said Fallows nodding thoughtfully, 
“it isall very complicated but I can get the hang of it with a 
bit ofan effort. An interesting story. But what can a lawyer do 
about it? I think Mrs. Leeds’ plan is a very sensible one. "The 
grandmother in Copenhagen will recognise the girl and every- 
thing will be settled.” 

“Nothing will be settled,”” Gleb contradicted him forcefully. 
“It might be if Xenia really did go to Copenhagen with her. 
But she won’t.” | 

Fallows raised his eyebrows with a meaningful look. 

“Are you trying to say that Mrs. Leeds is keeping the girl 
back on purpose? Have you any grounds for your supposition?” 

“I wouldn’t be taking up your time otherwise. Believe me, 
she has no intention of going to Copenhagen with her. The 


222 


girl was only supposed to get her strength back at her place. 
But now she has been there more than three months. Nothing 
happens. I bet she has made a wonderful recovery. There is 
nothing to keep her from travelling to Copenhagen. She could 
leave any time.” 

“You say you are convinced that Mrs. Leeds truly believes 
that she has before her, in the person of the girl, her cousin, 
Anastasia. So she isn’t one of the girl’s opponents.” 

*“ That is why I hesitated so long before coming to a lawyer. 
I can only advance one explanation. I have the feeling that 
Xenia is caught between two stools. She is a decent enough 
person not to deny her cousin and she is sorry for Anastasia. 
On the other hand, she doesn’t want to have to break with her 
aunts. T'hey are the Grand Duchesses Olga in Copenhagen 
and Xenia in London. "They are the late Czar’s sisters. Both 
ofthem want to prevent the recognition of Anastasia, because 
if Anastasia does not exist they are the next heirs. It is purely 
a question of the Czar’s estate. On 17th July, the ten years 
will be up. I have told you what the girl said to me at Seeon. 
Unless she puts forward a claim, the money in the Bank of 
England goes to the aunts. I am sure that Mrs. Leeds will 
keep Anastasia here until the time is up. The Dowager Em- 
press must not be allowed to see her before that date. But I 
doubt whether she will go to Copenhagen later either.” 

“And you really believe in this mysterious account in the 
Bank of England?” asked Fallows sceptically. 

“It undoubtedly exists. But it is not in the name of Roma- 
nov. Anastasia told me at Seeon that some confidential agent 
of her father’s opened the account. She doesn’t remember his 
name but it was a German one—short and of one syllable. 
That is what I want to know from you. Can one not make 
inquiries at the Bank of England to learn whether an account 
exists which was opened by a man with a one-syllabled Ger- 
man name, who laid down that the money was for the children 
ofthe Czar? It must be possible to inquire. If the answer is 


223 


positive it would also be a proof of the girl’s authenticity. How 
else could she know about the account?” 

“My dear man,” said Fallows, with a patronising smile, 

“you are forgetting that banks do not disclose their customers’ 
affairs. No information will be forthcoming about existing 
accounts unless——”” He seemed to have struck on an idea 
and rubbed the bridge of his nose. “Unless,” he said slowly, 
“one could perhaps obtain indirect evidence. One could in- 
quire. If there is no account the bank will say, no, there is no 
such account. If it replies that it can give no information and 
refers to professional etiquette, one might perhaps conclude 
that an account does, in fact, exist. Otherwise why refer to 
professional etiquette, you see?” He cleared his throat.‘*Natur- 
ally there’s a lot of hair-splitting there.” 

Gleb ran his hand through his hair. 

“But that is madness!” he cried. “T'he bank takes refuge 
behind its obligation to its customers. We then feel that we 
have got indirect evidence. But what can we do with it? 
Nothing. The day after 17th July the others will go along, 
put their documents on the table, ask ifthere is an account and, 
if there is, then they will be the legatees. And since their 
documents are in order, the bank will pay out. That is mad- 
ness. And the girl brought it all on her own head. She told her 
Aunt Olga that the money was there when she was in hospital 
in Berlin. The Danish Ambassador was present too. Other- 
wise they would know nothing about it. Anastasia said to me 
that she told them. It is enough to drive you mad.” 

Fallows looked at the excited young man meditatively. 

“You naturally have no money to,pay for a lawyer,” he 
muttered. T'hen he added somewhat hastily: ‘“I’m not think- 
ing so much of RR fee. "T'here would be other expenses—con- 
siderable ones.’ 

“Where can I get the money?” replied Gleb gloomily. 

“What about the girl— Anastasia?” 

“She lives on what Mrs. Leeds gives her,” growled Gleb. 


224 


“Do you think Xenia willgivea sent for a lawyer to disinherit 
her aunts?” 

“IT could naturally do a certain amount at my own ex- 
pense,” said Fallows in a leisurely voice. “I mean, I would 
have to take a closer look at the evidence for the girl’s authen- 
ticity. I could offset the expenses as it were. Perhaps we could 
reach an agreement on that point. Ifthe money goes to thegirl 
she could refund it to me.” 

Gleb stared at him. 

“All right, do you see a way?” 

“Tl have to think it over. I have a partner in London in 
the firm of Gilbert F. Kennedy. Old Kennedy is very friendly 
with one of the Governors of the Bank of England. I mean 
that one might be able to draw some conclusions from a few 
tactful hints. "This is how I see it. I shall ask Kennedy to in- 
quire of the Bank whether such an account exists. We wait 
and see what they say. If we feel that there is an account then 
we will draw up a statement on oath. ’I’'he girl must declare 
that she is the daughter of the Czar and that she lays claim to 
the account. You see what I am getting at? If this statement 
is delivered before the 18th July no one can touch anything. 
The account will be blocked.” Gleb looked at the lawyer with 
enthusiasm. 

“It’s a good job that I came to you,” he said. “That is the 
way to do it.” 

“Go slow, my boy,” said Fallows calmly. “I said the 
account will be blocked. Nothing will be paid out. Nothing 
to the aunts but nothing to the girl either. "T’'hen we must take 
the next step. We must take the matter to court. ’I'he court 
must give a judgment. Ifthe judgment says that the court has 
come to the conclusion, after examining the evidence, that 
Anastasia is really Anastasia, then the way is clear—or not, as 
the case may be. We might get a fine surprise. Let’s assume 
the judgment is in our favour. T’hen we go to the Bank of 
England. Suppose there isn’t any account after all? Perhaps the 


pP 225 


girl made a mistake. Perhaps she misunderstood a passing refer- 
ence by the Czar. ’T'hen I shall simply have had the honour of 
helping a Grand Duchess to establish her claim to her title. 
Nothing more.” 

Gleb looked at him dejectedly. 

“It makes me despair to listen to you,” he muttered. “You 
raise my hopes to the skies and then dash them to the ground.” 

There was.a depressing silence while Fallows thought hard. 

“You have told me a great deal, Mr. Botkin,” he began at 
last. “There are the Tsschaikovsky brothers who saved the girl. 
Alexander T'schaikovsky took his thanks in a somewhat crude 
way. The girl says she had a child by him. But then he is sup- 
posed to have married her. All right, Alexander is said to have 
been killed. But what about the other brother—Sergey, or 
whatever his name is? And there were supposed to have been 
two other women in this famous rescue convoy. Where have 
they got to? Where is the child? "T'hey can’t all have dis- 
appeared from the face of the earth.” 

Gleb had brought his documents with him. He searched in 
his briefcase. 

“Frau von Rathlef has begun inquiries in Rumania,” he 
said. “Unfortunately nothing much has come of them. She 
found no one called "Tschaikovsky. But we are sure the girl’s 
rescuer only assumed this name for safety’s sake. ’I'hat was the 
name they told the girl. Perhaps they gave another name in 
Rumania—if they reported their arrival at all.” 

He had taken a couple of letters and documents from his 
case. 

“Frau von Rathlef has written to me. In Berlin the girl 
gave the name of a street in Bucharest where she lived with 
Tschaikovsky. T'hatstreetexists. Itis called Svento Vojevoci— 
a little twisting side street in the oldest part ofthe town. T’hen 
a witness has been discovered—an Armenian by the name of 
Sarscho Gregorian. He has made a statement to the Bucharest 
police to the effect that he crossed the Dniester into Rumania, 


226 


when fleeing from Russia on sth December 1918. He came 
upon a group of refugees—three women and two men. They 
told him that one ofthe women was the Grand Duchess Anas- 
tasia. Gregorian, together with his wife and three children, 
then crossed the river along with the group to which Anastasia 
belonged. At a very definite spot—Resina. T'hen they stayed 
together until they reached Kishinev. He says the Grand 
Duchess was then taken on to Bucharest. He himself re- 
mained in Kishinev. On 6th May 1919, a messenger from 
Bucharest brought him 5,000 lei and said it was for having 
helped the Grand Duchess. Later she also sent him a crucifix 
and an ikon and sent him word not to have his children bap- 
tised until she came back, since she wanted to be their god- 
mother out of gratitude to the parents.” 

Gleb shoved over a document. 

“That isa copy ofthe Armenian’s statement—certified by 
the Bucharest Chief of Police. Frau von Rathlef writes that, 
in fact, the Armenian has not had his children baptised to this 
day, because he is convinced that one day Anastasia will keep 
her promise and come.” 

“A trusting man,” murmured the lawyer. ’I'here was no 
irony in his voice. He got up and walked up and down the 
room. "T'hen he came to a halt in front of Gleb. 

“Your girl does not know that you are here, does she?” 

“No— but I want you to meet her.” 

“Perhaps she doesn’t want to hear of a lawyer taking the 
matter up.” 

“Presumably she still sets her hopes on Xenia,” said Gleb. 
“I don’t know. I have tried to visit her at Oyster Bay a couple 
of times. Mrs. Leeds makes it impossible for me to meet her. 
When I ring up I can’t get through to her. But I’ll manage 
somehow. I have written to a friend in Copenhagen. He has 
written back that the Dowager Empress is fairly ill. A lot of 
people even think that she won’t recover. Xenia would have 
every reason in the world to go over as quickly as possible with 


227 


Anastasia, if she really wanted to. What happens if Maria 
Feodorovna dies?” 

Fallows had come to a decision. He sat down again at his 
desk. 

“Whatever comes of it,” he said decisively, “the case is 
a joy to any lawyer. I shall write to Kennedy in London 
today.” 

Gleb jumped up. 

“So you are prepared to do it?” 

Fallows laughed drily. 

“] hope to get some fun out of it. [am an inquisitive man. 
I would really like to know what goes on.”’ With an encourag- 
ing smile he accompanied Gleb to the door. 

The letter to London was sent off. A week later Kennedy 
replied that the Bank refused all information but he was sure, 
as a result of his inquiries, that the account did exist. "The man 
with the German name might be Peter Bark, who had dealt 
with financial matters for the Czar. Kennedy advised, there- 
fore, that Anastasia Tschaikovsky should make a formal de- 
claration and send it to the Bank of England, together with 
notice that she intended to put forward her claim. 

It was the 7th July when Kennedy’s letter arrived. "T'here 
were only ten days to go. Gleb attempted desperately to get in- 
to touch with the girl, but his attempts failed. A letter from 
him was certainly delivered to the bungalow at Oyster Bay, 
but he was never able to see the girl. Kennedy kept sending 
cables from London saying that something must be done. Fal- 
lows pondered what to do. On 12th July, he saw a possibility 
and asked Gleb to come to his office. 

“Listen, if you want to do something for the girl, make a 
statement on oath yourself. You played with Anastasia as a 
boy. You will declare before a notary that you have recognised 
in Frau Tschaikovsky your playfellow, the Grand Duchess 
Anastasia. You will write a letter saying that you wish to 
draw the attention of the Bank of England to the fact that 


228 


someone exists who could lay claim to the account if it exists. 
I see no other way out. Try it.” 

On 13th July Gleb Botkin sent his declaration to Kennedy, 
who forwarded it to the Bank of England. Gleb never re- 
ceived a reply from the Bank. But on 18th July, a day after 
the final date, he had a call from Oyster Bay. Mrs. Leeds said 
she urgently wished him to visit her that day. 

He drove out. A servant led him into the drawing-room, 
which he remembered from his first visit. Xenia was waiting 
for him, standing in the middle of the room. He saw from her 
eyes that she was furious. "T’here was no exchange of greetings. 
She shouted at him and her voice was sharp and shrill. 

“How could you do such a thing! Who gave you the right 
to meddle! Who? Tell me what you were thinking of. Do you 
expect to get something out of it? Tell me. Defend yourself at 
least! If you can!” 

Her eyes stared wildly; her red lips quivered with rage, then 
closed tight only to open immediately and overwhelm Gleb in 
a new stream of reproaches. He did not move. Her words left 
him untouched. He stood there coolly, waiting until she had 
to stop for breath. "The moment came and he seized it with a 
smile. 

“You are angry with me, Your Highness, or aren’t you?” 

She was speechless. "T'he words stuck in her throat but she 
stamped her foot. Gleb once again thought what fine legs she 
had. 

“You are—you are——” she brought out. 

*“] am here because you rang me,” he said calmly. “May I 
know why you wished to see me?” 

“You wrote to the Bank of England.” 

The corners of his mouth twitched triumphantly. 

“Yes, I did. What of it? I believe there is no money there. 
That is the official view of the Romanoy family. Or isn’t it? If 
there is no money there I can’t have been counting on it.” 

“You had no right to do it.” 


229 


“] have the right to tell anyone that the Grand Duchess 
Anastasia is alive—that I am convinced of the truth of Frau 
Tschaikovsky’s statement that she is the Grand Duchess. 
What doesit matter if Itold the Bank of England? Particularly 
ifthere is no money there.” He smiled ironically. “How do you 
know that I wrote to England? How do you know so prompt- 
ly? Was someone at the Bank on the ı7th? Was someone 
there yesterday to get the money that doesn’t exist? Am I right 
in thinking that it was your Aunt Xenia? Did she want to lay 
claim to the account, the existence of which she and the other 
Romanovs have been so energetically denying?” 

“My aunt was not at the Bank,” hissed the Princess. She 
swung round. William Leeds had come into the room. He 
looked at them both ironically. 

“Stormy weather,” he said with a grin. T'he princess threw 
a furious glance at her husband. 

"Then she launched herself at Gleb. 

“Anastasia hates you! You have taken something upon 
yourself that is none of your business. It only concerns her. 
You have written articles in the papers. You wrote to the 
Bank of England. You ” She could stand Gleb’s indif- 
ference and her husband’s grin no longer and ran out of the 
room. 

'The sudden calm was blissful. 

“Sit down, Botkin,” said Leeds laughing. He poured a 
whisky for both of them and sat down opposite Gleb, looking 
at him questioningly. 

“You are a pocket infernal machine, Botkin. You must 
have been ticking for months but nobody heard you. Now 
you’ve gone bang. Cheers.” 

Gleb took a sip and leaned back in his chair. 

“Your voice is wonderfully quiet,” he said and smiled. 

“I have a few noisy days behind me,” said Leeds and ran 
his finger round the rim of his glass. ““ Anastasia is a sweet girl. 
Really. We have had a couple of nice boating trips. She likes 


230 


to go sailing. My wife’s a nice person too. She certainly is, 
Botkin. But the two of them together! I have been wondering 
if I should put a net between the trees out there in case one of 
them throws the other out of the window.” 

“And what is the reason for this sudden tension?” asked 
Gleb. | 

“It has been going on for weeks. They don’t see eyeto eye.” 

“Because your wife won’t go to Copenhagen with Anas- 
tasia to see the Dowager Empress,” said Gleb emphatically. 

“That too,” Leeds nodded. He laid. down his glass and bent 
forward. “Listen, Botkin. Iam no Grand Duke, Let’s talk 
openly. I know what the Romanoys think. T'heir point of 
view isn’t quite so silly if you look at it soberly. Anastasia is 
not well—she will never be quite better. And you can’t help 
wondering whether everything is all right up top. She has 
been in an asylum. The time she spent in Dalldorf can’t be 
hushed up. She hates all her relations.” He raised his hand 
when Gleb attempted to object. “Naturally she has reason in 
a certain sense. But I ask you, is she the woman to represent 
the House of Romanoy? Is she the woman you could produce 
to millions of Russians and say they must support her if they 
want to have a monarchy again?” 

“But that is folly!”’ cried Gleb. ““T'hat’s not the point.” 

“It is for the Romanovs,” Leeds replied calmly. “T’'hey 
look at it only from this point of view.” 

Princess Xenia came back into the room. 'T'here was still a 
hectic spot on her cheeks but she seemed calmer. She sat down 
beside her husband. ““Don’t say anything just now,” he said to 
her. T'hen he looked at Gleb again. 

“You speak to Anastasia. Perhaps she will listen to you, 
Botkin.” Gleb made a grimace. 

“] am told she hates me,” he said with a glance at the prin- 
cess. T'he Leeds did not take up his remark. 

“Speak to her,” Leeds went on. “Tell her to give up her 
claims. Tell her to take things calmly and accept the situation. 


231 


"That is the most sensible thing she can do. I really represent 
no interests. Iam a business man and it is my view that politics 
are business too. You must take things calmly. Tell her to pick 
a place where she wants to live. She will be looked after. She 
will have doctors. She will be able to travel. She will have ser- 
vants. "T'he necessary money will always be forthcoming. She 
will have no worries, no troubles—only peace and quiet. A 
fine life, Botkin. Lots of people would give a great deal for it. 
It is a compromise, Botkin. It will help both sides. "The 
Romanovs will go on worrying about politics but she won’t 
need to worry about things which only seem important to 
people who cling to a senseless past. T'ell her that.” 

Gleb had listened in silence. He was staring in front of him. 
What Leeds had said was basically his own view. As far as 
Russia was concerned, hethought themonarchy had no future. 
"Only the Romanovs thought so and a few others who dreamt 
of the old splendour. 

He looked at Princess Xenia and Leeds. 

“Any ordinary mortal would accept,” he said. “But Anas- 
tasia is also a Romanov. Have you thought of that? "The 
thoughts which dominate her relatives are also in her. She has 
been so brought up that she cannot think otherwise.” He rose. 
Princess Xenia rose too. She came up to him and touched his 
arm. ’T'he look she gave him was hopeless and desperate. 

“Do you understand me?” she murmured. “Do you realise 
what I feel?” 

“You are caught between the two fires,” he said calmly. 
“You are a Romanov too.” 

“Please speak to her,” she whispered. 

“Where is she?” 

“In her room. I’ll take you there.” 


They were alone. He saw the change that had taken place in 
the girl. Once more she was suspicious and shut off. T’here 


232 


was no more of the easy gaiety which had filled her at Seeon 
on the days when they had rowed on the lake. 

“IT haven’t seen you for a long time,” she said in a low voice. 
“Not at the beginning when I was with Miss Jennings—and 
you never came here.” 

“When you were staying with Miss Jennings I had a ter- 
rible lot to do,” he replied reluctantly. “My publisher was giv- 
ing me a lot of work.” 

“What about here? Why did you never come?” She noticed 
his hesitation and was at once full of suspicion. ‘“T’ell me, why 
not?” 

He shrugged his shoulders. 

“I have been trying for months. I came here and was told 
you were not in. I rang up and they told me you didn’t wish 
to speak to me. I wrote ” 

“I didn’t get your letter.”’ "T'here was suddenly a childish 
lament in her voice. “I guessed it. "They are keeping me here 
as a prisoner. ’I’hey oughtn’t to do it. What is Xenia going to 
do with me? She must have some plan. I expect she thinks 
I do not notice. Why does she not go to Copenhagen with 
me?” 

What shall I say to her? thought Gleb. 

“I have written to the Bank of England,” he said changing 
the subject. “I wanted to have your permission beforehand 
but I could not get in touch with you.” He could not tell from 
her face whether the affair with the Bank of England in- 
terested her. “You remember, don’t you?” he went on. “You 
told me that there was an agent of the Czar—a man with a 
one-syllabled German name. Now I know the name. He is 
called Bark. Peter Bark.” 

She remained indifferent. 

“Yes, Bark—maybe that was the name.” "T'hen she added 
violently: “Why does Xenia not go to Copenhagen with me? 
Tell me that.” 

He pulled himself together. 


233 


“There are a number of reasons. I should like to explain to 
you what your relations think about it all.” 

He found it dificult to repeat to her the arguments Wil- 
liam Leeds had employed. He brought them out haltingly. 
Her face was cold and hostile. When he ended her eyes had an 
angry look. j 

“And is that your view, too, Mr. Botkin?”’ she said with 
considerable acerbity. “You think that I should agree with 
them?” 

She rose with a haughty gesture. Gleb jumped up. Her fury 
burst upon him. 

“I am supposed to renounce everything, Mr. Botkin. You 
adyise me to renounce everything. Am I to have no name? 
Am I to be nothing? Or have they already thought out who I 
shall be? I am the daughter of the Czar. I inherit from him— 
everything. I am leaving this house. I am going. Make up 
your mind which side you are on!” 

“I shall stand by you, Your Highness,” he whispered. 

“Then help me. Get me away from here.” "I'here was 
hatred in her voice. “I wanted to have a name—that was all. 
Now I want more. "The money too. My relations!—they did 
not want me to have the money. "They want it for their 
politics. I did not want the money. Now I do. And if I cannot 
have it they will not have it either. See to it. If you areon my 
side, see to it!” 

“I think I have already done so,” he replied. 

She stared at him. 

“TI told you that I wrote to the Bank of England,” he ex- 
plained. “Princess Xenia has been complaining to me about it. 
"The account is blocked. No one can touch it.” 

Her eyes shone. 

“That is good. "T'hat is very good.” After a pause she whis- 
pered: “Now I shall act on my own. For the first time. I need 
a lawyer, Gleb.” 

“I have one—he dealt with the Bank.” 


234 


“Then I want to speak to him. 'T'hey all say I am ill. T'hey 
don’t want anything to do with me. I am strong, Gleb. Iam 
well.’ Suddenly fear passed over her face. “I am, aren’t 1?” 

He swallowed. He had a sensation of doubt and misgiving. 
It was like a fire within him. 

“Yes, you are better, Anastasia Nikolayevna.” 

The girl left the pretty white bungalow at Oyster Bay. 
Gleb took a room for her in the Garden City Hotel on Long 
Island. "The name of Anastasia ’Tschaikovsky had been in all 
the papers—everyone knew that that was the name of the 
woman who was said to be the daughter of the Czar. ’To give 
her peace Gleb told the hotel that she was called Anna Ander- 
son. But her peace did not last long. 

Along with the lawyer Edward Fallows there also appeared 
Miss Jennings. “Your relations again,” she cried. “I have 
some like that too. I can tell you I told Xenia what I thought 
about it all. You poor darling!” 

And she spread out her protecting wings and took the girl 
into the country—to her house at Fairfield, Connecticut. 

“That will be our headquarters. Fallows will sort things 
out, you’ll see. He isa good man, Fallows, one of the best.” 


235 


21 


aaa aa 222.22 2\.2.2\2\2\2\ a2 


The girl found Fallows a very sensible man. He made practi- 
cal suggestions, but since he produced them with his father, the 
bishop’s, deliberate and impressive manner they sounded 
sweetly reasonable and not too obviously concerned with mak- 
ing fees. T'he girl had had a room set apart for her in Miss Jen- 
nings’ country house and Miss Jennings did not spare the 
flowers. On his first visit Mr. Fallows also brought a bouquet. 
He gave a brief glance at the cage with the two parrots— 
the only thing the girl brought with her from Oyster Bay 
—-and then dedicated himself entirely to his newly acquired 
client. 

“I am a very correct man,” he said, “and it would be 
against my principles as a lawyer, Your Highness, were I to 
start off by addressing you with that title. I beg you to under- 
stand my motives and to allow me, Your Royal Highness, to 
address you with all respect as ‘Madam’.” 

She could not help smiling and he took it for agreement. 

“Thank you, Madam,” hesaid. “I have good news for you 
right away.” As his manner was, he raised his eyebrows 
meaningfully so that they spanned his statement like a great 
arch. “A committee for the recognition ofthe Grand Duchess 
Anastasia has been founded in New York under the chair- 
manship of Miss Adeline Moffat. Its oflice isat 310 Riverside 
Drive, New York. We must not underestimate the impor- 
tance of the founding of this institution. It is one more voice 
on our side. Moreover Miss Moffat informs me that the 
Daughters of the American Revolution are not averse to 


236 


showing sympathy to the organisation. T'hat is also not un 
Important.” 

The girl did not find what he was saying particularly im- 
portant, but she did not show it so as not to discourage him. 

“Thank you,” she said softly. “Mr. Botkin will have told 
you my wishes.” She hesitated but then continued. “You 
know that I have a son. Perhaps you think I am not a good 
mother because I left the child in Rumania.” Her speech was 
scarcely intelligible. “You know the circumstances which led 
to the birth of the child. I was very young. I was ill—I see a 
lot of things differently now.” She raised her head and her 
voice became firmer. “I would like you to set out my wishes 
in a will—I should like my son to be able to enjoy the money. 
I would like you to begin inquiries. You must find him.” 

“You know about Frau von Rathlef’s investigations in 
Rumania,’ Fallows intervened. “You know that she found 
no trace of him.” 

“You must try again. And look for the T'schaikovskys too 
— I should like to provide for them in my will.” 

“Certainly,”” murmured Fallows. ’T'hen he began cautiously 
to speak of his own plan. 

“If I might suggest it, it is rather early to start talking about 
a will. T'he following is merely a proposal but you ought to 
consider it, Madam. Our first object must be to have you 
recognised. We need money for the investigations and for the 
legal costs and I have been considering how one could get the 
money. I have thought about a corporation.” 

She looked at him uncomprehendingly. 

“What kind of a corporation?” 

“Youare probably not familiar with such matters, Madam,”” 
he said slowly. “But you can have complete confidence in me. 
Please think it over. We will found a company. We will issue 
shares and I am sure we will find shareholders for them. You 
yourself, Madam, bring to this company your expectations 
of the fortune for which we are fighting. The others buy 


237 


shares and so produce hard cash we require for the struggle. 
A certain percentage of the fortune will later be paid to the 
shareholders. Do you understand what I am getting at, 
Madam?” 

The girl looked at him uncertainly but said: “Yes—I 
understand.” 

Fallows laughed contentedly. 

“You will not regret it, Madam,” he said. ‘“Naturally your 
personal expenses will be covered by what the shareholders 
contribute.” 

“So perhaps I will be able to go to Copenhagen soon,” she 
said in a low voice. 

“I am sure you will,” he assured her. 

When he left the girl felt she had never been so close to her 
goal. But months went past. "The fits of depression from 
which she suffered were broken by further visits from Fallows, 
who always assured her that everything took time and that 
there was no reason to despair. Gleb could come to Fairfield 
from New York only very seldom. When he came he re- 
ported that Fallows was working away indefatigably. 

On 14th October the newspapers carried an item of news 
which caused the girl to collapse: ‘“T'here died yesterday in 
Copenhagen Maria Feodorovna, the mother of the last Czar 
of Russia, who was murdered in Ekaterinburg by the Bol- 
sheviks along with his family. She was 81 years old. To the 
last she believed that her son and his family had not been 
killed but banished to Siberia. No one was allowed to speak of 
the murders in her presence.” 


It was a dull February day in 1929 when Mr. Fallows re- 
appeared at Fairfield. His excellent good humour was in 
blatant contrast to the mood of the girl, who lay in bed, limp 
and sick, with eyes which glinted feverishly. The old wound 
at the elbow had reopened. 


238 


Fallows stood by her bed with a document in his right hand, 
like an angel come to save her with a laming sword. Miss Jen- 
nings stood beside him and her face glowed with pleasure. 

“We have done it, Your Highness,”” whispered Miss Jen- 
nings and with the words a faint smell of whisky came from 
her lips. “T'he company has been founded. Do you know what 
it is called? We have thought of a wonderful name! A name 
which will always remind us of what we are fighting for. It is 
called the Grandanor Corporation. Grandanor—short for 
Grand Duchess Anastasia Nikolayevna of Russia. Isn’t that 
wonderful, Your Highness?” 

The girl gave the ghost of a nod. 

The text of the agreement was cast in that high-sounding 
ofhicial jargon which serves to camouflage business matters. 
The lawyer’s voice droned monotonously over the sick girl. 

“This agreement was concluded on the seventh day of 
February 1929, between the Grand Duchess Anastasia Niko- 
layevna of Russia, widow of Alexander Tschaikovsky and 
daughter and sole surviving child of Czar Nicholas II of 
Russia and the Empress Alexandra of Russia, hereafter re- 
ferred to as ‘the vendor’ on the one hand, and the Grandanor 
Corporation, a company set up in accordance with the laws of 
the State of Delaware, having as its head oflice the Delaware 
Registration Trust Company, Wilmington, Delaware, and 
hereafter referred to as ‘the company’ on the other hand. 
Whereas the vendor owns the property described below and 
whereas the company has been founded in accordance with the 
laws of Delaware State with an agreed capital of 1,200 shares 
of nominal value, and whereas the company wishes...” 

Whereas, whereas, droned through the girl’s head and she 
shut her eyes and tried to understand what was being read to 
her. Once more the monotonous voice came to her: 

“. „it is therefore agreed between the vendor and the 
company as follows: ı. that the vendor has ceded, made over, 
sold, transferred and assigned to the company all rights, claims 


239 


and interest in the property set out below namely (a) all moneys 
and other property and all rights of any sort or description...” 

The girl forced herself to open her eyes; Fallows’ stony 
face and Miss Jennings’ triumphant smile swam before her. 

“. . „including in particular all and any moneys in the Bank 
of England .. .”” said the voice. 

The girl turned her head to one side. She could scarcely 
hear the individual words. Her thoughts wandered. Suddenly 
she felt that the voice was pleasant, comforting and soothing. 
Everything will be all right, she thought. He will do every- 
thing that is right and necessary. 

“... signed Edward Fallows, President,” said the lawyer, 
raising his voice solemnly. 

It was all over. He looked attentively at the girl. 

“There you have it, Madam. It is all perfectly regular and 
in accordance with the law. I take it that you were able to 
follow me. ’T'here can naturally be no doubts about it.” 

He folded the agreement so that the last page was upper- 
most. 

“If you will add your signature beside mine.” 

He laid the agreement on the bed-cover, unscrewed his 
fountain pen and handed it to her. 

“T shall hold you up, Your Highness,” said Miss Jennings 
triumphantly. She put her arm round the girl’s shoulders. 
“The shareholders are only waiting for your signature, Your 
Highness. Then they will make the money available. And 
Mr. Fallows will leave for Europe at once to begin investi- 
gations and clear everything up finally.” 

The girl stared at the pen and did not know how it had 
come into her hand. 

“Here, please,” said Fallows, tapping the spot left for her 
signature. 

“Are you going to Europe?” she whispered. 

“All arrangements have already been made, Madam.” 

Then she signed. 


240 


“Thank you, Madam.” Fallows gave a brief bow; then he 
quickly packed the document away in his briefcase and screwed 
the top on his pen. 

“You will understand that I am in a great hurry. I wish 
you most sincerely a good recovery.” 

The days became weeks and the weeks months. Once Miss 
Jennings said to the girl: ““Fallows has written from Berlin. 
A wonderful city, he says. He has already spoken to Frau von 
Rathlef. A very conscientious man, very. He is asking for 
money. Well, I reckon this sort of thing Speiz money. He says 
he hasn’t anything positive to report yet.” 

For a second Miss Jennings’ eyes rested gloomily and mis- 
trustfully on the girl. 

Another time she said: ““Fallows has written en Berlin. 
He has a nice house there. He has taken a room in the Hotel 
Bristol as his oflice. He has put a notice in the papers asking 
for people to come forward and give evidence. He is asking 
for more money.” 

Yet another time she said: “I am going to Paris, my dear. 
Write me a couple of lines for Prince Andreas and ask him to 
receive me. He must be a wonderful man. He married this 
dancer and gave up everything for love. And he is on your 
side, honey. Write a couple of lines for me. I have sent Fal- 
lows more money.” 

She went to Paris and returned to report, twittering with 
excitement: “T'he Grand Duke was heaven. A real old- 
fashioned gentleman. Our Mr. Fallows is perhaps no good 
after all. T'hey say he has a girl friend. She’s called Helene. 
But that wasn’t what I wanted to tell you. Something much 
worse. Frau von Rathlef has died, poor thing. Something 
abdominal. She found out about it too late. She had been Iying 
semi-conscious for days before they found her and took her to 
hospital. Isn’t that terrible? It was too late for an operation. 
And just fancy, someone broke into her house, She had hidden 
all her material on your case in a piece of sculpture. Inside it. 


They’re hollow, aren’t they? T'he men from the hospital who 
came to take her away found the sculpture broken in bits. 
The documents were gone. Fallows is in a terrible state. And 
he wants more money. I don’t know—after all I want to see 
something for my money. Don’t be too upset about Frau von 
Rathlef. I’Il write Fallows a stiff letter... .” 

The girl said hardly anything in reply but shut herself up to 
bear the pressure of her thoughts, of her paralysing fear and of 
time, which stretched out endlessly, devouringly. 

She had become a mere object on whose possible value the 
rise or collapse of the Grandanor Corporation depended. She 
had become a chattel of the Corporation and she felt it sub- 
consciously. Detectives guarded the country house at Con- 
necticut, for Miss Jennings had received threatening letters 
from which it emerged that kidnappers intended to carry off 
the corporation’s property, in the shape of the girl, and hand 
her back in return for a ransom. Fallows cost money; the 
detectives cost money; it cost money to keep the girl. Miss 
Jennings, the largest shareholder in the Corporation, began to 
wonder if it was really a good business deal she had got mixed 
up in. 

Then came the day when it became apparent that the girl 
was not an inanimate object. It began with a question, which 
she brought out casually and quietly. 

“Is Gleb a member ofthe Corporation too, Miss Jennings?” 

“But of course, honey.” 

"Then came the outburst and the final crash. 

“So he istoo. For him I am something to do business with. 
Yes, business! I know. You have bought me! You, Fallows 
and the rest of them! "These men outside there and in the 
corridor too. "T'hey are guarding me and keeping watch on me. 
What do you all want? You have got everything. What is Fal- 
lows doing in Berlin? Nothing! Has he been in Rumania? Has 
he found my child? I won’t stand it any more. I am going 
away. I want to be alone. Alone at last. Help? Who is going 


242 


to help me? Everyone says he is helping—but they only do it 
to help themselves. Go away, Miss Jennings, go away! Or 
let me go. I want to go away. Away—away!” She shrieked 
and stormed. She stood rigidly there with a delirious look in 
her eyes and trembling hands. Miss Jennings kept her head 
bent down; the girl’s onslaught left her untouched. She nar- 
rowed her eyes. 

“The agreement is a trick,” shrieked the girl. “It is invalid. 
I shall tear it up. I will throw it at your feet. You can’t keep 
me. You can’t do that. You have no right to.” 

“We can!” There was no twittering, bird-like note in Miss 
Jennings’ voice. She said the words softly and threateningly; 
then she turned about and left the room. ’T'he key turned in 
the door with a harsh click. The girl’s fists drummed on the 
panels. Her blows and cries rang through the house until all 
became quiet, except for the whimpering which came from 
her room. 

In the following night, about three in the morning, a van 
drove up. Annie B. Jennings opened the door and let two men 
come in. One of them had a strait-jacket. 

“Is she still violent?” 

Miss Jennings shrugged. 

“First floor, first door on the righe,r she said. 

“What’s her name? We need that for the records.” 

Miss Jennings hesitated for a moment. Then she said 
calmly: “Anna Anderson.” 


243 


22 


aaa a 222 2\2.2.2,.2.2.2.2.2.2.2.2.2 


In July 1931 a young American doctor appeared in Ilten. 
It is a small village near Hanover with one of the largest 
private hospitals for nervous and mental diseases in Germany. 
The young doctor said he was studying in Berlin and that 
he had been asked by friends in New York to see whether 
Ilten was suitable for a patient—a young woman from 
America. 

The doctor inspected the hospital, said they would hear 
further from him and went away. "I'wo weeks later a lawyer 
arrived from Paris. He turned out to be the European repre- 
sentative of the firm of Cotton, Franklin, Wright and Gor- 
don, 63 Wall Street, New York City. He said he had been 
asked to arrange an entry visa for Miss Anna Anderson, the 
young American, on whose behalf the doctor from Berlin had 
already been in Ilten; the object was to have Miss Anderson 
taken in asa patient. 

On 13th August the German Consulate in New York in- 
quired by cable whether all expenses for treatment at Ilten for 
a certain Miss Anna Anderson had been guaranteed. It would 
depend on the reply of the hospital whether permission to stay 
in Germany would be granted or not. On 17th August the 
branch of the Deutsche Bank in Hanover informed the hos- 
pital that the requisite sum had been paid through the National 
City Bank of New York. T'he hospital passed the information 
to the German Consulate in New York. On 22nd August it 
was announced by cable that Miss Anderson would reach 
Cuxhaven on 28th August in the Deutschland. 


244 


"T'he hospital sent a nurse to Cuxhaven. At nine in the even- 
ing the nurse was back in Ilten with a bony woman in nurse’s 
uniform and a shy, silent woman of about thirty. “This is 
Miss Anderson,” said the bony nurse. She murmured her own 
name indistinctly. Anna Anderson was taken to her room. 
Dr. Willige, one of the two specialists at Ilten, took the nurse 
into his office. 

“Would you kindly let me have the invalid’s papers,” 
he asked. The nurse handed him a passport without a 
word. 

“That too, thank you—but I mean, her case history.” 

"The nurse shook her head. 

“I have no papers.” She hesitated and then added: “But I 
expect that they will be sent on to you.” 

“Did you merely accompany the invalid on the voyage or 
did you attend to her in America? Where was she?” 

“I have known her for six months. I was not actually her 
nurse but I had a lot to do with her. She was in the ‘Four 
Winds’ Clinic at Katonah—that’s forty miles from New 
York. It is a private clinic—it doesn’t specialise in mental 
cases but they are taken in too.” 

“What does the patient suffer from?” 

“Paranoia—at least that is what I was told. She was there 
when I was engaged. I think she had been there more than a 
year.” 

“I hope the documents will come soon,” said Dr. Willige. 
“You might remind them. When are you going back to 
America?” 

“] am not going back. Iam going to Finland. ITam Finnish. 
I wanted to go home six weeks ago, but they asked me to wait 
till she was fit to travel. I naturally did so. I saved the fare 
that way.” 

Dr. Willige rose. 

“You must be tired. T'here is a bed ready for you in the 
nurses’ quarters. We can talk more tomorrow.” 


245 


“] am at your disposal,”” murmured the nurse and took her 
leave with a nod of the head. 

Next morning she had disappeared—gone without report- 
ing to the medical staff. T’he nurse’s scanty information, her 
sudden disappearance, her obvious avoidance of further ques- 
tioning, the lack of any case history and, along with that, the 
fuss before the patient arrived, all pointed to something out 
of the ordinary. Professor Willige went up to the woman’s 
room. 

“Good morning, Miss Anderson. Do you speak German?” 

“Yes, naturally.” 

He looked at her. She was pale and thin. "There was a frigh- 
tening flicker in her eyes, but her bearing was confident and 
relaxed, in strong contrast to her startled look. Her accent 
struck him. 

“You aren’t American, are you? You are Russian.” 

She gave a sidelong glance. 

“Is she gone?” she asked. 

He became attentive. 

“Who, the nurse?” 

“Yes, please tell me if she has gone.” 

“Are you afraid of her? Why?” 

“Is she gone?” she repeated obstinately. 

“Yes, she is gone. I found her way of taking leave strange, 
to say the least of it.” 

An expression of extraordinary relief crossed her face. Her 
weak smile seemed to say that she could breathe again. 

“I can well imagine that she has disappeared. 'T'his is not 
America. Here she is frightened—not I.” 

Professor Willige took a chair, drew it up to the bed and sat 
down. 

“You must explain some things to me,” he said calmly. She 
lay back on the pillows and stared at the ceiling. 

“Certainly, I will explain,” she answered. And then after 
a long pause, added: “Did she leave the passport?” 


f 246 


He put his hand in the pocket of his white coat. He had the 
passport there. 

“Yes, Miss Anderson.” 

Her lips twitched. 

* Anderson— that is not my name.” She turned her head to 
him. “Look and see if I signed it. You will see I did not sign.” 
He opened the passport. Where the signature should have 
been there wasa cross in ink. 

“A cross you see,” she said in a low voice. “I did not sign.” 

He shut the passport and put it away. 

““T'here is one more question I have to ask you then,” he 
said, “or do you want to tell me the whole story?” 

“I willtry. Fora while I have not been allowed to say what 
I thought. I prayed I would come back to Germany.” 

“You must promise me to stay quite quiet,” he said softly. 

“I will be quiet—1 have learned.” 

“T'he nurse spoke of a clinic—the ‘Four Winds’ in Ka- 
tonah. Why were you there? Do you know?” 

“There are a number of reasons,” she replied slowly. “ T'he 
people who sent me there, they say I’m not right in the head. 
I know another reason. You will think I am ill, doctor. I can- 
not say that Jam well— you can see that yourself.” 

“Tell me about Katonah.” 

“Itisa very simple story. It is a question of money, doctor. 
There was reason for people to think that I am worth a lot. 
"They make an agreement with me. I will explain about it all 
later. They made an agreement and I did not notice that I 
belonged to them as soon as I had signed. I was a thing and 
not a human being any more. Later I saw what had happened 
and wanted to annul the agreement. Naturally I shouted and 
raged. T'hat gave them a reason to shut me up in a madhouse. 
After all, a violent lunatic is dangerous to herself and to others, 
isn’t she? But I was not a danger to myself. Only for the 
others. I had to be put away because I wanted to challenge the 
agreement. T'hen I was away and they could say I was ill. A 


247 


sick woman cannot cancel an agreement she made when she 
was well. T'hat is a very simple sum to do.” 

He had listened calmly. For the moment he could not check 
whether what she said was true. It sufficed for him as a doctor 
that he had managed to make her speak. 

“You say your name is not Anderson. Who are you?” 

“You must have patients here who say they are Napoleon. 
Now you have a patient who says she is a Russian Grand 
Duchess. You may laugh, I am not cross. I only ask you to 
check on what I say. I am the Grand Duchess Anastasia 
Nikolayevna. I am the Czar’s daughter.” 

He suppressed any expression of surprise. He had heard the 
story of the unknown girl. "T'he papers had been full of the 
mysterious woman. He remembered reading that she had gone 
to America in 1928. 

“Naturally I shall check everything,” he replied. ‘“So you 
say it was your enemies who got you into this situation. Do 
you know that your enemies have paid out a lot of money for 
you? Your stay here is paid in advance for a year. Katonah 
must have cost a lot too. Enemies are not usually so generous.”” 

“I know what you think, doctor. I have thought a lot too. 
I have had plenty of time for it. More than a year I was shut 
up. My enemies are very friendly, doctor. Everything is legal. 
"They do everything through lawyers and strictly according to 
the law. Millions are at stake, doctor. Lawyers’ fees are not 
very big in comparison. "IT’he main thing is I have disappeared 
from the world and cannot speak.” 

Very calmly she told him her story from the beginning. 

“Always other people have wanted to help me,” she said. 
“Always they have flocked round me. "Then I wanted to help 
myselfand it ismy fault that I was caught and chained as never 
before. But I will fight against it no more or else I will really 
become mad. I want peace. Peace all to myself.” 

The professor rose. T'he patient lay pale and limp in bed. 
He looked at her. 


248 


“We shall see,” he said. 

“We have time, doctor, a lot of time. I am very patient. I 
have learned.” 

She stayed at Ilten ten months. 'The doctors observed 
her and came to the conclusion that she was not mentally ill. 
She was physically exhausted, she suffered from depressions, 
she was eccentric and tortured herself and others; but her 
mind was not ill. 

She still had the passport which had been made out in the 
name of Anna T'schaikovsky. 

“I called myself Anna Anderson,” she explained to the 
doctors, “when I was in a hotel for a short time in America. 
I had been in all the papers as Frau 'T'schaikovsky. Everyone 
knew that that wasthe Grand Duchess. So in the hotel I called 
myself Anderson. "That was how Miss Jennings thought of 
using the name.” 

Inquiries were made at the German Consulate in New 
York. It emerged that aNew York lawyer had turned up 
there with the passport in the name of Anderson and had had 
the visa issued. ’I’he passport had been issued by an American 
government ofhcial. On being asked, the oflicial replied that the 
lawyer had appeared there too, and asked for the document for 
his young companion, a young girl, whom he had introduced 
as Anna Anderson. 'T'hat was at a time when, as could be 
proved, the sick girl was confined in the clinic at Katonah. 

“They took a double along,” the sick woman told her doc- 
tors. ‘“T'he photograph in the passport—a blurred photograph 
—is of me. At Katonah they put the passport in front of me. 
It was all ready, only the signature was missing. T'hey said I 
must sign Anna Anderson. I refused. T'hen they said ‚they 
were taking me to Germany. They could not take me on my 
other passport because the permit to stay in America was out 
of date long ago. T'he officials would notice and ask questions. 
'Then they threatened I would never get back to Germany, 
but I could with the new passport. Because I wanted to get 


249 


” 


away from America quickly I made the cross, because I did 
not want to sign a name that does not belong to me.” 

She laughed bitterly. . 

“It is very funny what happens to me with ofhicials. Ofh- 
cials are so wonderful and perfect. "T’hey find out everything. 
They know everything about people and give them no peace. 
But with me, oflicials are not perfect. T’'hey never discover if 
I am perhaps the Polish woman, Schanzkovski, as they say. I 
was in Dalldorf. ’T’he police never found out who I am. At 
Seeon I got a passport in the name of T'schaikovsky, although 
I have no birth certificate and all the other things they want. 
And in America they gave me a passport in the name of An- 
derson. At the customs in America and at Cuxhaven they 
never wondered why there was only a cross as signature. 
These are your perfect ofhcials, doctor!” 

'The woman’s face remained a question-mark. ’I'he time 
when each day of her life led to new adventures was drawing 
to a close. The men and women who had played a röle in her 
life were left behind. 

Harriet von Rathlef was dead. "T'he Peuthert woman, who 
had begun it all in Dalldorf, had died mysteriously. Whether 
by murder, suicide, or a natural death, was never established. 

Knopf never again declared himself on the case. When he 
died, his friends said that he was convinced he had found the 
true solution when he stated that the mysterious woman was 
the Polish girl, Franziska Schanzkovski. 

Doris Wingender still lives in Berlin. She is a gay, frank 
woman who shakes her head when the puzzle is discussed. 
For her the mysterious woman is none other than Franziska 
Schanzkovski and if a problem exists for her at all it is how a 
simple country girl can still pull wool over people’s eyes. 

Chief Inspector Gruenberg died, full of years. T'o the end 
he collected such material on the case as he could lay hands on. 
He divided his views, most correctly, into two compartments. 
As a private citizen he was convinced to the end that the 


250 


woman was the true Grand Duchess Anastasia. As a police 
ofhicial he admitted that the evidence to hand was not sufficient 
to clear the case up once and for all. 

Gleb Botkin lives in a god-forsaken village called Kassville 
in the State of New Jersey. Kassville consists of a post oflice, 
a drugstore and a few houses for the place’s fifty inhabitants. 
"The man, of whom many people say that he interested him- 
self in the girl out of selfish motives, leads a strange life. Many 
people turn up their noses at him. He has founded a sect called 
“The Church of Aphrodite’. He has thirty followers. He 
dedicates himself to his cult fanatically and in solitude. His hut 
consists of one room. One corner is partitioned off; behind it 
there is a table—an altar on which there stands a life-size 
plaster model ofthe Venus of Milo. Botkin celebrates Mass in 
a robe he made himself out of red velvet with a golden fringe. 
His long beard, his piercing eyes, his sermons, in which he ab- 
Jures all gods and praises Aphrodite alone as the creator of all 
life and love, and his unfailing helpfulness in daily life have 
led the inhabitants of the village to see in him a holy man who 
is not so bad, even if he is very odd. If he is asked about the 
ınysterious woman he swears she is Anastasia. He can under- 
stand, he says, that she doesn’t want to have anything to do 
with him. T'he story of the Corporation must have made her 
think that he was only interested in speculation. But he 
assures people that he was convinced that the Corporation had 
tried to do the best for the girl. He has heard no more of Miss 
Jennings or of Fallows. He thinks Miss Jennings died a while 
ago and thinks he remembers reading the notice of her death. 

The woman who is now called Anna Anderson today lives 
in Unterlengenhardt in the Black Forest. She lives in a 
wooden hut; it is warped and rickety. She still finds friends 
who are convinced that she is the Czar’s daughter and help 
her. 

She has lived in Hanover and in Eisenach. In 1938 she 
applied to the Berlin lower courts to reach a judgment in the 


251 


matter of her identity. T'he courts considered the matter for 
years. In September 1941 it reached a conclusion: “.... that 
the petitioner is not the Grand Duchess Anastasia Romanov.” 
The evidence which points to her being the Grand Duchess 
is not strong enough for oflicialdom. And the evidence that she 
is Franziska Schanzkovski is not strong enough either. So she 
has become a human being who has no ofhcial existence. "T’he 
courts cannot deal with her and for oflicialdom she is a strange 
creature, whom they can see with their own eyes although, 
really and truly, according to the laws of the civilised world 
she ought not to exist. 

She lives a retired life. She often shows a charm which en- 
chants those few people whom she receives in her hut. She is 
often querulous and unbearable. 

She will be a living riddle until death settles all. 


252 


S 


249] 
#lsssL 
ER 


ale 


Ta 


Braer 


BER ITEER ZEN 


in 
BER Tele 
ER 


4 
verth # 


R 
a 


R 


wir 


hier) 
als 


2) 


KR 


Keen 


1% 


LI TEE? 
RN 
Kart 


Pre 
packte 


EIERN 


% 


BR 


Be 


So 


Hr 


ar 


Fe 


Hi 


” 


1% 
Aue 


[4 


Ei 


