Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  Hbrary  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  this  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  informing  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http  :  //books  .  google  .  com/| 


SUv  840, 


:i. 


I 


HARVARD 
COLLEGE 
LIBRARY 


O' 


/. 


.if— t? 


SOME  NEW  WORKS  IN 
FRENCH  LITERATURE 


JULIE    DE    LESPINASSE, 

Authorised  English  Version  from  the 
French  of  the  Marquis  de  S^gur, 
Membre  de  TAcad^mie  Fran9aise. 
Frontispiece  after  the  unique  Por- 
trait by  Carmontelle.  Demy  8vo, 
cloth,  7S.  6d.  net. 


MARIE     DE     MfiDICIS 

AND  THE  COURT  OF  FRANCE 
IN  THE  XVHTH  CENTURY. 
Authorised  English  Version,  trans- 
lated from  the  French  of  M.  Louis 
Batiffol  by  Mary  King,  under 
the  superintendence  of  H.  W.  C. 
Davis,  Fellow  of  Balliol  College. 
Oxford.  With  Collotype  Frontis- 
piece after  a  rare  engraving  of  the 
Queen  dated  i6oz.  Demy  8vo,  cloth, 
7S.  6d.  net.  [Shortly. 


MOLIERE:   a  Biography. 

By  H.  C.  Chatfield  Taylor. 
Introduction  by  Thomas  F.  Crane, 
Pi  of.  of  the  Romance  Languages  in 
Cornell  University.  With  lo  Plates 
after  designs  specially  prepared  for 
this  volume  by  Job.  Royal  8vo, 
buckram,  los.  6d.  net. 


JN  THE  KINCS  CLASSICS 

Small  x6ino(6X4i  ios.),gilt  tops,  photogravure 

frontispiece  :  half-bound  boanis,  is.  6d. ; 

quarter  vellum,  cloth,  2s.  6d. ;  special 

three-quarter  vellum,  Oxford 

sides,  5X. 

No.  II.  THE  ROMANCE  OF  FULK 
FITZ-WARINE.  Newly  Trans- 
lated from  the  Anglo-French  by 
Alice  Kemp  Welch.  Introduction 
by  Prof.  Brandin. 

No.  22.  EARLY  LIVES  OF  CHAR- 
LEMAGNE.  Translated  and  Edited 
by  A.  T.  Grant. 

No.  45.  THE  SONG  OF  ROLAND. 
Newly  Translated  from  the  Old 
French  by  Mrs.  Crossland.  Intro- 
duction by  Prof.  Brandin. 

London:    CHATTO  &  WINDUS 


THE    CURSE    OF    THE 
ROMANOVS 


Alexander  I  as  a  boy,  after  a  portrait  by  Lampy. 
Constantine  Pavlovilsh  as  a  boy.  after  a  portrait  by  Lampy. 


ISi 


t>» 


I    ill.     «•■    •    ^.W  ,       I  \l 


« 


jr 


13 


•         K 


f         .      » 


THi:  .  ::i<  ^  ^  ■;■    r^- ■  •  • 

«.■•  Ri>. :  . 
.\-  •■•  I  'J  -. 

1 


1   ' 
t 
1    . 


■     •     1 
> 


I  .  1  ■•  .  ■  . 


,  ■ ,  -XT  '"' ' 


I 


/ 


.»■ 


A 


1     I 


HE    CURSE    OF 
THE  ROMANOVS 

A  STUDY  OF  THE  LIVES  AND 
THE  REIGNS  OF  TWO  TSARS 
PAUL  I  AND  ALEXANDER  I 
OF  RUSSIA  :  1754-1825  :  BY 
ANGELO  S.  RAPPOPORT,  PH.D. 
PUBLISHED  AT  LONDON  BY 
CHATTO  &  WINDUS 
MCMVII 


lb 


JUi^<fUA>^^-^^^ 


All  rights  reserved 


Printed  by  Ballantynb,  Hanson  &*  Co. 
At  the  Ballantyne  Press,  Edinburgh. 


This  book  is  dedicated  to  the  memory 
of  the  noble  martyrs  who  have  fallen 
in  the  struggle  for  Russian  freedom 


^ 


PREFACE 


The  eyes  of  Europe  are  directed  towards  Russia, 
the  European  China,  where  the  scion  of  the  house 
of  Romanov  is  seated  on  his  tottering  throne, 
frightened  at  the  phantom  of  an  approaching  Revo- 
lution. Convulsively  he  is  clinging  to  the  throne 
of  his  ancestors,  reluctant  to  give  up  what  he  con- 
siders his  right.  But  has  Nicholas  II  a  right  to 
the  Russian  throne  ?  Yes,  the  right  of  the  usurper ! 
Michael  Romanov  was  elected  Tsar  of  Russia  by 
the  voice  of  the  nation,  but  Peter  I,  his  grandson, 
was  the  son  of  an  unknown  parent.  The  Tsar 
himself  knew  that  he  was  not  the  son  of  Alexis,  and 
one  day  he  asked  Count  Yaguzhinsky  to  tell  him 
whether  he  was  his  father.  The  Count,  however, 
replied  that  it  was  difficult  to  say,  as  the  Tsaritza 
had  so  many  lovers.  Elizabeth  may  or  may  not 
have  been  the  daughter  of  Peter  the  Great.  She 
was  in  any  case  the  daughter  of  Catherine  I,  a 
former  Livonian  servant.  The  legitimacy  of  Paul  I 
is  doubtful,  and  if  one  is  to  believe  the  confessions 
of  Catherine  1 1  he  was  not  a  Romanov. 

For  nearly  three  centuries  these  so-called 
Romanovs  have  ruled  over  Russia,  but  they  have 
remained  strangers  to  the  people  under  the  sway 
of  their  sceptre.  From  the  time  of  their  accession, 
there    has    been   an   ever-widening   gulf   between 


X  PREFACE 

Autocracy  and  the  Russian  nation.  It  is  the  doom 
of  Autocracy  not  to  work  hand  in  hand  with,  but 
against,  the  nation.  The  affectionate  bond  which 
unites  the  subjects  of  a  constitutional  country  such 
as  England,  for  instance,  with  their  sovereign,  is 
absent  in  the  land  of  the  Tsar.  Fear  takes  the  place 
of  loyalty.  The  Tsar  remains  an  alien  in  the  midst 
of  his  people.  He  is  not  one  of  them,  he  is  an 
usurper.  Ever  since  the  rise  of  the  power  of 
Moscow,  ever  since  the  first  development  of  Auto- 
cracy, the  rule  of  the  Tsars  has  appeared  to  the 
people  not  as  a  legitimate  government,  but  as  a 
foreign  tyranny,  as  the  incarnation  of  the  spirit 
of  Tshengis  Khan  and  Tamerlane,  imposing  laws 
by  ukases  and  knouts.  The  subjects  in  Russia 
owe  everything  to  the  ruler,  but  the  latter  owes 
nothing  to  his  subjects.  The  Tsar  can  dispose  of 
his  throne  as  he  pleases,  he  may  even  change  the 
form  of  government,  he  may  rule  despotically  and 
he  may  grant  a  constitution.     "  The  Tsar  giveth 

and  the  Tsar  taketh,  the  name  of  the  Tsar  be ." 

That  is  the  difference  between  the  history  of  con- 
stitutional countries  and  that  of  Autocracy.  The 
histories  of  Windsor  Castle  and  of  the  Tower 
are  full  of  hideous  reminiscences  and  of  bloody 
deeds  ;  the  walls  of  the  Louvre  and  the  Escurial 
could  tell  a  terrible  tale  or  two ;  but  the  ensemble 
of  English,  French,  and  Spanish  dynasties  in  their 
records  represent  the  history  of  a  nation,  whilst 
the  records  of  Russia  are  nothing  else  but  a  history 
of  slavery.  **The  idea  of  a  powerful  Autocracy 
is  the  idea  of  slavery,"  wrote  Alexander  Hertzen. 
The  sovereigns  of  the  house  of  Romanov  have 
done   nothing  for   the   people.     The   latter  think 


PREFACE  xi 

of  their  rulers  in  connection  only  with  their  mis- 
fortunes, with  oppression,  war,  military  colonies, 
police,  prisons,  Schluesselburg,  Siberia,  the  mines, 
tortures,  and  the  knout.  And  it  is  also  the  doom 
of  Autocracy  that  even  its  attempts  at  liberalism 
should  be  frustrated.  Autocracy,  I  do  not  hesitate 
to  maintain,  must  be  the  enemy  of  the  people  or 
Autocracy  would  cease  to  exist,  but  the  logical  result 
of  its  attitude  will  one  day  be  its  annihilation. 
Sooner  or  later  assassination  is  the  inevitable  fate 
of  the  ruler  whose  oppression  becomes  unbearable, 
as  in  the  case  of  Paul  I,  whilst  disappointment 
and  a  return  to  reactionary  measures  is  the  result 
of  all  liberal  attempts  on  the  part  of  Autocracy, 
as  in  the  case  of  Alexander  I.  Paul  I  and  Alex- 
ander I,  the  subjects  of  the  present  study,  are 
two  typical  examples  of  the  fate  of  the  Romanovs. 
They  either  remain  faithful  to  the  spirit  of  Auto- 
cracy, and  assassination  stares  them  in  the  face, 
or  they  inaugurate  an  era  of  liberalism,  but  finding 
that  they  thus  undermine  their  own  existence,  they 
turn  reactionaries  and  lose  their  mental  balance, 
as  in  the  case  of  Alexander. 

This  is  the  Curse  of  the  Romanovs.  For  it  is  a 
dynasty  ruling  over  a  nation  against  the  interests  of 
the  nation.  The  interests  of  the  reigning  house 
cannot  fail  to  clash  with  those  of  the  people.  All 
attempts  on  the  part  of  Autocracy  to  grant  liberal 
institutions  to  the  country  must  therefore,  as  I  have 
pointed  out,  unavoidably  end  in  a  fiasco  and  in  a 
farce.  Such  was  the  case  of  Alexander  I,  and  such 
is  that  of  Nicholas  II.  Alexander  I,  the  dreamer 
of  Republics,  crushed  the  aspirations  of  Poland  and 
Greece   and   suppressed  the   liberal  movement  in 


xii  PREFACE 

his  own  country,  and  Nicholas  II,  whilst  pretending 
to  grant  a  constitution  to  Russia,  instituted  courts- 
martial.  He  has  granted  his  subjects  the  right  to  die. 
Every  Russian  enjoyed  for  some  time  the  privilege 
of  being  arrested,  tried,  and  sentenced  to  death 
within  twenty-four  hours,  and  promptly  executed. 
Of  course,  nominally  this  privilege  was  only  granted 
to  "revolutionaries,"  but  the  Russian  Government 
applied  this  term  in  a  very  liberal  and  generous 
manner.  One  need  not  have  thrown  a  bomb  or 
fired  a  revolver  to  be  court-martialled.  Among  re- 
volutionaries and  enemies  of  the  Government  were 
counted,  not  only  Zenaida  Konopliannikof,  who  shot 
General  Minn,  but  also  the  majority  of  the  members 
of  the  Douma,  who  signed  the  Manifesto  of  Vyborg, 
all  those  who  dared  to  ask  citizen  rights,  nay  ele- 
mentary human  rights,  for  their  countrymen  whom 
they  represented.  And  yet  only  a  few  months  ago 
M.  Stolypin — with  a  sang-froid  which  I  really  ad- 
mire— declared  to  a  French  journalist,  M.  Ludovic 
Naudeau,  that  the  Russian  Government  ''  does  not 
and  will  never  prosecute  anybody  for  his  political 
opinions,  but  it  does  and  will  prosecute  all  those  who 
propagate  revolutionary  ideas  and  commit  revolu- 
tionary acts."  This  declaration  is  certainly  amusing 
for  its  sanS'gine^  but  in  any  case  it  clearly  indicates 
the  decision  of  the  Government  to  muzzle  and  pro- 
scribe all  revolutionaries  and  progressionists.  And 
who  are  the  revolutionaries  ?  All  those  whom  the 
Government  chooses  to  designate  as  such  ;  in  other 
words,  all  those  who  are  in  the  way  of  Tsardom, 
and  who  either  do  not  further  its  work  or  who  re- 
fuse obediently  and  submissively  to  accept  its  laws 
and  orders.     The  courts-martial  were  instituted  in 


PREFACE  xiii 

the  interest  of  order  and  peace.  Thus  it  is  quite 
comprehensible  that  whilst  one  crime  was  severely 
punished  by  the  court-martial,  another  was  very 
indulgently  treated  :  whilst  the  girl,  Mile.  Shakerman, 
who  threw  a  bomb  at  an  official  Poltavtshenko, 
because  he  had  taken  part  in  the  massacres  of  the 
Jews,  but  missed  him,  was  hanged,  the  murderer  of 
Herzenstein  went  free ;  whilst  any  one  expressing  a 
liberal  idea  was  immediately  arrested,  the  reactionary 
bands  were  enjoying  full  freedom  of  speech ;  whilst  the 
ex-deputies  of  the  Douma  who  signed  the  Vyborg 
Manifesto  were  being  prosecuted,  M.  Dobruvin,  the 
leader  of  the  League  of  Russian  men,  affiliated  to 
the  Black  hundreds,  was  invited  to  lunch  by  General 
Kaulbars,  complimented  and  followed  to  the  station 
by  a  crowd  of  300  people  to  whom  he  addressed  the 
following  words  :  **  We  have  made  up  our  minds  to 
exterminate  the  enemies  of  Russia.  Friends,  you 
know  where  to  find  them.  Down  with  the  revolu- 
tionaries and  the  Jews." 

One  must  indeed  be  an  extraordinary  optimist 
to  continue  to  see  things  in  a  roseate  light,  and  a 
still  greater  optimist  to  expect  reforms,  liberty,  and 
progress  from  the  Russian  Government.  Such 
hopes  are  built  upon  the  quicksand  of  Tsardom. 
Although  the  Government  freely  uses  the  words 
liberty  and  rights,  in  a  vague  manner,  all  the 
promises  tumble  down  like  a  house  of  cards  when 
some  more  precise  definition  of  these  terms  is 
attempted.  Two  Doumas  have  been  dissolved,  and 
there  will  be  no  difficulty  in  dissolving  another. 
In  other  words,  either  the  Douma  will  do  whatever 
Tsardom  commands,  and  approve  such  reforms  as 
the  Government  may  think  fit  to  institute,  in  order 


XIV  PREFACE 

to  strengthen  its  own  power,  or  the  Douma  will  be 
dispersed.  And  what  reforms  may  be  expected  ? 
If,  as  long  as  the  liberals  and  revolutionaries 
seemed  to  possess  some  influence,  the  Government 
only  vaguely  promised  but  never  kept  its  promises, 
it  is  absurd  to  expect  anything  when  it  will  have 
entirely  gained  the  upper  hand.  Is  it  reasonable 
to  imagine  that  after  courts-martial,  shooting  and 
hanging,  flogging  and  sending  to  Siberia  have 
exterminated  a  large  number  of  liberals  and  re- 
volutionaries, and  frightened  many  more  into 
speechlessness,  when  by  such  means  of  persecution, 
as  were  and  still  are  employed,  all  those  in  Russia 
who  had  decided  to  fight  Autocracy  will  have  been 
reduced  to  silence — Autocracy  will  grant  a  constitu- 
tion and  a  popular  government  ? 

There  is  a  certain  sense  of  mockery,  of  con- 
tradiction and  incongruity  in  all  liberal  attempts 
emanating  from  Autocracy.  And  indeed  all  constitu- 
tional attempts  in  Russia,  from  the  times  of  Michael 
Romanov  to  those  of  Nicholas  II,  have  ended  in 
failure.  There  are  only  two  alternatives  for  the 
future  of  Russia  :  the  disappearance  of  the  house  of 
Romanov- Soltykov-Holstein-Gottorp  as  a  reigning 
family,  or  the  continuation  of  a  rule  of  slavery.  I 
confess  that  I  hope  fate  will  decide  in  favour  of 
the  first  alternative. 

As  for  the  sources  upon  which  the  present  study 
is  based,  I  have  enumerated  them  in  the  appended 
Bibliography.  The  facts  have  been  more  especially 
collected  from  the  Sbornik,  the  Archives  of  Prince 
Voronzov,  and  the  Russian  Archives  and  Russian 
Antiquities.  I  have  endeavoured  to  sketch  the 
history  of  two  rulers  of  the  house  of  Romanov,  and 


PREFACE  XV 

to  show  that  both  the  rule  of  oppression  and  that  of 
liberalism  ended  in  assassination  and  failure  respec- 
tively.    Caveant  Cansules. 

I  cannot  terminate  these  preliminary  remarks 
without  expressing  my  sincerest  thanks  to  my 
friend  W.  Teignmouth-Shore,  who  kindly  read 
some  of  the  final  proofs,  and  to  Miss  M.  Edwardes, 
for  her  valuable  assistance. 

London,  June  1907. 


I 


"A 


CONTENTS 


PART    I:    PAUL  I 
CHAPTER  I 

FROM  THE  COLOSSEUM  TO  THE  KREMLIN 

Crime  and  insanity — Genius  and  folly  on  the  throne — Rome 
and  St.  Petersburg — Roman  Caesars  and  Russian  Tsars — 
Tyrants  and  assassins — The  curse  of  the  Romanovs    . 


PAGE 


CHAPTER    II 

THE   BIRTH   OF   A    TYRANT 

The  successors  of  Peter  I— Elizabeth  Petrovna — Peter  1 1 1,  the 
unwashed  Emperor — The  Grand  Duchess  Catherine  and 
her  lovers — Paul's  paternity — He  is  not  a  Romanov — His 
education — Panin  appointed  tutor  of  the  Prince  ...      22 


CHAPTER   HI 

MOTHERHOOD  AND  AMBITION 

The  death  of  Elizabeth — Peter  III — He  is  assassinated  at 
Ropsha — Impression  produced  on  Paul — Catherine  and 
d'Alembert— Paul's  education — His  tutors,  Panin  and 
Poroshin — Paul's  amorous  disposition — He  is  encouraged 
by  Catherine  and  Orlov — His  sweetheart  Vera— Paul's  mili- 
tary studies — Estimate  of  Paul's  character — Inoculation  for 
small-pox — Dr.    Dimsdale's  visit   to   Russia — Catherine's 

feigned  affection  for  her  son 33 

xvii  b 


4 


xviii  CONTENTS 

CHAPTER  IV 

THE  MARRIAGE  OF  HAMLET 


FAGB 


Paul's  first  liaison — Semeon  Velikij — ^Asseburg,  the  matrimonial 
agent — Princess  Wilhelmina  of  Darmstadt — The  bride  is 
coming — Paul  foils  in  love  with  his  fiancee — The  nuptial 
ceremony — The  appointment  of  General  Soltykov  as  per- 
sonal attendant  on  the  Prince — Conspiracy  to  put  Paul  on 
the  throne — The  revolt  of  Pougatshev — Catherine's  visit 
to  Moscow — Popularity  of  Paul — Catherine  mistrusts  her 
daughter-in-law — The  Empress's  pilgrimage  to  the  Convent 
of  Saint  Sergius — The  death  of  the  Grand  Duchess — Andr^ 
Razoumovsky — Various  rumours 67 


CHAPTER   V 

LOVE   IN  A  PALACE;  OR,  THE  LOVE  LETTERS 

OF  A  PRINCESS 

Paul's  second  marriage — The  guilt  of  his  late  wife — Une  liaison 
iris  innocente — Princess  Sophia  Dorothea  of  Wiirtemberg 
— Her  delight  at  the  splendid  prospect — Paul  journeys  to 
Berlin — Description  of  the  bride  by  Madame  d'Oberkirch — 
Paul  falls  in  love  with  the  bride-elect — Love  letters  of  a 
Princess — The  character  of  the  new  Grand  Duchess- 
Catherine  jealous  of  her— The  birth  of  Alexander        .        .      94 


CHAPTER  VI 

THE  JOURNEY  OF  THE  COUNT  AND  COUNTESS 

DU  NORD 

Paul  and  his  wife  go  abroad — Joseph  II — Paul's  letter  to  Arch- 
bishop Platon — Sir  James  Harris's  despatches — Panin's 
intrigues — Paul  and  his  wife  met  by  King  Stanislaus — The 
Austrian  Emperor's  letter  to  his  brother — The  Grand  Duke 
and  Duchess  visit  Italy — They  proceed  to  France — Recep- 
tion at  Versailles — Marie  Antoinette — The  visit  to  Brussels 
— Paul's  mysterious  tale— The  ghost  of  Peter  I — The  return 
home — Cold  reception — Orders  relating  to  the  dresses  of 
the  ladies  at  Court — Catherine  endeavours  to  annoy  the 
Grand  Duchess in 


CONTENTS  xix 

CHAPTER  VII 
THE  SWEDISH  CAMPAIGN 


PAGB 


The  death  of  Panin — Paul  grows  sullen — Catherine's  oration 
over  the  grave  of  Panin — The  education  of  the  Princes 
Alexander  and  Constantine — Laharpe — The  Grand  Duke's 
desire  to  join  the  army — The  Empress  makes  him  a  present 
of  the  estate  of  Gatshina — Paul's  isolation — His  amusements 
— Maria  F^odorovna  and  Mamonov,  Catherine's  favourite 
— The  jealousy  of  an  old  woman — Catherine's  journey  to 
Tauris — Paul's  views  on  the  Russiaxi  military  forces — His 
departure  for  the  army — His  pathetic  letter  to  his  wife  149 

CHAPTER   VIII 

THE  HAMLET  OF  GATSHINA 

Count  de  S^gur  visits  the  Grand  Duke— Interesting  conversa- 
tion— Change  in  Paul's  character — His  marotte  militaire — 
Rostoptshin's  letters — Paul  is  working  out  his  programme — 
The  Grand  Duke's  pecuniary  troubles — The  affection  exist- 
ing between  Paul  and  his  wife  is  lessened — Mile.  N^lidov — 
The  French  Revolution — Impression  on  Paul — Catherine's 
plan  to  exclude  her  son  from  the  throne       .        .        .        .169 

CHAPTER  IX 

L'lMP^RATRICE  EST  MORTE,  VIVE  L'EMP^REUR 

The  death  of  Catherine — Paul's  feeling  of  joy — Hamlet  among 
the  grave-diggers — The  funeral  of  Peter  III — The  son 
reconciles  his  parents — Follies  and  wise  \aiVfS— La  guerre  ait 
chapeau  rond— The  men  of  Gatshina  .        .  .181 

CHAPTER  X 

A   MODERN   CALIGULA 

Campaign  against  round  hats — Paul's  marotte  militaire — Tour- 
genev's  Memoirs — The  men  of  Gatshina — Changes  and 
reforms — Ill-treatment  of  courtiers  and  officers — Paul's 
helpers — His  love  for  pomp  and  ceremony — Coronation 
solemnities — The  Tsar  mistrusts  his  wife  and  best  friends — 
Mile.  N^lidov — Paul's  foreign  policy — Souvarov's  campaign 
in  Italy — Paul's  admiration  for  Napoleon    .        .        .        •193 


^ 


XX  CONTENTS 

CHAPTER  XI 
L'EMP^REUR  EST  FOU.    THE  DEED   IS  DONE 


PACK 


Period  of  terrorism — Paul  is  mad — Opinions  of  Russian  states- 
men— The  mad  captain — Conspiracy  to  depose  Paul — 
Panin  and  Pahlen — Alexander's  consent — Paul's  suspicion 
— Whitworth  accused  of  conspiring  against  Paul — Maria 
•^  F^odorovna  is  aware  of  the  conspiracy — Paul's  last  days — 
The  night  of  the  assassination  —  //  est  txchevi — Paul's 
character 224 


PART    II:    ALEXANDER   I 
CHAPTER  XII 

THE   BIRTH   OF  ALEXANDER 

Catherine's  joy  at  the  birth  of  her  grandson— Her  letters 
to  Grimm — Alexander's  early  education — Grandmamma's 
A  B  C — Catherine's  grand-children — The  Imperial  babies 
— Alexander's  teachers — Laharpe  the  Republican — Lessons 
in  history— Catherine's  instructions 251 

CHAPTER  XIII 

THE  MARRIAGE  OF  ADONIS 

Roumyanzev  sent  to  Carlsruhe — The  two  Princesses — Princess 
Louisa  (Elizabeth)— Catherine  delighted — The  Imperial 
Don  Juan — Plan  to  exclude  Paul  from  the  throne — 
Laharpe's  views — Adam  Czartorysky  and  Alexander  meet 
in  the  gardens  of  the  Taurida  Palace — Alexander's  dreams 
and  aspirations 290 

CHAPTER   XIV 

"SIRE,  VENEZ   R^GNER" 

Alexander  awaiting  the  result  of  the  conspiracy  against  his 
fiither — His  grief  and  remorse — Attitude  of  Maria  F^dor- 
ovna — First  years  of  Alexander's  reign — Coronation — 
Universal  joy — Reforms  and  benevolent  administration — 
The  Secret  Council — New  code  of  laws — Educational 
establishments  and  universities — The  Coalition — Ill-feeling 
towards  France 306 


CONTENTS  xxi 

CHAPTER  XV 

THE  SON  OF  THE  REVOLUTION  AND  THE 
FIRST  GENTLEMAN  OF  EUROPE 


PAGB 


Napoleon's  victories — The  meeting  of  the  two  Emperors — The 
raft  on  the  Niemen — Tilsit  and  Erfurt — Plans  for  the 
partition  of  the  world — War  between  France  and  Russia 
— Napoleon  at  Dresden — The  burning  of  Moscow — Alex- 
ander's appeal  to  the  European  nations — The  entry  of  the 
Allies  into  Paris — The  Congress  of  Vienna — Second  entry 
of  the  Allies  into  Paf  is .        .    326 


CHAPTER  XVI 

THE  MYSTICISM   OF  CiESAR 

The  Holy  Alliance — Alexander's  conversation  with  Dr.  Eylert 
— Laharpe's  apology  of  the  Holy  Alliance — Madame 
Kruedener — Meeting  between  Alexander  and  Madame 
Kruedener — Text  of  treaty  of  the  Holy  Alliance  .  .    356 


CHAPTER  XVII 
FINITA  LA  COMMEDIA— THE  MYSTERIOUS  END 

Alexander's  friends  —  Michael  Speransky  —  Araktsheev,  the 
Pobiedonostzev  of  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth  cen- 
tury —  Alexander's  reactionary  tendencies  —  Spread  of 
liberalism  in  Russia — Secret  societies — The  assassination 
of  Kotzebue  —  Mutiny  of  the  Semeonovsky  regiment  — 
Magnitzky  —  Alexander's  private  life  —  His  world- weari- 
ness— Domestic  life — The  Empress  Elizabeth — Madame 
Narishkin  —  Alexander's  daughter  Sophia — Illness  of 
Empress  Elizabeth  —  Journey  to  Taganrog  —  Illness  of 
Alexander  and  death  —  Letter  of  Elizabeth  to  Maria 
F^dorovna  —  Rumour  relating  to  Alexander's  death  — 
Feodor  Kousmitsh  —  Alexander's  character  :  "  a  lucky 
accident" 370 


ILLUSTRATIONS 


ALEXANDER   I   AS  A   BOY  ....       Frontispiece 

After  a  portrait  by  Lampy 

CONSTANTINE  PAVLOVITSH  AS  A  BOY     . 
After  a  portrait  by  Lampy 

PAUL   I To  face  page     22 

After  a  portrait  in  the  possession  of  the  Academy 
of  Science  in  St,  Petersburg 

COUNT  N.  J.  PANIN „  31 

From  an  engraving  by  Radig 

GRAND     DUCHESS     NATALIA     ALEX- 

EEVNA „  74 

After  a    portrait    in    the    Romanov    Gallery 
in  the  Winter  Palace 

EMPRESS   MARIA  F^ODOROVNA    .  „  104 

After  a  portrait  by  Lampy 

CATHERINE   II    IN   OLD  AGE  ...  „  178 

After  an  aquarelle  bv  S,  S,  Solomko 

MANIFESTO      OF     PAUL     I     ON      HIS 

ACCESSION „  186 

EMPEROR      PAUL      LIBERATES      KOS- 
CIUSZKO       AND       THE        POLISH 

PRISONERS „  187 

From  an  engraving  by  Orlovsky 

MADEMOISELLE     CATHARINE     IVAN- 

OVNA  N^LIDOV  (in   1776)  .  „  214 

After  a  portrait  at  the  Court  of  Peterhoj 

xxiii 


xxiv  ILLUSTRATIONS 

PRINCESS    ANNA     PETROVNA     GAGA- 

RENA To  face  page    218 

After  a  portrait  in  possession  of  Prince  P,  A, 
Golitein 

COUNT  IVAN   PAVLOVITSH  KOUTAYS- 

SOV „  220 

After  an  aquarelle  belonging  toE.  A,  VsevoloehsJ^ 

COUNT    GENERAL    ALEXANDER    VAS- 

SILIEVITSH   SOUVAROV      ...  „  222 

PAUL   I   IN   1798 „  224 

After  a  portrait  by  Stshoukin 

COUNT  PETER  ALEXEEVITSH  PAHLEN  „  233 

After  a  portrait  by  Kugelcken 

GENERAL  BENNIGSEN       ....  „  244 

After  a  drawing  by  Cook 

ALEXANDER   I „  251 

After  the  Bust  by  Houdon 

F.  C.   DE  LA  HARPE „  274 

EMPRESS  ELIZABETH  ALEXEEVNA      .  „  292 

After  the  portrait  by  Monier 

PRINCE  ADAM   CZARTORYSKY  „  302 

After  an  engraving  by  Soliman 

COUNT    ALEXIUS    ANDREEVITSH   AR- 

AKTSHEEV „  324 

After  a  drawing  by  Outkin 

MICHAEL    MICHAELOVITSH    SPERAN- 

SKY „  372 

After  an  engravins^  by  Wright 

THE   DEATH   OF  ALEXANDER   I    .        .  „  398 

After  the  engraving  by  T,  JCoulakov,  1837 

GRAND  DUKE  NICHOLAS  PAVLOVITSH  „  402 

After  a  portrait  by  Benner 


PART   I 


PAUL     I 


THE    CURSE    OF    THE 

ROMANOVS 


CHAPTER   I 

FROM  THE  COLOSSEUM  TO  THE  KREMLIN 

"  God  is  Tsar  in  heaven, 
The  Tsar  is  God  on  earth." 

— Russian  Proverb, 

Crime  and  insanity — Genius  and  folly  on  the  throne — Rome  and  St.  Peters- 
burg— Roman  Caesars  and  Russian  Tsars — ^Tyrants  and  assassins — The 
curse  of  the  RomanoTs. 

Sad  and  gloomy  is  the  picture  which  the  Rome  of 
the  Emperors  offers  to  the  student  of  history. 
Looking  back  from  modern  times  upon  the  remote 
past,  we  are  somewhat  astonished  to  see  millions, 
whose  ancestors  were  the  ''viri  antiqui  et  vere 
Romania'  submitting  to  the  tyranny  of  a  single  in- 
dividual whose  exploits,  in  the  case  of  an  ordinary 
mortal,  would  meet  with  death  at  the  hand  of  the 
executioner.  The  whims  and  fancies  of  criminals, 
idiots,  and  imbeciles,  wearing  the  purple,  were  law 
to  the  Roman  masses  ;  for  the  criminal  or  imbecile 
was  the  all-powerful,  almighty  Emperor.  About 
his  madness  men  only  dared  to  whisper  with 
pale  cheek  and  trembling  lip;  his  crimes  were 
loudly  styled  acts  of  supreme  justice;  his  mad 
pranks    were    praised   as   deeds   dictated    by    the 


J 


4    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

wisdom  and  benevolence  of  a  great  ruler.  He  was 
the  Caesar,  before  whom  all  human  beings  were 
but  shrinking,  kneeling  slaves. 

And  yet  only  a  short  span  of  time,  a  century 
and  a  half,  separates  us  from  the  period  when  a 
vast  European  Empire  was  ruled  in  a  similar 
manner,  when  numerous  millions  were  oppressed, 
worked  to  death,  sent  to  mines  and  into  exile, 
knouted  and  beheaded,  at  the  absolute  will  and 
mercy  of  modern  Caesars — the  Tsars  of  Russia. 
Tyrants,  prostitutes,  degenerates,  imbeciles  and 
lunatics,  ruled  the  destinies  of  nations,  and,  as  once 
the  Caesars  in  Rome,  the  Tsars  and  Tsaritzas  of  St. 
Petersburg  had  only  to  lift  their  finger  to  see  their 
slightest  whims  fulfilled.  The  life  and  goods  of 
the  highest  dignitary  of  State  no  less  than  the  miser- 
able existence  of  the  most  wretched  moujik  were  at 
the  mercy  of  the  master.  All-mighty,  all-power- 
ful Caesars  and  Tsars !  To  venture  to  criticise  you 
meant  death,  to  appear  to  disobey  you  worse  than 
death.  You  spoke,  and  the  world  was  hushed  ;  you 
frowned,  and  proud  and  valiant  men  bowed  their 
heads,  cowed  before  your  gaze ;  you  grew  angry,  and 
millions  trembled  before  your  mighty  wrath.  You 
smiled  the  smile  of  an  imbecile,  and  fawning  cour- 
tiers, cringing  slaves,  prostrated  themselves  before 
you,  singing  **  Hosannah  "  to  the  most  benevolent 
ruler  on  earth !  you  are  the  Elect  of  the  Gods  whom 
you  represent  on  earth ;  you  are  the  "  anointed  of 
the  Lord,"  the  "  shadow  of  God  on  earth,"  and  '*  Not 
all  the  water  in  the  rough  rude  sea  can  wash  the 
balm  from  an  anointed  king"  (Richard  II).  You 
are  never  unjust,  never  unkind,  never  cruel,  for  you 
are  the  representatives  of  Providence  on  earth,  and 


FROM  COLOSSEUM   TO   KREMLIN     5 

Providence,  religion  teaches  us,  is  always  kind 
and  benevolent,  even  when  it  appears  cruel  and 
malicious  to  men.  And  just  as  we  cannot  under- 
stand the  ways  of  Providence,  so  are  we  unable 
to  fathom  your  ways.  Everything  is  allowed  to 
you,  and  the  life  and  death  of  your  subjects  is  in 
your  hands.  Millions  must  readily  die  for  you,  so 
as  to  spare  you  the  slightest  inconvenience.  Your 
cruelty  is  termed  justice,  your  obstinacy  firmness, 
your  weakness  clemency,  your  passionate  wrath 
righteous  indignation,  your  debaucheries  exces- 
sive love  of  the  beautiful  or  political  wisdom. 
Augustus  committed  many  adulteries,  said  his 
friends,  not  out  of  lust  and  voluptuousness,  but  in 
order  to  learn  from  the  wives  the  secret  plans  of 
their  husbands.^ 

If  CaesaFs  wife  is  above  suspicion,  much  more 
is  Caesar  so.  But  you  are  not  only  sacred,  divine, 
august,  but  also  very  clever.  You  make  a  feeble 
attempt  at  an  insipid  joke  and  the  world  is  con- 
vulsed with  laughter.  You  nod  or  slightly  touch 
your  hat  to  vast  crowds  and  you  are  proclaimed 
paragons  of  kindness  and  condescension.  Your 
facial  expression  betrays  a  gloomy  frame  of  mind, 
and  commiseration  is  at  once  felt  for  your  worries, 
for,  as  Atlas  of  yore  who  carried  the  world,  you 
have  to  carry  on  your  shoulders  the  cares  and 
troubles  of  millions  of  your  beloved  subjects. 

What  wonder,  therefore,  degenerates  that  you 
were,  with  the  germs  of  insanity  lurking  like  a 
hidden  worm  in  your  brain,  if,  intoxicated  by  your 
omnipotence,  your  actions  and  conduct  soon  became 
those   of   madmen,    unchecked   and    uncontrolled. 

^  Cf,  Suetonius,  Aug.  LXIX. 


6    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

Weak-minded  creatures  that  you  were,  you  easily 
fell  victims  to  an  intellectual  alcoholism  or  the 
Cesarean  insanity. 

Must  it  not  logically  follow  that  if  everything 
a  man  does  or  says  or  thinks  is  good,  great, 
noble,  right,  just,  and  wise,  never  bad,  never 
miserable,  and  that  if  he  is  never  wicked,  never 
wrong,  unjust,  or  cruel,  he  must  gradually  lose 
every  conception  and  sense  of  difference  between 
justice  and  injustice,  between  good  and  evil,  be- 
tween right  and  wrong,  unless  he  is  armed  with  a 
deep  contempt  for  humanity  and  with  a  powerful 
and  unshakable  personality?  Ignorant  as  he  is  of 
danger  and  privation,  of  pain,  physical  and  moral, 
how  can  he  help  falling  a  victim  to  his  whims  and 
fancies  or  fail  to  grow  furious  at  the  slightest 
opposition?  Yet,  unable  to  govern  himself,  he 
nevertheless  pretends  to  be  able  to  govern  and  rule 
millions,  empires,  and  the  world ;  scarcely  master  of 
his  own  will  he  continues,  however,  to  be  the 
absolute  master  of  the  wills  of  millions. 

The  irritability  of  the  degenerate,  of  the  men- 
tally diseased,  who  is  seized  with  fits  of  megalo- 
mania, which  suffer  no  criticism  and  brook  no  con- 
tradiction, leads  to  systematic  cruelty  if  it  is  not 
checked,  and  it  is  disastrous  if,  on  the  contrary,  it 
is  accompanied  by  the  unlimited  power  of  Tsar  or 
Caesar.  In  ordinary  men  their  wills,  their  whims 
and  fancies,  their  manias,  are  checked  and  controlled 
by  the  will  of  others,  by  law  and  by  society.  There 
are  prison  cells,  lunatic  asylums,  strait-jackets,  for 
the  ordinary  mortal  who  grows  diseased,  loses  his 
balance  and  strikes  out  in  his  wild  strength,  but 
there  is  but  slight  control  for  the  idiot  or  madman 


FROM   COLOSSEUM   TO   KREMLIN     7 

on  a  throne,  at  any  time  and  in  any  country.  It 
did  not  and  does  not  exist  at  all  for  the  Caesars  and 
for  the  Tsars.  Who,  indeed,  has  ever  dared  to  doubt 
aloud  the  soundness  of  their  minds?  Who  has 
dared  to  dam  the  current  of  their  anger  or  check 
their  mad  outbursts  which  lash  the  smooth  exist- 
ence of  their  subjects  into  foam-crested  waves  and 
break  and  ruin  everything  before  them  ?  There  is 
no  law,  no  power  to  oppose  their  will.  On  the 
contrary,  they  are  supported  by  the  abject  adoration 
of  their  entourage,  and  woe  unto  him  who  shows  the 
slightest  inclination  not  to  be  submissive.  Crowds 
of  slaves  surrounding  the  throne  are  constantly 
singing  their  praises,  extolling  their  vices,  flattering 
their  vanities,  treating  the  ruler  not  as  a  mortal  but 
as  a  superior  being,  nay,  as  a  God,  standing  beyond 
good  and  evil  But  if  this  fancied  God,  or  at  least 
Superman,  happens  to  have  a  diseased  brain  and  a 
wild  dash  of  degenerate  blood  in  his  veins,  then 
this  abject  veneration,  coupled  with  an  unrestrained 
will,  and  the  knowledge  of  omnipotence,  finally 
unhinges  his  feeble  mind.  What  wonder  if  every 
vestige  of  his  judgment  is  destroyed  and  his  moral 
feelings  are  corroded. 

The  omnipotence,  however,  upon  the  pinnacle 
of  which  the  Csesars  and  the  Tsars  suddenly  found 
themselves,  was  not  the  real — at  least  not  the  only — 
cause  of  the  Caesarean  insanity.  It  was  simply  the 
soil  upon  which  their  madness  took  root,  bringing 
forth  eccentric  blossoms  and  fruits ;  it  was  the  means 
which  allowed  unlimited  scope  to  their  maniacal 
whims,  and  lent  unto  them  vast  dimensions.  Placed 
as  they  were  high  above  the  ordinary  mass  of  human 
beings,  seeing  on  one  side  riches  and  power,  and 


M 


8    THE   CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

worshipping  nations  at  their  feet,  and,  on  the  other, 
the  bottomless  abyss  into  which  the  assassin's  knife 
could  at  any  moment  throw  them,  a  sense  of  giddi- 
ness  seized  them  and  they  lost  their  mental  equi- 
librium. But  whenever  fate  has  placed  a  real 
genius,  a  giant  with  a  vast  brain  and  a  powerful 
mind,  one  of  nature's  aristocrats,  upon  the  pin- 
nacle of  power,  upon  the  Caesarean  throne,  the 
mixture  of  exultation  and  terror  to  which  the  de- 
generate and  the  parvenu  so  easily  fall  a  prey, 
produced  no  disastrous  effects  upon  them. 

If  unlimited  power  fosters  and  fostered  the  so- 
called  Caesarean  insanity,  it  was  not  the  sole  factor, 
for  it  affects  and  affected  only  those  who  have  and 
had  a  predisposition  to  abnormality,  degeneracy, 
and  insanity.  It  requires,  indeed,  an  aristocratic 
mind,  a  noble  spirit,  to  preserve  the  mental  balance 
of  the  autocratic  ruler  in  the  lofty  atmosphere  of 
a  throne.  Whenever  a  genius,  nay,  even  a  strong- 
minded  man,  happened  to  don  the  purple,  the  strong 
wine  of  pow6r  failed  to  intoxicate  him  and  he  pre- 
served his  full  vigour.  Such  was  Napoleon,  such 
were  some  of  the  Caesars,  Hadrian,  the  two  Anto- 
nines,  even  Augustus.  The  majority  of  Caesars 
and  Tsars  carried  the  germs  of  insanity  in  them 
before  they  found  themselves  absolute  masters  of 
the  world  or  of  vast  empires.  Their  madness 
would  have  manifested  itself  in  a  more  modest 
way,  even  had  they  remained  private  individuals. 
Caligula,  Nero,  or  Paul  I  would  not,  under  any  cir- 
cumstances, have  remained  normal,  but  as  private 
individuals  they  would  have  lacked  the  opportu- 
nity to  cause  much  harm.  The  Caesarean  dig- 
nity fostered   their  manias,  giving   them  full  and 


FROM   COLOSSEUM   TO   KREMLIN     9 

unlimited  scope.  Napoleon  suddenly  found  him- 
self master  of  a  mighty  Empire  ;  he  put  his  foot 
on  the  neck  of  Europe,  but  the  blood  of  the  Cor- 
sican,  the  son  of  strong-minded  Laetitia  Ramolini, 
was  not  corrupt,  it  was  fresh  and  vigorous  unlike 
that  of  his  whilom  enemy  and  later  admirer,  thq  mad 
son  of  Catherine  Minerva,  Paul  L  Augustus  and 
Hadrian  and  the  two  Antonines  stood  just  where 
Caligula  and  Nero  had  stood,  but  the  thought  of 
ruling  the  world,  of  commanding  all  its  riches  and  all 
its  pleasures,  the  knowledge  that  they  could  swal- 
low up  provinces,  nay,  the  world  itself,  did  not  drive 
them  mad.  They  were  great  and  wise.  They,  too, 
could  exclaim,  with  Charles  V  in  **  Hernani"  : — 

"  Ye  gods  I    To  stand  alone 
Upon  the  topmost  summit  of  the  world, 
The  head  and  front  of  all ;  to  be  the  stone 
That  binds  the  whole  together ;  to  behold 
The  heads  of  kings  submissive  'neath  my  feet ; 
And,  lower  still,  the  houses  of  the  great. 
Then  priests  and  men  of  war;  lowest  of. all, 
Deep  in  the  shadow  that  my  greatness  casts. 
The  world  ! 

A  mighty  pyramid  whose  base  is  stretched 
From  pole  to  pole  upon  the  nations'  backs, 

The  world  1  a  sea, 
An  ever-troubled  flood,  which  all  is  moved 
If  aught  be  cast  therein  ! 

In  its  depths, 
If  one  perchance  should  gaze  adown  the  gloom, 
Are  countless  Empires,  noble  vessels  wrecked, 
Tossed  by  the  ebb  and  flow  of  that  same  tide 
That  knew  them  once,  but  know  them  now  no  more. 
And  of  all  this  to  be  the  lord  !     To  climb, 
At  their  election,  to  this  pinnacle. 
Knowing  one's-self  a  man  as  other  men  ! 
To  see  the  abyss  below !    What  if  my  head 
Turned  dizzy  at  the  sight !  " 


r 


lo    THE  CURSE   OF   THE    ROMANOVS 

But  their  heads  did  not  grow  dizzy  on  the 
summit  of  the  "  restless  pyramid."  They  trod  upon 
the  trembling  world,  they  felt  the  pulsing  of  its 
eager  life,  but  their  strength  did  not  fail  them  ;  they 
looked  down  from  their  giddy  height  into  the  surg- 
ing deep,  but  neither  reeled  nor  tottered  ;  on  the 
contrary,  their  spirits  increased  in  strength,  for 
they  were  of  no  common  mould.  Caesar,  the  real 
founder  of  the  Caesarean  dignity,  was  an  unques- 
tioned monarch,  but  his  head  was  never  turned. 
"  No  sudden  wave  of  passion,"  said  Antonius  in  his 
funeral  oration,  ''  made  him  cruel,  no  fortune  or 
success  spoiled  him,  no  power  changed  him,  and 
even  the  complete  possession  of  the  highest  power 
in  the  State  failed  to  influence  him."  ^  Caesar 
was  one  of  the  few  mighty  ones,  **  who,  in  great 
things  as  in  little,  never  acted  on  whim  or  prejudice, 
but  always,  without  exception,  in  accordance  with 
his  duty." 

This  is  no  place  in  which  to  investigate  the  causes 
that  led  to  the  degeneration  of  the  Caesars  or 
other  reigning  European  families.  Their  neuro- 
pathic  state  has  been  attributed  to  consanguineous 
marriages,  which  are  the  prerogative  of  royalty,  and 
which,  in  the  end,  produce  depravity  and  mania 
in  the  descendants.  A  famous  Russian  specialist 
in  insanity  has  attributed  the  development  of  the 
pathological  element  in,  and  the  deterioration  of, 
the  members  of  royal  and  imperial  houses,  from 
the  Caesars  down  to  the  Georges,  to  the  detri- 
mental influence  exercised  upon  them  by  their  con- 
sciousness of  power  and  the  exalted  exclusiveness  of 
their  position.     It  is  the  retribution  by  which  Nature 

>  Cf.  Dio  Cassius,  Historia  Rotnana^  44,  42. 


FROM  COLOSSEUM   TO   KREMLIN    ii 

punishes  the  crime  which  is  committed  by  one 
class  assuming  power  over  another.^  Personally, 
I  am  rather  inclined  to  consider  the  mental  con- 
dition of  reigning  houses  as  the  result  of  exhaus- 
tion. The  heirs  of  genius  are  doomed  to  decay 
and  deterioration.  Intellectual  development,  in  in- 
dividuals as  in  races,  leads  to  a  neuropathic  state, 
to  weakness  and  to  extinction.  The  descendants 
of  great  men  cannot  escape  physical  and  mental 
decay.  Nature,  having  perfected  herself  in  a  great 
man,  has  exhausted  her  force,  and  what  follows  is 
necessarily  weak  and  miserable.  Jealous  fate  makes 
the  descendants  pay  heavily  for  the  gifts  she  has 
heaped  upon  one  of  their  ancestors.  It  is  the 
curse  of  inheritance,  the  curse  of  ancestry  that 
weighs  on  their  shoulders.  Now  the  members  oi 
the  reigning  houses  have  been  and  are  in  most 
cases  the  descendants  of  a  great  man  who  has 
been  the  founder.  It  is  due  to  this  fact  that  their 
successors,  who  are,  if  not  their  sons  and  daughters, 
their  very  near  kinsmen  and  descendants,  must 
carry  in  them  and  propagate  the  germs  of  disease 
and  degeneration.  Although  in  Rome  as  well  as 
in  Russia,  from  Peter  to  Paul,  the  dynasty  was 
not  hereditary,  the  Cxsar  and  Tsar  designating 
his  successor  during  his  lifetime,  this  choice  was 
limited  to  relatives  or  descendants.  Thus,  whilst  in 
Augustus,  the  nephew  of  Caesar,  who  was  a  universal 
genius,  the  first  signs  of  mental  deterioration  were 
noticeable,  these  rapidly  increased  in  his  successors, 
members  of  the  J  ulian  house.  Antonia  the  younger, 
sister  of  Augustus,  was  the.  mother  of  Claudius. 

1  Cf.  Paul  Jacoby,  Etudes  sur  la  Selection  chis  Phomme,    Paris, 
1904. 


12     THE  CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

Her  son,  Germanicus,  was  the  father  of  Caligula, 
whose  mother  was  Agrippina,  grand-daughter  of 
Augustus  and  daughter  of  the  depraved  Julia. 
Nero's  mother  was  Agrippina  the  younger,  a 
great-grand-daughter  of  Augustus.  The  father  of 
Claudius,  the  great-grandfather  of  Nero,  was  Drusus, 
son  of  Augustus  and  Livia.  Tiberius  alone  was 
not  related  to  the  Julian  house,  and,  in  fact,  his- 
torians have  endeavoured  to  prove  that  he  has 
been  misrepresented  to  posterity.  Napoleon  once 
warmly  defended  the  character  of  this  emperor. 
But,  whatever  the  causes,  it  is  admitted  that  the 
princes  of  the  Julian-Claudian  house,  unlike  the 
great  Julius  himself — soldier,  statesman,  legislator, 
historian  and  orator — were  unfit  to  rule  the  world, 
and  this  statement  is  equally  true  of  the  Romanovs, 
whose  history  in  many  points  resembles  that  of 
the  Roman  Caesars.  Almost  the  same  thoughts 
must  occur  to  the  student  of  history  whether  he  read 
the  annals  of  the  Caesars  or  those  of  the  Russian 
Tsars.  The  similarity  of  their  fate  is  often  striking. 
It  could  not  be  otherwise. 

The  Rome  of  the  Emperors  and  the  St.  Peters- 
burg of  the  Tsars  in  the  eighteenth  century  offer 
pictures  differing  only  in  their  framework.  Here 
as  there  we  see  the  same  crowned  criminals,  clowns 
and  madmen,  ruling  supreme;  the  purple  hiding 
their  bloodstained  hands.  The  gratification  of  their 
own  personal  wishes  constitutes  in  their  minds  the 
welfare  of  the  State,  and  patriotism  takes  the  shape 
of  the  veneration  of  Caesar  and  Tsar.  In  St. 
Petersburg,  as  once  in  Imperial  Rome,  everything 
is  the  property,  not  of  the  State,  but  of  the  ruler. 
On  all  sides  hundreds  of  thousands  are  starving. 


FROM  COLOSSEUM   TO   KREMLIN    13 

whilst  the  few  revel  in  fabulous  luxuries.  Hunger 
and  epidemics  decimate  the  subjects,  whilst  the 
ruler  is  richly  remunerating  the  courtier  whose  ima- 
gination hits  upon  a  new  and  hitherto  unheard-of 
luxury  or  pleasure ;  the  starving  masses  cast  eager, 
hungry  glances  upon  a  piece  of  bread,  whilst  vast 
sums  are  wasted  to  satisfy  the  gluttony  of  the  ruler. 
The  complete  absence  of  a  prosperous  middle-class, 
the  bone  and  sinew  of  cities  and  of  empires,  is 
equally  noticeable  in  Cesarean  Rome  as  in  Im- 
perial St.  Petersburg,  both  mainly  consisting  of  two 
classes,  wealthy  nobles  and  patricians,  moujiks 
and  slaves. 

Hundreds  of  thousands,  nay  millions  of  miser- 
ably wretched  beings  are  suffering  from  famine,  are 
exposed  to  insalubrious  climates  and  a  baneful  at- 
mosphere, whilst  a  few  beati  revel  in  luxury  and 
debauchery.  Excessive  love  of  pomp  and  extrava- 
gance in  feasts  and  revelries,  in  dress  and  presents, 
were  characteristic  of  the  Caesars  as  of  the  Tsars. 
Snow  in  summer,  roses  in  winter  for  Caligula  and 
Nero,  pdtis  de  Perigord  by  special  messenger  from 
Paris  for  Elizabeth  Petrovna,  and  if  the  Romanovs 
could  boast  neither  the  artistic  refinement  nor 
the  rich  imagination  which  characterised  the  re- 
velries of  the  princes  and  princesses  of  the  Julian- 
Claudian  house,  they  nevertheless  displayed  an 
equal  love  for  pleasure  and  debauchery.  Fortunes 
were  spent  on  entertainments  during  the  reigns  of 
Elizabeth  and  Catherine  of  which  Roman  Empresses 
would  perhaps  not  have  been  ashamed.  The  Roman 
nobles  indulged  in  luxurious  and  voluptuous  recrea- 
tions and  escaped  to  Baiae  and  the  other  fashion- 
able watering-places  of  Campania,  whilst  the  plebs 


14    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

were  slowly  festering  in  the  unhealthy  quarters  of  the 
Esquiline  and  the  Quirinal.  Fever  and  leprosy  are 
good  enough  for  the  plebs.  Worse  off  than  the 
slaves  was  the  nominally  free  ciins  Romanus.  As 
long  as  he  was  healthy  and  robust  Caesar  cared  for 
him,  it  is  true.  He  gave  him  panem  et  circenses^ 
bread  and  games.  But  Caesar  did  not  protect  him 
against  sickness  and  fever,  he  opened  no  hospitals 
— for  what  did  Caesar  care  for  dying  wretches? 
Why  should  he  save  the  lives  of  proletarians  whom 
it  cost  him  vast  sums  to  feed?^  Caesar  had  no 
need  of  them.  What  a  contrast  between  the  Roman 
rich,  whose  magnificent  dwellings  on  the  heights 
of  the  Carinae  dominated  the  Forum  Romanum, 
and  the  crowd  teeming  in  the  dirty  hovels,  in  the 
narrow  streets  of  the  Suburra  or  in  the  suburbs 
beyond  the  Pomoerium.  But  is  the  contrast  less 
between  Russian  nobles,  who  have  their  grandes  et 
petites  entries  to  the  Winter  Palace  and  the  Hermi- 
tage, and  the  Russian  plebs?  Still  the  Roman 
slave,  the  client  from  the  Aventine,  was  happier 
than  his  Russian  counterpart  of  centuries  later. 
For,  after  all,  Caesar  was  afraid  of  the  plebs,  of 
the  so-called  Populus  Romanus^  who  nominally 
constituted,  though  in  connection  with  the  Senate, 
the  official  government  of  Rome.  The  Populus 
Romanus  was  not  only  able  to  pass  laws  ;  it  could 
prevent  the  passage  of  laws  and  it  could  revolt,  for  it 
was  a  surging,  dangerous  crowd,  animated  by  a 
turbulent  spirit.  It  was  in  Caesar's  interest,  there- 
fore, to  flatter  this  crowd  so  as  to  gain  its  favour. 
Caesar  fed  and  amused  this  rabble ;  he  gave  it  bread 

Cf.  Nomfiire  de  Champagny:  Les  Cisars^  Paris,  1841-43,  vol.  iv, 
p.  37;  and  Dio  Cassius,  Historia  Romanes^  Iv,  15. 


FROM   COLOSSEUM    TO   KREMLIN    15 

and  games,  all  that  the  rabble  required,  and  as  his 
own  safety  greatly  depended  upon  the  temper  of 
the  mob,  Caesar  was  most  punctual  in  the  distri- 
bution of  his  bounties  and  the  supply  was  most 
regular.  But  no  Tsar  will  feed  the  hungry  moujiks ; 
he  is  so  sure  of  their  meekness  of  character.  They 
will  not  riot,  and,  even  if  they  make  a  feeble  attempt 
at  it,  cannon-shots  soon  silence  them.  No  live 
measures  of  grain  for  you,  my  poor  moujiks,  from 
the  hand  of  the  Tsar;  no  largesses  on  special 
occasions,  no  bread  and  no  games,  no  congiarium 
and  no  sportula  for  you,  O  plebs  of  the  Neva,  of 
the  Volga  and  of  the  Kama,  as  once  for  those  of 
the  Tiber.  Anna,  Elizabeth,  and  Catherine  will 
waste  large  sums  on  pleasure,  Catherine  will  lavish 
twenty  million  of  roubles  on  her  favourites,  Paul 
will  make  princely  gifts  on  the  occasion  of  his 
coronation ;  he  will  give  thousands  of  presents  to 
his  friends,  to  his  servants,  to  his  mistresses  and 
to  their  relatives,  but  you  alone,  great  silent  mass, 
will  be  ignored.  You  will  be  ignored,  because  no 
one  is  afraid  of  you,  because  you  have  shown  to 
your  rulers  that  you  lack  the  spirit  of  the  ancient 
Roman  mob,  that  you  are  silent  and  submissive, 
that  you  will  not  rebel,  will  not  threaten  the  Russian 
Caesar,  not  only  when  you  are  refused  bread,  but 
even  when  your  humble  petitions  are  greeted  with 
cannon-shot  and  salvos. 

In  the  rooms  of  the  Hermitage  in  St.  Petersburg 
the  visitor  may  admire  one  of  the  finest  collec- 
tions of  pictures  in  the  world,  whilst  high  on  the 
ruins  of  the  Villa  of  Zeus  on  the  island  of  Capreae, 
where  Tiberius  passed  the  last  years  of  his  life, 
stands  the  chapel  of  Santa  Maria  del  Soccorso  ;  but 


/' 


i6    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

if  stones  could  speak  what  a  tale  they  could  whisper 
into  the  ears  of  the  visitors,  tales  of  hideous  cruelties, 
of  lust  and  obscenity.  What  scenes  the  walls  of  the 
palaces  of  the  Russian  Tsars  and  of  the  Roman 
Caesars  must  have  witnessed ;  the  walls  of  the  Hermi- 
tage and  of  the  Kremlin,  the  ruined  walls  of  the 
palaces  on  the  Palatine  and  of  the  Caprean  villas, 
what  strange  sounds  they  must  have  heard.  They 
witnessed  all  the  passions  dwelling  in  the  human 
breast  let  loose,  lust  and  cruelty,  and  vice  and  folly ; 
they  heard  the  sighs  of  agony  of  the  assassinated, 
and  the  tumultuous  uproar  of  bacchanalian  revel. 

In  St.  Petersburg,  as  once  in  Rome,  it  is  the  same 
rule  of  favourites  and  of  freed  men,  of  mistresses 
and  of  lovers.  Messalina,  the  wife  of  Claudius, 
and  Catherine,  the  spouse  of  Peter  HI,  manifest 
an  utter  contempt  for  the  moral  sense  and  decency 
of  the  nation.  Caesars  and  Tsars  get  rid  of  their 
wives,  of  their  nearest  relatives  and  of  their  rivals, 
by  foul  and  treacherous  means,  and  no  law  punishes 
them.  Emancipated  Grecian  slaves  are  the  advisers 
of  the  Caesars,  whilst  German  adventurers,  Turkish 
barbers  and  French  dancing  girls,  influence  the 
Russian  Tsars  and  Tsaritzas.  Men  of  low  birth 
and  of  foreign  origin,  to  whom  the  interest  of  the 
State  is  nothing,  companions  of  Caesars  and  Tsars 
in  their  excesses,  who  stand  and  fall  with  the  ruler, 
fill  the  palaces  in  Rome  and  St.  Petersburg,  dictat- 
ing laws  to  the  world  and  to  a  vast  Empire.  Caesars 
and  Tsars  alike  take  equal  care  to  throttle  the  hydra- 
head  of  opposition.  But  opposition  in  Rome  had 
no  hydra-head  to  rear ;  it  no  longer  dared  to  oppose 
the  purple-clad  tyrants.  Tiberius  could  rightly 
feel  disgusted  with  the  servile  spirit  of  the  Senate 


FROM   COLOSSEUM   TO   KREMLIN    17 

and,  on  leaving  the  Curia,  express  his  contempt  for 
the  "souls  of  slaves."  It  was  this  Caesar,  too,  who 
once  sneered :  '*  Oh,  how  this  people  hasten  towards 
servility ; "  ^  and  if  Russian  Tsars  knew  Latin,  they 
might  with  equal  right  have  indulged  in  some  such 
similarly  contemptuous  remark  after  a  Council  or 
Cabinet-meeting.  The  lunatics  and  the  profligates, 
the  "  angry  boys  "  and  the  depraved  young  women, 
on  the  Caesarean  throne  and  in  the  Imperial  Palaces, 
on  the  Palatine  and  on  the  banks  of  the  Neva, 
were  actually  supported  by  the  spirit  of  cowardice 
and  servility  of  their  subjects.  Slavery  and  ser- 
vility are  writ  in  large  letters  on  the  blood-stained 
pages  in  which  astonished  posterity  has  read  and 
will  continue  to  read  the  history  of  two  mighty 
Empires,  of  pagan  Rome  and  of  Byzantine-Chris- 
tian Russia.  The  same  invertebrate  Senate  and 
Cabinet,  the  same  fawning,  flattering  camarilla,  the 
same  servile  rabble  and  the  same  influential  Officers 
of  the  Guard  aitid  Praetorians, 

The  Roman  plebs,  the  city  rabble,  had  lost  all 
conception  of  liberty,  desiring  nothing  but  bread 
and  games ;  a  hundred  days  of  pleasure  in  the  year, 
and  corn  gratuitously  given  by  Caesar,  were  all  that 
the  descendants  of  the  ancient  liberty-loving  Romans 
required.  The  Senate  had  lost  its  energy,  its 
ardour  and  its  pride  ;  devoid  of  statesmanlike  faculty, 
it  was  a  mere  tool  in  the  hands  of  the  Emperor. 
The  days  when  the  Senate  proudly  declared : 
"  Where  the  Senate  is,  there  also  is  Rome "  were 
gone  for  ever.  The  knights,  the  capitalists,  were 
indifferent  to  the  form  of  government,  so  long  as 
there    were    no    financial    crashes.      As    for    the 

'  C/.  Tacitus,  Annals,  3,  65. 

B 


/ 


i8     THE   CURSE   OF   THE    ROMANOVS 

soldiers  they  were  certainly  on  the  side  of  the 
Emperor.  Thus  the  spiritless  and  craven  Sena- 
torial aristocracy,  the  lazy,  pleasure-seeking  popu- 
lace, and  the  flattering  army  of  gilded  mamelukes, 
were  rivals  in  supporting  Caesar  s  mad  outbreaks. 

"And  why  should  Caesar  be  a  tyrant,  then? 
Poor  man !  I  know  he  would  not  be  a  wolf. 
But  that  he  sees  the  Romans  are  but  sheep : 
He  were  no  lion,  were  not  Romans  hinds. 
Those  that  with  haste  will  make  a  mighty  fire 
Begin  it  with  weak  straws :  what  trash  is  Rome, 
What  rubbish,  and  what  offal,  when  it  serves 
For  the  base  matter  to  illuminate 
So  vile  a  thing  as  Caesar ! " 

We  need  but  read  Russians  for  Romans,  and 
St.  Petersburg  for  Rome,  and  Shakespeare's  lines 
are  equally  applicable  to  the  dominions  of  the 
Tsars  as  to  those  of  Rome.  A  fawning,  flattering 
bureaucracy,  a  servile  Senate,  spiritless  Cabinet- 
ministers  and  adventurers,  surrounded  Paul  I  as 
once  Caligula  and  Nero.  Even  so  late  as  1897  ^^ 
a  Medical  Congress  held  in  Moscow,  the  Russian 
Rome,  built  on  seven  hills  like  the  city  on  the  Tiber, 
before  an  assembly  of  7000  International  repre- 
sentatives of  science,  the  Russian  Caesar,  the  man 
who  is  sending  thousands  to  the  mines  and  is 
crushing  the  liberties  of  nations,  was  referred  to 
by  a  Russian  Cabinet  Minister  as  ^^voluptas  et 
deluicB  humani generis''  ^ 

But  if  the  Caesarean  insanity  remained  equally 
unchecked  in  ancient  Rome  as  in  holy  Russia, 
owing  to  the  weakness  or  indifference  of  nobles  and 
of  plebs,  the  Caesars  and  Tsars  themselves  were 

Kuhn,  F.  J.,  Betrachtungen  fiber  Majestdten^  &c.,  p.  43.     1901. 


FROM   COLOSSEUM   TO   KREMLIN     19 

nevertheless  in  constant  fear  of  Palace  revolutions, 
of  the  conspiracy  of  the  Praetorians,  of  the  sword 
of  the  assassin  lurking  in  the  dark,  of  the  poison  in 
the  goblet  of  Grecian  wine.  Praetorians  or  officers 
of  the  Preobrazhensky  guards  hurl  one  Caesar  down 
from  the  summit  of  his  pyramid  and  place  another 
in  his  place.  Amid  his  pomp  Caesar  trembles  ;  in- 
deed, few  are  the  members  of  the  Julian-Claudian 
house  who  die  a  natural  death.  The  aged  Tiberius 
is  throttled  in  his  agony ;  furious  and  remorseless, 
Claudius  finds  death  in  a  poisoned  cup ;  Verus, 
Domitian,  Commodus — not  one  of  them  dies  a 
natural  death.  The  same  spectre,  terrorising  the 
mighty  Caesars,  will  stretch  its  icy  hand  to  seize — 
centuries  later — the  puny  forms  of  the  Tsars.  Peter 
1 1 1  is  throttled  at  Ropsha  by  Orlov,  the  lover  of  his 
wife ;  Paul  is  brutally  murdered  by  a  drunken  band 
of  officers,  with  the  consent  of  his  own  son  and 
heir.  And  even  those  whom  poison  and  sword 
spared,  and  who  did  not  end  their  wretched  lives  in 
a  secluded  cell  in  Schlusselburg,  what  agonies,  what 
sleepless  nights  they  suffered.  The  people  of  St. 
Petersburg  were  prepared  to  go  to  bed  under  one 
ruler  and  awake  in  the  morning  under  another. 
He  or  she  who  only  yesterday  was  all-powerful  was 
to-day  on  the  way  to  the  distant  ice  regions  of 
Siberia,  if  his  or  her  life  has  been  spared.  Elizabeth 
Petrovna  will  not  dare  to  sleep ;  she  has  her  grat- 
tenses  who  keep  her  awake  till  the  morning.  The 
conspirators,  the  officers  of  the  Preobrazhensky, 
protected  by  the  silence  of  the  night,  might  already 
be  on  their  way  to  the  Palace  to  seize  the  person  of 
the  ruler. 

History  repeats  itself:  There  Cassius  Charea, 


r 


20    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

and  here  Orlov  and  Platon  Zoubov ;  there  Macro, 
the  chief  of  the  Praetorians,  and  here  Pahlen,  Chief 
of  the  Police  of  St  Petersburg.  Here  Alexander 
awaiting  in  one  of  the  rooms  of  the  Palace  the  news 
of  Paul's  death,  and  there  Caligula  counting  the  last 
moments  of  his  grand-uncle,  Tiberius,  on  Caprese. 
There  the  Roman  tribune  of  the  Praetorian  cohort  is 
stabbing  Caligula  in  the  street  of  Rome,  and  here, 
Orlov  throttling  Peter,  and  Platon  Zoubov  knocking 
down  Paul  in  his  bedroom,  hitting  the  Tsar  on  the 
temple  with  a  golden  tabatt^re.  Nero,  the  master 
of  the  world,  to  save  his  life  creeping  on  hands 
and  knees  through  a  hole  which  his  freedman  Phaon 
makes  in  the  wall ;  Paul,  proud  of  his  Imperial  dig- 
nity, crawling  on  all-fours  behind  a  screen  like  a 
trembling  schoolboy — what  a  tragi-comedy !  Nero 
sighing,  **  This  is  loyalty,"  and  Paul  asking  in 
astonishment,  *'What  have  I  done?"  You  lacked 
Imperial  dignity  in  death,  Caesars  and  Tsars.  What 
pigmies  you  appear  by  the  side  of  the  giant  who 
died  on  St.  Helena,  and  whose  name  historians 
have  often  coupled  with  yours. 

Madmen  and  imbeciles,  terrorising  and,  in  their 
turn,  terror-stricken  by  the  mad  fear  of  the  assassin 
among  their  very  protectors  and  blood  relatives, 
striking  pitilessly,  but  receiving  the  blow  in  their 
turn — such  was  and  is  the  fate  of  the  Caesars  and 
of  the  Tsars.  The  curtain  fell  upon  the  tragedy 
of  the  Caesars,  of  the  Julian-Claudian  and  Flavian 
houses,  enacted  in  the  Imperial  Palaces  on  the 
Palatine  in  pagan  Rome,  but  it  rose  again  on 
the  ** Curse  of  the  Romanovs"  in  the  eighteenth 
century  in  Byzantine-Christian  Moscow  and  St. 
Petersburg.     The  scene  had  merely  been  shifted 


FROM   COLOSSEUM   TO   KREMLIN    21 

from  the  Colosseum  to  the  Kremlin,  from  Rome 
to  Constantinople,  and  from  Constantinople  to 
Peterhof  and  Oranienbaum.  Different  surround- 
ings, different  scenery,  different  costumes,  a  dif- 
ferent cast,  but  the  same  play.  It  is  perhaps 
lacking  in  the  grandeur,  in  the  intensity  of  thrilling 
passions,  in  the  consummate  art  of  the  classic  actors, 
but  it  is  still  the  same  play,  and  it  is  not  yet  con- 
cluded. It  began  in  the  eighteenth  century,  but  the 
death  of  Alexander  I  did  not  bring  it  to  a  close. 
In  a  storm  of  battle  and  murder  the  Julian-Claudian 
house  passed  away.  Horror  mingled  with  astonish- 
ment and  not  wholly  unmixed  with  some  admiration 
clings  to  the  tragedy  of  the  Caesars.  Many  shades  of 
victims  haunted  the  ruined  palaces  on  the  Palatine, 
and  round  the  Kremlin,  too,  they  are  now  darkly 
crowding.  Their  number  is  continually  swelling. 
They  are  the  exiles  to  Siberia  and  the  victims 
of  the  tyranny  of  Tsardom.  They  have  watched 
during  the  agony  of  Paul  I  and  the  remorse  of 
Alexander  I,  a  guilty  party  to  his  father's  death. 
They  are  now  silent  spectators  of  the  progress 
of  the  play,  ready  to  greet  with  grim  applause 
the  final  fall  of  the  curtain  upon  the  Curse  of  the 
Romanovs. 


CHAPTER    II 

THE   BIRTH  OF  A  TYRANT 

"  A  child  has  been  bom  unto  us ; 
A  son  has  been  given  unto  us." 

The  successors  of  Peter  I — Elizabeth  Petrovna — Peter  III,  the  unwashed 
Emperor — The  Grand  Duchess  Catherine  and  her  lovers — Paul's  pater- 
nity— He  is  not  a  Romanov — His  education — Panin  appointed  tutor  of 
the  Prince. 

On  the  20th  of  September  (O.S.)  (October  the  ist) 
1754,  the  Summer  Palace  in  St.  Petersburg  and  the 
entire  capital  of  Russia  offered  a  festive  appearance. 
A  great  event,  affecting  the  vast  Empire  and  its  mil- 
lions of  inhabitants,  had  occurred — an  heir  was  born 
to  the  Russian  throne.  The  little  Grand  Duchess 
Catherine  (Sophia  before  she  adopted  the  Greek 
orthodox  faith),  afterwards  the  great  Empress  Cathe- 
rine II,  wife  of  the  heir-apparent  Peter,  nephew  of 
the  Empress  Elizabeth,  had  given  birth  to  a  son — 
Little  Paul,  **the  Son  of  Minerva"  had  come.  The 
aged  Empress,  the  clever  daughter  of  Peter  the 
Great,  was  happy  ;  she  could  now  sleep  quietly,  for 
the  spectre  of  a  Palace  revolution  ceased  to  frighten 
her.  In  order,  however,  to  give  the  reader  an 
adequate  idea  of  the  importance  attaching  to  the 
birth  of  Paul,  it  will  be  necessary  briefly  to  sketch 
the  circumstances  amid  which  the  successors  of 
Peter  the  Great,  from  his  wife,  Catherine  I,  to  his 
daughter,  Elizabeth,  ascended  the  throne. 


29 


afortrailln  Ikl  ^ailt 


THE    BIRTH    OF   A  TYRANT         23 

Peter  I  died  somewhat  suddenly  in  1725. 
Some  little  time  previously  he  had  framed  a  law — 
afterwards  abolished  by  Paul  I — which  gave 
the  ruling  sovereign  right  to  designate  his  suc- 
cessor. Although  shortly  before  his  death,  Peter, 
furious  at  the  scandalous  conduct  of  Catherine,  whom 
he  surprised  in  the  arms  of  her  lover,  M.  de  la  Croix, 
had  intended  to  repudiate  his  wife,  her  former 
lover  and  friend,  Alexander  Menshikov,  placed 
this  Livonian  servant,  his  whilom  mistress,  on  the 
Russian  throne.  She  was  succeeded  by  Peter  H, 
the  son  of  Alexis,  the  rebellious  son  of  Peter  the 
Great,  who  was  knouted  to  death  by  order  of 
his  Imperial  father.  Peter  II  died  of  small-pox, 
after  a  reign  of  three  years.  The  crown  was  offered 
to  Peter's  niece,  Anna  I  vanovna,  during  whose  reign, 
1 730-1740,  her  lover  Biron,  a  man  of  low  origin  and 
high  ambitions,  ruled  supreme  in  Russia,  banishing 
thousands  of  subjects  to  Siberia  or  sending  them  to 
the  scaffold.  Anna  I  vanovna  had  selected  as  her 
successor  to  the  Russian  crown  the  little  Ivan, 
the  infant  son  of  her  niece  Anna.  On  her  death-bed 
the  Empress  appointed  her  lover,  Biron,  as  Regent 
during  the  minority  of  the  young  Tsar.  The 
mother  of  the  baby  Emperor,  jealous  of  Biron's 
power,  availed  herself  of  the  help  of  Field- Marshal 
Munich,  and  brought  about  the  downfall  of  the 
Regent.  Biron,  arrested  in  his  bed,  was  sent  to 
Siberia,  whilst  Anna,  Duchess  of  Brunswick,  was 
appointed  Regent.  Her  reign,  however,  was  not 
long.  Elizabeth,  the  clever,  handsome  and  plea- 
sure-loving daughter  of  Peter  the  Great  and  of 
his  second  wife,  Catherine,  of  whom  the  English 
Ambassador  wrote  that  "she  will  be  too  fat  to  be 


24    THE   CURSE   OF   THE    ROMANOVS 

in  a  plot/'  was  persuaded  to  ascend  the  throne 
rather  than  end  her  days  in  a  convent,  with  which 
prospect  the  Regent  had  threatened  her.  On  the 
5th  of  December,  1741,  on  a  cold  winter  night, 
Elizabeth,  at  the  head  of  three  hundred  Grenadiers 
of  the  Preobrazhensky  regiment,  marched  to  the 
Winter  Palace,  where  the  Regent  and  tlie  baby- 
Emperor  were  arrested,  and  the  next  morning  the 
population  of  St.  Petersburg  was  informed  that 
Elizabeth  Petrovna  was  Autocrat  of  Russia.  Soon 
after  her  accession  she  appointed  an  heir  to 
the  throne  in  the  person  of  her  nephew,  Karl 
Ulric,  the  son  of  her  sister  Anna.  Anna  had  been 
married  to  the  Duke  of  Holstein,  but  died  two 
months  after  having  given  birth  to  a  son.  The 
boy,  now  fifteen  years  old,  was  brought  to  Russia, 
and  in  1745  married,  at  the  recommendation  of 
Frederick  II,  to  Princess  Sophia  Augusta  of  Anhalt 
Zerbst,  who,  on  becoming  a  member  of  the  Greek 
orthodox  faith,  was  given  the  name  of  Catherine. 
After  nine  years  of  sterility,  which  made  the  Em- 
press fear  new  complications  and  dangers  for  the 
dynasty,  Catherine,  to  the  delight  of  Elizabeth, 
gave  birth  in  1754  to  a  boy,  the  future  Emperor 
Paul  I.     The  dynasty  was  now  consolidated. 

Thus  the  long-desired  event  had  at  last  come, 
and  the  Russian  Court  and  Russian  society  cele- 
brated it  joyfully.  The  guarantee  of  a  more  peace- 
ful order  of  things  had  appeared  in  the  person  of 
the  little  Grand  Duke,  around  whose  cradle  were  now 
centred  Russia's  hopes  for  times  less  blood-stained 
than  those  of  his  predecessors.  'Mt  was  not  a 
family  event,"  writes  a  Russian  historian,  "but  a 
political  occurrence  of  an  Imperialistic  importance." 


THE   BIRTH   OF   A   TYRANT        25 

The  figure  of  the  imprisoned  child- Emperor,  Ivan 
III,  now  faded  away  behind  the  cradle  of  little 
Paul  and  ceased  to  be  an  object  of  terror  to  Eliza- 
beth.^ Elizabeth  had  looked  forward  with  eager 
expectancy  to  the  delivery  of  her  niece,  and  no 
sooner  was  the  child  born  than  the  Empress  sum- 
moned her  confessor,  who  gave  it  the  name  of  Paul, 
and  at  once  ordered  the  midwife  to  take  the  boy 
and  follow  her  to  her  own  apartments.  Catherine 
herself  remained — ^as  we  are  informed  in  her 
Memoirs — in  bed  and  alone.  The  bed  was  placed 
between  two  doors  and  windows  that  did  not  close 
properly,  "no  one  dariiig  to  lift  her  into  her  own 
bed"  or  to  give  her  something  to  drink.  Eliza- 
beth was  taken  up  with  the  child,  Peter  did  nothing 
but  drink,  whilst  no  one  cared  or  inquired  after 
Catherine,  who  was  soon  seized  with  a  violent  fever. 
She  received  not  the  slightest  attention.  She  was 
not  allowed  to  see  her  child  for  forty  days,  and  dared 
not  so  much  as  openly  inquire  after  him,  for  such 
would  have  been  considered  by  Elizabeth  as  a 
doubt  of  her  care.  In  fact,  the  Empress  took  such 
care  of  the  young  Prince  that  she  nearly  killed  the 
infant  by  the  excess  of  her  solicitude.  She  would 
run  up  to  him  herself  whenever  he  cried,  but  her 
ideas  of  baby  comfort  and  hygiene  were  rather 
primitive.  The  room,  the  Empress's  own  room,  in 
which  the  cradle  stood,  was  kept  at  an  extremely 
high  temperature,  whilst  the  infant  was  wrapped  up 
in  flannels  and  almost  smothered  by  a  number  of 
coverlets  lined  with  wadding  and  black  fox-skins. 
•*  I  saw  him  myself,"  writes  Catherine,  "many 
times  afterwards,  lying  in  this  style,  the  perspiration 

^  Cf,  Bilbassov,  V.  A.,  Geschickte  Katherina  11^  vol.  i,  p.  272. 


26     THE   CURSE   OF   THE    ROMANOVS 

running  from  his  face  and  whole  body,  and  hence  it 
was  that,  when  older,  the  least  breath  of  air  that 
reached  him  chilled  him  and  made  him  ill.  Besides, 
he  had  in  attendance  on  him  a  great  number  of  aged 
matrons,  who,  by  their  ill-judged  care  and  their 
want  of  common-sense,  did  him  infinitely  more  harm 
than  good,  both  physically  and  morally."  Only 
when  the  forty  days  of  her  convalescence  were  over 
was  Catherine  allowed  to  see  her  child  for  the  first 
time.  He  was  brought  into  her  room,  accom- 
panied by  the  Empress,  and  her  confessor  who 
read  the  prayers.  "  I  thought  the  child  pretty," 
writes  Catherine,  "and  the  sight  of  him  raised  my 
spirits  a  little ;  but  the  moment  the  prayers  were 
finished,  the  Empress  had  him  carried  away  and 
then  left  me."  ^ 

On  the  25th  of  September  (O.S.)  (October  the 
6th)  little  Paul  was  christened  with  great  pomp.  The 
christening  was  followed  by  festivities  which  lasted 
a  whole  year.  The  Imperial  Chamberlain,  Shou- 
valov,  Elizabeth's  favourite,  gave  a  fancy  dress 
ball  which  continued  for  forty-eight  hours  and  at 
which  the  Empress  was  present.  "Who  would 
ever  have  thought,"  wrote  Count  Voronzov,  an  eye- 
witness of  the  general  rejoicings,  forty  years  after- 
wards, **that  it  was  the  birth  of  a  tyrant  we  were 
then  celebrating." 

The  question  of  Pauls  paternity  is  still  very 
vexed.  If  Paul  was  not  a  son  of  Peter  HI,  who, 
through  his  mother,  was  a  grandson  of  Peter  the 
Great,  the  present  ruler  of  the  Russian  Empire 
is  neither  a  Romanov  nor  a  Holstein  Gottorp,     He 

*  Cf.  Mimoires  de  PlmpSratrice  Catherine  11^  London,  1859,  pp. 
216-225. 


THE   BIRTH   OF  A  TYRANT        27 

I 

would  simply  be  Nicholas  II  Soltykov.  It  would 
be  true  then  that  the  revolutionary  exile,  Prince 
Kropotkin,  the  scion  of  an  ancient  Slav  family,  is 
possessed  of  a  greater  right  to  the  Russian  throne 
than  the  great-grandson  of  Paul  I,  the  usurper. 
The  doubt  which  shrouded  in  mystery  the  birth  of 
Paul,  as  it  has  that  of  many  other  of  the  world  s 
rulers,  is  one  of  those  that  can  only  be  cleared  by 
mothers  and  midwives.  Catherine  herself  admitted 
in  her  Memoirs,  in  her  cynical  manner,  that  not 
Peter,  but  Sergius  Soltykov,  was  Pauls  father.  She 
had  received  the  order  of  her  aunt  and  Empress 
Elizabeth  that  an  heir  to  the  Russian  throne  should 
be  forthcoming.  She  was  told  that  "there  were 
situations  in  which  a  higher  interest  demanded  an 
exception  to  the  rule,"  and  that  she  must  "  choose 
between  Sergius  Soltykov  and  Leon  Narishkin  "  as 
the  father  of  her  son.  Catherine  decided  in  favour 
of  the  former.  Her  words,  however,  have  been 
discredited  by  historians,  who  believe  that  Catherine, 
who  hated  Paul  because  he  really  was  the  son  of 
Peter,  wrote  these  lines  in  order  to  disqualify  him 
for  the  throne.  Personally,  I  am  of  opinion  that 
even  if  the  paternity  of  Paul  may  be  ascribed  to 
Peter,  this  unhappy  monarch  was  not  his  only 
possible  father.  Catherine  had  not  waited  for  the 
Imperial  command  of  her  aunt  to  break  the  seventh 
commandment  She  had  sought  consolation  in 
the  arms  of  her  lovers  for  her  disappointment  in  an 
unhappy  marriage,  long  before  she  had  been  told 
that  "  for  the  good  of  the  State  she  must  sacrifice 
her  scruples." 

"  One  day,"  relates  an  ambassador  at  the  Court 
of  St.  Petersburg,  "Catherine  was  confidentially  con- 


28    THE   CURSE   OF  THE    ROMANOVS 

versing  with  the  Princess  Dashkov  when  a  splendid 
regiment  of  soldiers  passed  the  window.  *  Which 
one  among  these  soldiers  do  you  like  best  ? '  asked 
the  future  Empress  of  Russia.  *  It  is  hard  indeed,' 
replied  the  Princess, '  to  make  a  choice.'  Catherine 
smiled.  'To  avoid  this  embarras  du  chotXy  she 
cynically  observed,  *  I  should  love  the  entire  regi- 
ment.'"^ 

She  was  as  good  as  her  word  when  she  became 
Autocrat  of  all  the  Russias.  It  is  difficult  to  ima- 
gine that  Catherine's  admission,  with  regard  to  the 
paternity  of  Paul,  was  dictated  by  her  wish  to  pre- 
vent him  from  ascending  the  throne.  Did  she  not 
in  so  doing  also  disqualify  her  grandson  Alexander, 
whom  she  intended  to  appoint  as  her  successor? 
In  any  case,  no  one  at  the  Court  of  St.  Petersburg 
believed  Paul  to  be  the  son  of  Peter,  and  Sergius 
Soltykov  was  always  mentioned  as  the  father  of  the 
heir  apparent* 

One  day,  relates  Count  Fedor  Golovkin,  a  con- 
temporary of  Catherine  and  of  Paul,  and  Russian 
Ambassador  at  Naples  in  1794,  when  Paul  was 
accused  of  conspiring  with  Saldern  against  Cathe- 
rine, Count  Panin,  Paul's  preceptor,  brutally  told  him 
that  he  was  an  illegitimate  child. 

''  Do  you  know  who  you  are  ?  "  asked  Panin. 

"  The  successor  to  the  throne." 

**  Yes,  but  how?  I  will  tell  you  what  you  still 
ignore.  You  are  the  heir  apparent  only  by  the 
gracious  will  of  your  mother.     You  have  hitherto 

^  Cf.    Histoire    secrUe    des   Amours   de   Catherine    11^    Paris, 

1873,  P-  38. 

"  Cf.  Bourr^e  de    Corberan,   Un  Diplomate  Franqais  (Jourmd 

InUrne^  \^i\  vol.  i,  p.  245. 


THE    BIRTH    OF   A   TYRANT        29 

been  left  in  the  belief  that  you  are  the  son  of  Peter 
III,  but  it  is  now  time  that  you  should  learn  the 
truth.  You  are  an  illegitimate  child,  and  the  wit- 
nesses to  this  fact  still  exist."  ^ 

Immediately  after  the  birth  of  Paul,  Soltykov 
was  sent  away.  He  was  despatched  to  Sweden, 
officially  to  announce  the  birth  of  an  heir  to  the 
Russian  throne.  Peter  HI  himself  never  con- 
sidered the  child  as  his  own,  and  we  shall  presently 
see  that  he  intended  to  exclude  him  from  the 
dynasty. 

As  for  Paul,  in  spite  of  his  attitude  after  the 
death  of  his  mother  and  his  apparent  filial  love  for 
his  pretended  father,  he  never  believed  himself  to 
be  a  son  of  Peter  HI,  of  whom  he  often  spoke  as 
"a  drunkard  and  an  imbecile."  His  conduct  was 
dictated  by  his  hate  for  Catherine  and  Potemkin 
rather  than  his  reverence  for  Peter  HI.  We  shall 
have  occasion  to  return  to  this  subject  in  a  subse- 
quent chapter.  Count  Fedor  Golovkin  informs  us 
that  Paul,  having,  in  1 796,  invited  all  the  dethroned 
sovereigns  to  St.  Petersburg,  Stanislaus  Poniatovsky, 
the  former  lover  of  Catherine  and  King  of  Poland, 
appeared  at  the  Russian  Court.  "  The  King  has 
told  me,"  writes  Count  Golovkin,  "  that  Paul,  with 
tears  in  his  eyes  and  kissing  the  king's  hands, 
implored  him  to  acknowledge  himself  as  his  father." 
Paul  was  very  disappointed  when  Poniatovsky 
declined  it.* 

Paul  was  able  to  walk  when  little  more  than  a 

>  Cf.  Golvokin,  La  Cour  (k  Paul  /,  pp.  102-103.  The  MS.  dis- 
covered by  M.  S.  Bonnet,  in  the  possession  of  M.  de  F.,  in  the  Manor 
of  Monuaz,  in  the  vicinity  of  Lausanne,  was  published  in  1905. 

'  Golovkin, /3iV/.,  p.  138. 


^ 


30    THE   CURSE   OF   THE    ROMANOVS 

year  old.  The  women  who  were  about  him  be- 
stowed small  care  on  his  person  ;  his  hours  for  going 
to  bed  were  arranged  according  to  their  convenience, 
and  varied  from  eight  o'clock  in  the  evening  to  one 
o'clock  in  the  morning.  His  meals  were  equally 
irregular,  and  the  neglect  of  the  child  went  so  far 
that  it  was  possible  for  him  to  fall  out  ot  his  crib  at 
night  and  nobody  know  anything  about  it,  until  he 
was  found  the  following  morning  asleep  on  the 
floor. 

He  never  left  his  own  apartments  during  the 
lifetime  of  the  Empress  Elizabeth,  of  whom  he  stood 
in  trembling  awe,  such  was  the  terror  in  regard  to 
her  with  which  he  had  been  inspired  by  his  attend- 
ants. While  he  was  still  young  she  never  missed 
a  day  in  going  to  his  apartments,  and  frequently  re- 
peated her  visits  at  night,  but  these  ceased  as  he 
grew  older.  Of  his  parents,  on  the  contrary,  he  saw 
very  little ;  so  rare  indeed  were  their  visits,  that  one 
paid  by  Catherine  to  her  son  was  considered  an 
occurrence  important  enough  to  be  mentioned  in  the 
diary  of  the  Sergeant  of  the  Royal  Household.  We 
know  from  Catherine  herself  how,  after  her  long 
course  of  suffering  in  Russia,  she  applied  to  the  Vice- 
Chancellor,  Voronzov,  expressing  her  wish  to  return 
to  her  native  land.  He,  hoping  to  turn  her  from 
her  resolution,  reminded  her  of  her  children,  but  all 
her  answer  was  that,  as  she  was  denied  the  natural 
pleasure  of  seeing  them  except  by  express  permission 
of  the  Empress  and  was  not  allowed  to  live  with 
them,  it  was  a  matter  of  no  consequence  whether 
they  were  separated  by  a  hundred  yards  or  a  hun- 
dred versts.  Her  Majesty,  she  added,  no  doubt 
took  good  care  of  them. 


THE   BIRTH    OF   A   TYRANT        31 

Apart  from  the  different  servitors,  in  the  way  of 
nurses,  pages  and  others,  who  overran  his  apart- 
ments, the  young  Grand  Duke  Paul  was,  in  1758, 
personally  attended  by  Alexis  Gerebzov  and  Count 
Martin  Skavronsky.  The  Empress  further  recalled 
Theodore  Bekhteev  from  Paris,  where  he  was  acting 
as  Charg6  d' Affaires,  in  order  that  he  might  enter 
the  service  of  the  Grand  Duke  as  Master  of  the 
Ceremonies,  and  on  July  9,  1760,  she  nominated 
the  Chamberlain,  General  Nikita  Panin,  as  the  Grand 
Master  of  Paul's  household. 

This  appointment  was  not  favourably  looked 
upon  by  the  ladies  of  Paul's  household.  Panin 
being  at  dinner  with  the  Empress,  the  Grand  Duke 
sent  some  one  to  spy  at  him  through  the  door  and 
bring  him  word  of  his  appearance.  The  report  he 
received  was  that  Panin,  who  at  that  time  was  only 
forty-two  years  of  age,  was  a  heavy,  cross-looking 
old  man,  with  a  hideous  wig  on  his  head.  When, 
therefore,  shortly  after,  Paul  came  across  an  old 
man  in  a  wig,  clad  in  a  long,  blue,  yellow-lined  coat, 
walking  in  the  gardens  in  St.  Petersburg,  he  natu- 
rally concluded  that  this  was  Panin ;  the  child  was 
terrified,  and,  having  been  led  to  believe  that  all 
his  old  attendants  were  to  be  taken  from  him  and 
all  further  pleasure  denied  him,  it  was  with  tears 
in  his  eyes  that  he  received  the  first  visit  of  his 
Grand  Master. 

Paul's  first  attendance  at  any  theatrical  perform- 
ance, as  we  learn  from  the  diary  already  mentioned, 
was  on  the  12th  of  August  1760,  when  the  French 
tragedy  of  *'  Mithridate "  was  given  at  the  Opera 
House  in  the  presence  of  the  Empress.  The  nth 
of  October  of  that  same  year  saw  his  first  appear- 


A 


32     THE   CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

ance  at  a  public  dinner,  Paul  being  then  six  years 
of  age.  After  this  event  he  was  considered  old 
enough  to  give  private  audience  to  the  members  of 
the  diplomatic  corps. 

Paul,  although  of  a  rather  weakly  constitution, 
which,  as  has  been  pointed  out  above,  may  to  a 
great  extent  be  ascribed  to  the  ridiculous  and  ex- 
aggerated care  his  Imperial  aunt  took  of  him,  seems, 
in  his  early  youth,  to  have  given  unmistakable  sig^s 
of  intelligence.  His  tutor,  Poroshin,  relates  that 
Paul  was  only  seven  years  of  age  when  Buturlin, 
before  leaving  to  rejoin  the  army,  came  to  pay  his 
respects  to  the  future  Emperor;  and  that  on  this 
occasion  the  latter  observed  that  M.  de  Soltykov 
had  gone  to  conclude  peace  but  had  failed,  and  that 
M.  de  Buturlin  would  now  make  neither  peace  nor 
war.  Paul,  who  was  very  ugly,  is  reported  to  have 
been  very  handsome  in  his  early  youth,  if  we  are  to  be- 
lieve the  testimony  of  his  mother,  of  Count  Golovkin, 
and  of  others.  Count  Stroganov  had  in  his  picture- 
gallery  the  portrait  of  Paul  at  the  age  of  seven  by 
the  side  of  one  of  his  son  Alexander  I  taken  at  the 
same  age  and  in  a  similar  costume,  and  so  great 
was  the  resemblance  between  father  and  son  that 
strangers  inquired  why  the  Count  Stroganov  had  two 
copies  of  the  same  portrait.  Alexander,  it  must  be 
borne  in  mind,  was  exceedingly  handsome.  Pauls 
ugliness  is,  therefore,  attributed  to  his  severe  illness 
in  1764,  which  nearly  had  a  fatal  issue. 


CHAPTER   III 

MOTHERHOOD  AND  AMBITION 

The  death  of  Elizaheth — Peter  III— He  is  assassinated  at  Ropsha — Im- 
pression produced  on  Paul— Catherine  and  d'Alembert — Paul's  educa- 
tion— His  tutors,  Panin  and  Poroshin — Paul's  amorous  disposition — 
He  is  encouraged  by  Catherine  and  Orlov — His  sweetheart  Vera — 
Paul's  military  studies — Estimate  of  Paul's  character — Inoculation  for 
smallpox — ^Dr.  Dimsdale's  visit  to  Russia — Catherine's  feigned  affection 
for  her  son. 

Elizabeth  is  dying.  Frederick  II  will  soon  be 
able  to  exclaim  in  his  exultation,  on  learning  the 
news  of  the  demise  of  his  enemy,  that  the  "  sky 
begins  to  clear."  Morta  la  bestta^  morto  il  veneno. 
For  nearly  a  year  the  Empress  has  been  confined 
to  her  Palace.  In  vain  did  sorrowing  courtiers,  in 
vain  did  sheepskin-clad  moujiks  pray  for  her  re- 
covery. On  Christmas  Eve  (O.S.)  1761,  the  proud 
daughter  of  Peter  the  Great  lay  on  her  death-bed. 
Her  nephew,  Peter,  soon  to  be  Emperor  Peter  III, 
and  his  spouse,  Catherine,  were  kneeling  before  the 
Empress.  With  tearful  eyes  the  Grand  Duke  was 
listening  to  the  last  instructions  of  his  aunt  and 
benefactress.  She  recommended  him  to  be  kind  to 
his  subjects,  to  live  in  peace  with  his  wife,  but,  as  a 
special  mark  of  his  gratitude  for  her  past  kindness, 
she  implored  him  to  cherish  his  son,  the  Grand 
Duke  Paul.  This  last  injunction  is  very  significant. 
Elizabeth  was  well  aware  of  the  fact  that  her  nephew 
refused  to  recognise  little  Paul  as  his  own  flesh  and 

33  r 


^ 


34    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

blood.      The  weeping  Peter  promised  everything, 
but  he  failed  to  keep  his  promise  with  regard  to  his 
son.^     On  the  following  day,  at  four  o'clock  in  the 
afternoon,  Elizabeth  died,  and  Peter  ascended  the 
throne.     The  name  of  Paul,  as  heir  to  the  throne, 
was  omitted  from  the  form  of  the  oath  of  allegiance 
taken  by  the  subjects  on  the  accession  of  Peter  HI. 
According  to  a  message  despatched  by  M.  de  Bre- 
teuil,  the  French  Ambassador,  there  was  an  attempt 
at  Court  to  make  Peter  repudiate  his  wife,  disavow 
Paul,  and  marry  Princess  Voronzov.     Peter  lacked 
courage  to  take  this  step,  but  he  never  ceased  think- 
ing of  it     *'  The  Emperor,"  wrote  M.  de  Breteuil, 
''has  seen  his  son  only  once  since  his  accession. 
Should  he  get  any  male  issue  by  his  mistress,  it  is 
probable  that  he  will  marry  the  latter  and  appoint 
the  boy  as  his  successor.     The  epithets,  however, 
which    Mademoiselle    Voronzov    hurled    at    His 
Majesty  during   one   of  their   disputes   in    public 
are  rather  reassuring  in  this  respect."  *      Peter,  it 
seems,  also  recalled  Sergius  Soltykov  from  Paris  and 
treated  him  with  marked  kindness.     His  Majesty 
— so  the  courtiers  maintained — was  d  la  recherche 
de  la  paterniti  of  his  son,  and  wished  Soltykov  to 
acknowledge  himself  as  the  real  father  of  the  Prince.* 
On  the  death  of  the  Empress,  Peter  HI  con- 
tinued to  leave  Panin  in  attendance  on  his  son,  and 
besides  conferring  on   him,  in  1762,  the  rank  of 
Privy  Councillor,  also  decorated  him  with  the  Order 
of  St.  Andrew.     He  was,  however,  not  without  his 
suspicions  of  the  Grand  Master,  and  appointed  one 

^  Cf.  La  Caur  de  Russie^  p.  178.  '  IbicLf  p.  191. 

^  Cf,j  however,  Helbig,  Biographie  Peters  des  Dritten^  1 808-1 809, 
Bd.  2,  p.  75. 


MOTHERHOOD   AND   AMBITION     35 

of  his  aides-de-camp  to  keep  him  in  sight  and  watch 
his  movements. 

It  was  as  impossible  to  Catherine  as  it  was  to 
the  Emperor  to  give  thought  or  time  to  their 
son.  Catherine's  position  during  the  short  reign 
of  Peter  III  was  unenviable,  nay,  painful  in  the 
extreme  and  menaced  with  danger. 

After  a  reign  of  six  months  Peter  III,  who,  in 
spite  of  his  many  eccentricities,  his  drunkenness  and 
his  abhorrence  of  a  bath,  had  many  good  qualities, 
was  dethroned  by  his  wife,  who  succeeded  him  as 
Empress  Catherine  II.  A  few  days  after  his  abdi- 
cation the  grandson  of  Peter  the  Great  was  assas- 
sinated at  Ropsha.  One  tragedy  had  thus  come  to 
an  end  with  his  death,  and  another  was  in  course  of 
preparation.  The  curtain  rose  again  upon  it  thirty- 
five  years  later,  when  the  great  Empress  lay  on  her 
death-bed  unconscious,  while  her  son  was  burning 
her  secret  papers. 

When,  on  the  28th  of  June  (O.S.)  (July  9th)  1762 
Catherine  ascended  the  throne,  Paul  at  that  time 
being  under  eight  years  of  age,  current  events  did 
not  fail  to  produce  a  deep  impression  upon  his  imagi- 
native mind  and  delicate  frame.  He  was  frightened 
out  of  his  wits  by  the  information  of  some  courtiers 
that  his  father  intended  to  take  his  life.  This 
information  and  the  fright  it  gave  the  Prince  very 
seriously  affected  his  health  and  shattered  his  nerves.^ 
Young  as  he  was,  Paul  was,  however,  aware  of  the 
fact  that  many  courtiers,  and  among  them  his  own 
tutor,  Panin,  thought  that  Catherine  had  usurped  the 
throne  which  by  right  belonged  to  her  son,  whom 
Elizabeth  had  intended  to  appoint  as  her  successor. 

'  Cf.  Sabathier  de  Cabres,  La  Cour  de  Russie^  p.  252. 


36    THE  CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

He  brooded  over  the  wrong  that  was  done  to  him 
for  thirty-four  years,  until  he  could  take  his  revenge, 
Panin  himself  did  not  hesitate  to  make  Catherine 
understand  that, 'after  the  death  of  Peter  HI,  her 
son,  Paul,  was  the  rightful  successor,  and  she,  his 
mother,  could  only  be  considered  as  the  Regent 
during  the  minority  of  the  Emperor.  Panin  found 
no  support  for  his  plans,  but  this  expression  of  his 
opinion  was  sufficient  to  make  Catherine  hate  and 
fear  both  Panin  and  Paul. 

The  German  Princess,  now  Empress  of  Russia, 
was  not  a  woman  to  be  afraid  of  a  crime.  Her 
conscience  was  elastic  to  the  highest  degree.  Peter 
HI  met  his  death  in  Ropsha,  and  Orlov,  who 
plainly  avowed  and  accused  himself  of  the  deed, 
was  generously  rewarded  for  it.  The  Prince  Ivan, 
dethroned  by  Elizabeth,  might  still  be  considered 
a  dangerous  rival ;  Ivan  was  promptly  assassinated. 
She  knew,  too,  that  an  agitation  was  on  foot  to 
exclude  her  from  the  throne  and  to  place  Paul  in 
her  stead.  The  best  of  mothers  seem  to  lose  all 
their  affection  for  their  sons,  and  to  be  animated 
by  a  spirit  of  selfishness,  when  it  is  a  question 
of  renouncing  a  crown.  But  Catherine  had  never 
been  guilty  of  too  much  affection  for  any  members 
of  her  family,  and  if  she  showed  little  tenderness 
towards  her  parents  and  her  brother,  it  is  not  to  be 
wondered  at  that  Paul,  whom  she  was  bound  to 
consider  as  her  rival,  could  not  be  the  object  of 
her  excessive  love.  Her  position,  however,  was 
still  very  precarious,  and  Paul  was  necessary  to 
her ;  as  long  as  he  lived  she  could  safely  reign  in 
his  name.  "  She  would  not  remain  long  at  the  head 
of  the  State  should  the  young  Tsar  die,"  wrote 


MOTHERHOOD  AND   AMBITION     37 

the  French  Ambassador,  de  Breteuil.^  Catherine 
showed,  therefore,  great  anxiety  when  the  Prince 
suddenly  fell  ill  during  his  voyage  from  St.  Peters- 
burg to  Moscow  for  the  coronation  of  his  mother. 
He  arrived  in  a  state  of  ill-health  at  Moscow,  but 
soon  seemed  to  rally.  Catherine  was  crowned  on 
the  22nd  of  September,  and  a  week  later  Paul  had 
again  an  attack  of  fever  and  lay  dangerously  ill  in 
the  Kremlin.  For  a  whole  week  his  serious  con- 
dition was  a  matter  of  great  anxiety,  and  his  mother 
never  left  his  bedside.  She  made  a  solemn  vow  that 
she  would  build  a  hospital  in  the  name  of  Paul  if 
the  latter  recovered.  Paul  got  better,  and  Catherine 
erected  the  Paul's  hospital  in  Moscow.*  But  who 
can  fathom  the  human  heart  ?  Was  it  her  motherly 
affection,  or  the  thought  that  Paul  was  the  link  that 
united  the  German  Princess  to  the  Russian  throne, 
that  was  at  the  bottom  of  her  solicitude?  In  any 
case,  the  Empress  had  learned  the  extent  to  which 
the  population  was  attached  to  the  Prince.  His 
illness  and  recovery  gave  cause  to  successive  grief 
and  rejoicings.  She  shaped  her  attitude  towards, 
and  her  treatment  of,  her  son  accordingly. 

Catherine  was  no  sooner  on  the  throne  than  she 
took  a  step  on  behalf  of  her  son's  education,  which, 
if  it  did  not  in  the  end  prove  successful,  at  least 
won  for  her  the  applause  of  the  Encyclopaedists. 
She  sent  orders  to  Soltykov,  the  Russian  Minister 
in  Paris,  to  beg  d'Alembert  to  undertake  the  educa- 
tion of  the  Tsarevitsh.  Whether  d'Alembert  was 
gifted  with  the  qualities  which  would  have  made 

*  Cf.   Russie  in  Archives  des  Affaires  iirangkres,    Paris,  vol. 
Ixxi,  No.  22. 

*  Cf.  De  Breteuil,  /.^.,  and  Sbornik,  vol.  vii,  pp.  144-149. 


/- 


38    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

him  a  suitable  tutor  for  the  heir  of  the  Russian 
throne,  it  is  almost  impossible  to  say  ;  at  any  ,rate» 
he  did  not  take  the  Empress's  proposal  as  a  serious 
one,  and  wrote  a  bantering  letter  to  Voltaire  on 
the  subject : — 

*'  You  may  like  to  know  that  I — who  am  without 
the  honour  of  being  a  Jesuit — ^have  been  asked  to 
undertake  the  education  of  the  Grand  Duke  of 
Russia ;  but  I  am  too  much  subject  to  hemorrhoids, 
which,  in  that  country,  are  dangerous." 

D'Alembert  sent  his  refusal  to  the  Empress 
through  her  Cabinet  Minister,  Odar.  Whereupon 
Catherine  wrote  to  d'Alembert  expatiating  on  her 
great  wish  to  place  so  precious  a  being  as  an  only 
son  under  the  care  of  one  in  whom  she  had  such 
blind  confidence.  She  pressed  him  to  come  to 
Russia,  giving  him  full  liberty  to  bring  what  friends 
with  him  he  liked. 

"I  know  you  too  well,"  wrote  Catherine,  in  her 
second  letter  to  d'Alembert,  **  to  be  an  honest  man, 
to  attribute  your  refusal  to  vanity.  I  am  sure  that 
the  sole  motive  of  it  is  the  love  of  leisure  enabling 
you  to  cultivate  letters  and  friendship.  But  where 
is  the  objection  ?  Come  with  all  your  friends ;  I 
promise  them  too  every  advantage  and  comfort  that 
depends  upon  me.  Do  not  listen  to  the  representa- 
tions of  the  king  of  Prussia  ;  this  prince  has  no  son- 
I  confess  that  I  have  the  education  of  my  son  so 
much  at  heart,  and  you  are  so  necessary  to  it,  that 
perhaps  I  press  you  too  much.  Excuse  my  indis- 
cretion for  the  sake  of  the  cause."  * 

The  proposal,  however,  which  had  been  made 
by  the  Tsaritza  to  one  of  its  members,  was  duly  pub- 

^  Sbomik,  vol.  vii,  pp.  1 79-1 8a 


I 


MOTHERHOOD   AND   AMBITION    39 

lished  in  the  Minutes  of  the  Sittings  of  the  French 
Academy.  Voltaire  complimented  his  friend  in 
moving  terms,  and  Catherine's  enlightened  action 
was  recorded  far  and  wide  in  the  papers  and  became 
the  talk  of  the  whole  civilised  world. 

And  so  this  first  effort  to  enter  upon  the  road  of 
popularity  had  been  attended  with  success.^  That 
Catherine  had  at  heart  no  sincere  desire  for  the  wel- 
fare of  her  son  is  sufficiently  proved  by  the  little 
trouble  she  took  to  find  another  tutor  for  him  in 
place  of  the  one  she  had  proposed.  A  rumour  ran 
through  the  literary  world  of  Paris  that  Catherine, 
being  disappointed  with  regard  to  d'Alembert,  was 
intending  to  renew  her  request  either  to  Diderot, 
Marmontel,  or  Saurin — what  really  happened  was 
that  Paul  was  left  under  the  care  of  Panin. 

On  the  15th  July  1762  Paul  was  made  Colonel  of 
a  regiment  of  Cuirassiers,  henceforth  known  as  the 
Cuirassiers  of  the  Hereditary  Grand  Duke.  On  the 
20th  December  of  the  same  year  the  following  ukase 
was  issued  to  the  Senate :  '*  Moved  by  the  zealous 
and  ever-present  loving  anxiety  which  we  feel  for 
the  welfare  of  Our  Nation,  and  for  the  prosperity 
of  the  Fleet,  which  above  all  things  claims  our 
care,  we  have  been  graciously  pleased,  in  imitation 
of  our  Grandfather  Peter  the  Great  of  imperishable 
memory,  to  create  our  well-beloved  son.  and  heir 
Paul,  Grand  Admiral  of  the  Fleet,  in  order  to  incul- 
cate in  him  from  his  earliest  years,  that  feeling  of 
solicitude  concerning  it  with  which  we  ourselves 
are  animated." 

Moreover,  as  Duke  of  Holstein,  the  privilege  of 
conferring  the  order   of  Saint   Anne,   which   had 

1  Cf,  Kobeko,  Der  Caesarevitsch  Paul^  1886,  p.  10. 


/* 


40    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

been  instituted  by  his  grandfather,  Duke  Charles 
Frederick,  was  reserved  to  the  Grand  Duke,  or, 
to  speak  more  correctly,  on  him  fell  the  duty  of 
signing  the  brevets,  no  one  but  Catherine  herself 
being  allowed  to  award  the  honour. 

Finally,  on  the  21st  July  1762,  Catherine  settled 
an  allowance  upon  him  of  one  hundred  and  twenty 
thousand  roubles,  and  the  following  year  made  over 
the  estate  Kamenny  Ostrov  to  him  as  a  gift.^ 

Catherine  also  took  good  care  to  be  well  posted 
up  in  all  that  was  said  or  done  by  those  who  were 
about  her  son.  She  appointed  certain  valets  and 
other  personal  attendants,  less  for  the  purpose  of 
waiting  upon  him  than  to  make  report  to  her  of  all 
that  took  place  in  the  Grand  Dukes  apartments. 
Having  once  confided  him  to  Panin's  care,  she  gave 
herself  no  further  trouble  in  the  matter  of  Paul's 
education.  Rooms  were  set  apart  for  him,  and  into 
these  she  very  seldom  entered.  She  wrote  to 
Panin  during  the  long  pauses  between  her  .visits 
to  her  son,  but  her  solicitude  was  always  about  the 
latter's  health ;  as  to  all  that  concerned  his  studies 
she  appears  to  have  been  quite  indifferent. 

Panin,  to  whom  the  education  of  Paul  had  been 
entrusted  already  by  Elizabeth,  was  certainly  one  of 
the  ablest  and  most  highly  cultivated  Russians  of 
the  day.  He  knew  how  to  win  his  pupil's  affection, 
so  that  Paul's  childish  attachment  to  him  developed 
into  a  firm  friendship  in  the  after  years.  Whether 
Panin  possessed  all  the  qualities  necessary  for  his 
post  is  rather  doubtful.  "  M.  Panin,"  wrote  the 
Earl  of  Buckinghamshire,  "has  the  care  of  the 
Grand  Duke,  superintends  his  education,  attends 

»  Cf.  Shilder,  "  The  Emperor  Paul,"  p.  38,  note. 


MOTHERHOOD   AND   AMBITION    41 

him  almost  everywhere,  dines  with  him,  and  lodges 
in  the  same  room ;  add  to  this,  though  a  sensible 
and  a  worthy  man,  long  used  to  business,  he  is 
indolent  in  the  taking  it  under  consideration,  and 
tedious  in  the  agitation  of  it;  his  constitution  is 
weak,  and  he  has  a  taste,  for  pleasure  and  dissipa- 
tion."^ Panin's  love  affairs,  too,  did  not  fail  to 
occupy  Paul's  imagination  and  to  distract  his  mind 
from  serious  studies.  "  M.  Panin,"  wrote  Sir 
George  Macartney,  "conceived  a  violent  passion 
for  the  Countess  of  Stroganov,  daughter  of  the 
Grand  Chancellor  Voronzov.  The  ill  effects  aris- 
ing to  M.  Panin  from  this  unfortunate  connection 
are  that,  by  his  negligence  and  dissipation,  all 
business  is  either  at  a  stand  or  moves  with  more 
than  Russian  slowness ;  that  he  begins  to  lose  the 
respect  of  the  public,  which  can  scarcely  pardon  an 
undisguised  boyish  passion  in  a  man  of  his  years, 
station  and  experience ;  that  his  enemies  have  not 
failed  to  lay  hold  of  this  opportunity,  to  represent 
the  indecency  and  ill  example  of  such  weakness  in 
the  Minister  of  Her  Majesty  and  in  the  Governor 
of  the  Heir  of  her  Empire."^  In  spite,  however, 
of  his  failings,  the  English  Ambassadors  spoke  in 
praise  of  his  honesty,  sincerity  and  ability.  "He  is 
certainly  incorruptible,  and  the  most  capable  man 
in  this  country,"  said  Sir  George  Macartney ;  and 
Lord  Cathcart  testified  that  "  Panin  aims  at  nothing 
but  utility  and  integrity.  He  is  in  many  respects 
an  exception  to  all  I  have  seen  of  his  country ;  he 
has  more  the  character  and  manners  of  a  German." ' 
Panin's  first  care  on  entering  upon  the  duties  of 

^  Cf»  Sboxnik,  vol.  xii,  p.  182.         >  Ibid,^  vol.  xii,  pp.  256-257. 

'  Ibid,^  vol.  xii,  pp.  428,  429. 


42    THE   CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

his  new  office  of  Grand  Master,  was  to  draw  up  a 
scheme  for  the  education  of  the  Grand  Duke.  In 
this  it  was  arranged  that  his  education  should  be 
divided  into  two  periods.  During  the  first  of  these, 
which  was  to  last  until  Paul  was  fourteen  years  old, 
the  subjects  to  be  taught  him  were  Bible  History, 
Arithmetic,  and  three  languages,  French,  German 
and  Russian.  Emphasis,  however,  was  laid  on  the 
necessity,  during  these  early  years,  of  giving  the 
lessons  the  tone  of  instructive  advice  and  wise 
counsels,  rather  than  of  allowing  them  to  be  merely 
dry  and  arduous  scientific  studies. 

As  for  the  second  period,  it  was  deemed  un- 
necessary that  the  Grand  Duke  should  be  taught 
all  sciences  indiscriminately,  and  Panin,  therefore, 
was  asked  to  prepare  a  list  of  those  of  which  he 
considered  the  knowledge  was  indispensable  to  one 
in  his  position,  and  he  further  undertook  to  arrange 
how  these  subjects  were  to  be  taught. 

The  choice  of  tutor  fell  on  Poroshin,  who  was 
installed  in  his  office  on  the  9th  July  1762.  Poro- 
shin was  learned  and  accomplished  ;  he  was  a  sound 
mathematician  and  a  fine  linguist,  and  the  inter- 
course with  him  was  in  a  high  degree  instructive  to 
his  pupil. 

He  became  passionately  attached  to  the  Grand 
Duke,  whom  he  never  left ;  indeed,  the  only  reproach 
that  can  be  cast  at  him  is  that  he  carried  his  affec- 
tion for  his  pupil  to  an  exaggerated  extreme.  His 
kindness  to  the  Tsarevitsh,  who  confided  all  his 
childish  secrets  to  him,  on  some  occasions  amounted 
to  weakness. 

The  only  document  of  any  reliability  from  which 
we  learn  anything  of  Paul  during  this  period  is  the 


MOTHERHOOD    AND   AMBITION    43 

Diary  kept  by  Poroshin  from  September  12th,  1764, 
to  the  month  of  January  1766. 

The  hours  of  Paul's  day  were  divided  as  follows  : 
he  rose  at  seven,  sometimes  earlier ;  dinner  was 
after  one  o'clock,  supper  at  half-past  eight.  There 
were  lessons  both  before  and  after  dinner;  these 
being  finished,  the  remainder  of  the  day  was  fre- 
quently spent  in  going  to  the  theatre,  to  Court 
receptions  or  to  masked  balls. 

Pauls  religious  instruction  was  not  neglected. 
A  certain  portion  of  time  was  put  aside  for  this  on 
three  days  of  the  week,  and  it  was  further  ordered 
that,  on  Sundays  and  Saints'  Days,  a  pious  address 
was  to  be  read  to  him  before  attending  Divine  Ser- 
vice, the  length  of  which  was  to  depend  on  the  time 
at  disposal  for  this.^ 

French  and  German  were  taught  him  thoroughly, 
besides  Russian,  and  he  was  given  some  slight 
knowledge  of  Italian  and  Latin,  Platon  being  his 
instructor  in  the  last-named  language. 

Panin  was  only  concerned  in  the  Grand  Duke's 
education  in  so  far  that  he  superintended  those 
under  him,  who  submitted  their  plan  of  work  for 
his  approval.  He  urged  Paul  to  learn  passages 
from  the  best  French  authors  by  heart,  or  to  study 
scenes  in  the  French  tragedies  so  as  to  be  able  to 
recite  them,  but  beyond  this  he  seems  to  have  exer- 
cised no  personal  influence  as  regards  the  course  of 
his  learning. 

He  was,  however,  a  firm  adherent  of  Betzky's 
theory  that  children  learn  a  great  deal  from  their 
games,  and,  although  he  did  not  interfere  in  Paul's 
actual   studies,    he    occasionally   appeared    with    a 

^  Cy.  Prince  Vyazemsky,  infra. 


44    THE   CURSE   OF   THE    ROMANOVS 

plaything  of  some  kind  or  another  which  he  con- 
sidered might  help  to  instruct  him.  Thus  he 
brought  him  a  carpenter's  bench  and  showed  him 
how  to  use  it,  or  some  silk-worms,  or  a  house  of 
cards.  He  took  him  one  day  to  the  Convent  at 
Smolna,  and  to  the  Academy  of  Fine  Arts,  of  which 
the  Grand  Duke  was  made  an  honorary  member. 

Poroshin  quotes  instances  to  show  with  what 
respect  the  Grand  Duke  regarded  his  instructors. 
Prince  Golytzin,  Master  of  the  Royal  Household, 
having  said  to  Paul  that  he  must  know  his  rule 
of  three  before  learning  fractions,  the  latter  replied, 
"  I  have  been  taught  otherwise,  but,  believe  me, 
dear  Prince,  Monsieur"  (pointing  to  Poroshin) 
**  knows  far  better  than  you  do  what,  as  well  as 
in  what  order,  I  ought  to  learn." 

There  was  never  any  effort  made  to  find  out 
how  far  the  Grand  Duke  was  profiting  by  his 
studies.  On  one  occasion  only  did  he  undergo  an 
examination  in  sacred  history,  in  the  presence  of 
the  Empress  and  certain  dignitaries  of  the  realm. 
Panin  thought  it  would  be  advisable  for  Paul  to 
be  examined  on  other  subjects,  but  whatever  pro- 
posals were  suggested  as  regards  this  matter  they 
were  never  carried  into  practice.  Valuable  infor- 
mation regarding  the  manner  in  which  Panin  and 
Poroshin  conducted  Paul's  education  is  found  in 
the  works  of  Prince  Vyazemsky.^ 

The  intellectual  and  social  surroundings,  writes 
the  Prince,  amidst  which  he  was  reared  were,  may 
be,  somewhat  in  advance  of  his  age,  but  in  every 
way  suited  to  the  development  of  his  intellect  and 
to  his  general  enlightenment,  as  well  as  calculated 

*  Vyazemsky,  Prince  P.  A.,  Works,  vol.  vii,  pp.  69-77. 


MOTHERHOOD   AND   AMBITION    45 

to  render  him  serious  and  practical  in  character  and 
eminently  patriotic ;  it  brought  him  into  contact  with 
the  most  distinguished  men  of  his  country,  and  into 
touch  with  everything  that  laid  claim  to  superiority ; 
in  a  word,  he  grew  up  in  close  relation  with  all  the 
moral  forces  of  the  country  of  which  he  was  one  day 
to  be  the  master. 

The  conversations  which  took  place  before  him  at 
table  and  elsewhere,  although  at  times  they  might  be 
ill-timed  and  far-fetched,  were,  as  a  whole,  enter- 
taining and  instructive ;  they  denoted  a  freedom  of 
opinion  and  liberty  of  thought  fitted  to  awaken  and 
confirm  the  young  Prince's  judgment  and  to  accus- 
tom him  to  hear  and  appreciate  the  truth.  The 
society  around  him,  and  this  should  be  well  borne 
in  mind,  was  not  composed  of  cavillers,  or  men  in 
any  way  opposed  to  their  sovereign  and  country,  but, 
on  the  contrary,  men  devotedly  attached  to  both. 
And  for  this  very  reason  they  allowed  themselves 
to  speak  openly,  having  no  fear  of  compromising 
themselves  or  of  betraying  their  country's  cause,  by 
blaming  what  they  thought  worthy  of  censure  and 
contrary  to  its  true  interests. 

Count  Panin,  the  young  Grand  Duke's  tutor, 
statesman  and  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs  as  he  was, 
not  only  inclined  to  Russian  principles  in  his  politics, 
but  was  himself  a  Russian  all  over  from  head  to  foot 
He  had  been  brought  up  on  national  traditions,  and 
nothing  that  had  to  do  with  Russia  was  unfamiliar 
to  him  or  a  matter  of  indifference.  His  love  for  his 
country  was  therefore  not  the  lukewarm  attachment 
of  the  man  in  office,  who  loves  it  for  interested  and 
selfish  motives,  merely  because  he  loves  power ;  he 
was  ardently  and   enthusiastically  devoted   to  his 


46     THE   CURSE   OF   THE    ROMANOVS 

country,  as  only  a  man  can  be  who  is  attached  to  it 
by  all  the  ties  of  life,  by  community  of  interests  and 
sympathy,  and  to  whom  its  past,  its  present,  and  its 
future  are  equally  dear.  It  is  such  love  as  this  which 
renders  true  and  loyal  service ;  it  does  not  ignore  the 
vices,  the  weaknesses,  or  the  eccentricities  of  the 
nation,  but  puts  forth  all  its  strength  to  combat  and 
overcome  them.  All  other  love  is  blind,  futile,  un- 
intelligent, and  even  harmful. 

As  regards  the  education  of  the  young  Prince  it 
is  necessary  to  notice  the  following  particulars. 

The  military  element  was  not  prominently  re- 
presented either  in  the  Grand  Duke's  education  or 
among  his  surroundings.     There  were  no  military 
exercises  or  formalities  to  disturb  him  at  his  studies. 
He  was  not  taught  to  look  upon  himself  as  a  soldier 
above  all  things  else.     It  is  true  that  the  future 
sovereign  of  so  great  a  power  as  Russia  could  not 
be  left  in  ignorance  of  what  in  part  constituted  the 
nation's  strength  and  security;  but  he  was  spared 
all  minute  practical  details,  such  as  might  warp  the 
intellect  of  a  child,  and  only  allowed  to  study  mili- 
tary matters  from  a  higher  and  general  point  of 
view.      Care  was  taken  that  duties   which  would 
have  been  only  an  amusement  for  him  should  not 
be  represented  as  of  supreme  importance,  nor  were 
they  permitted  to  interfere  with  more  serious  studies, 
and  so  hinder  him  from  learning  how  to  fulfil  duties 
of  a  far  more  difficult  and  more  sacred  character.     A 
prince  naturally  gifted  with  military  talents  of  a  high 
order,  and  likely  one  day  to  develop  into  a  great 
commander,  will,  by  the  mere  force  of  circumstances 
and  innate  ability,  fulfil  his  vocation.     It  is  not  only 
superfluous,  but  dangerous,  to  forcibly  instil  tastes 


MOTHERHOOD   AND   AMBITION    47 

such  as  these  while  he  is  still  a  child,  so  that  they 
become,  so  to  speak,  mechanical  and  habitual.  To 
give  a  direction  of  this  kind  to  his  inclinations  is 
likely  to  stunt  his  intelligence,  and  to  divert  it  from 
some  other  path  which  would  have  led  to  finer 
results  more  conducive  to  the  good  of  the  State  and 
more  likely  to  shed  lustre  on  his  name  and  reign. 
An  education  carried  out  principally  on  military 
lines  is  apt  to  lead  to  a  confusion  of  ideas,  which 
may  well  translate  themselves  later  on  into  con- 
fusion of  facts  and  principles.  Where  the  army 
forms  a  powerful  and  privileged  caste  in  a  country, 
it  is  always  to  be  feared  that  it  will  become  a  state 
within  a  state.  Noble  and  self-sacrificing  as  the 
profession  of  arms  is,  and,  in  time  of  war,  pro- 
ductive not  only  of  heroes,  but  of  men  great  in 
all  ways  by  its  power  of  developing  the  best 
capabilities  and  virtues  of  humanity,  it  is,  all 
things  considered,  in  times  of  peace  a  sterile  and 
objectless  occupation,  calculated  to  stupefy  and 
deteriorate  the  higher  mental  faculties.  A  man  of 
high  military  achievement  may  well  become  a 
great  statesman,  for  the  science  of  war  is  connected 
with  all  other  branches  of  human  service;  but 
every  soldier  is  not  gifted  with  high  military  abili- 
ties, and  is  certainly  not  fitted  for  civil  and  adminis- 
trative duties,  merely  by  virtue  of  the  uniform  he 
wears. 

Extreme  care  was  bestowed  on  the  Grand 
Duke's  religious  instruction.  In  addition  to  the 
lessons  given  him  by  the  arch-priest  Platon,  who 
later  was  one  of  the  most  illustrious  men  of  the 
Orthodox  Church,  pious  works  were  read  to  him  on 
Sundays  and  Saints'  Days.     Platon  was  admitted 


48    THE  CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

to  his  society  and  frequently  dined  with  him,  so  that 
the  Grand  Duke  not  only  knew  him  as  a  spiritual 
adviser,  only  seen  at  stated  intervals,  but  became 
intimately  acquainted  with  him  apart  from  religious 
studies.  Platon  was  the  Court  preacher,  and  the 
words  of  truth  which  he  uttered  in  the  name  of  God 
could  not  but  have  exercised  a  beneficial  and  re- 
straining influence  on  the  young  Prince  and  on 
the  Court  in  general.  We  gather  from  Poroshin's 
journal,  that  even  the  Empress  was  impressed  by 
his  preaching.  The  sermons  delivered  in  the  pres- 
ence of  the  Court  helped  to  increase  the  moral 
authority  of  the  priest  in  Russia,  an  authority  sorely 
needed  and  so  sadly  neglected  there.  Religious 
eloquence  was  also  thereby  encouraged,  and  a 
stimulus  given  to  other  preachers  who  either  did  not 
preach  at  all  or  preached  only  in  the  desert  The 
example  of  the  Court  must  have  helped  to  make 
preaching  the  fashion,  and  as  a  fashion  it  has  its 
good  side.^ 

Paul  grew  up  alone,  without  any  companions  of 
his  own  age.  Occasionally  the  children  of  some  of 
the  members  of  the  Court  were  invited  to  share  his 
dancing  lessons.  Reading  and  the  theatre  were 
among  the  means  of  education  in  the  system  adopted 
by  the  Grand  Duke's  teachers. 

The  reading  was  of  an  indiscriminate  character  ; 
Paul  laid  hold  of  whatever  fell  to  his  hand.  The 
chief  works  purchased  for  him,  and  these  in  large 
numbers,  were  plays  and  operas,  which  gave  him 
the  opportunity  of  studying  French  verses  and  of 
humming  them  over  to  himself.  At  last,  however, 
so  little  was  discernment  shown  in  the  choice  of 

*  Cf,  Prince  Vyazemsky,  Works,  1882,  vol.  vii,  pp.  69-72. 


MOTHERHOOD   AND   AMBITION     49 

books,  the  Grand  Duke  himself  asked  to  be  allowed 
to  give  up  reading. 

It  need  scarcely  be  said  that  Voltaire's  works  held 
a  prominent  place  in  the  Tsarevitsh's  library.  About 
this  time,  Voltaire  had  started  a  correspondence  with 
Catherine,  and  was  in  high  favour  at  the  Russian 
Court.  The  Empress  had  the  Discours  aux  Welches^ 
which  is  among  the  tales  which  Voltaire  published 
under  the  pseudonym  of  "  Vad6,"  translated  in  her 
presence  by  Kosmin,  the  Secretary  of  State.  She 
asked  Paul  if  he  had  read  it,  and  advised  him,  if  not, 
to  do  so,  advice  which,  it  is  unnecessary  to  add,  was 
followed  by  her  son. 

Theatrical  performances  were  very  much  in  the 
fashion  during  the  reign  of  Catherine,  who  also 
looked  upon  them  as  a  method  of  instruction.  At 
the  Royal  Theatre  it  was  customary  to  begin  with  a 
play,  which  was  followed  by  a  ballet,  and  the  enter- 
tainment wound  up  with  a  comic  opera  or  some 
short  piece. 

Paul  took  part  in  the  private  theatricals  got  up 
by  the  ladies  and  gentlemen  of  the  Court.  In  1765 
they  played  "  Semira  *'  by  Soumarokov,  the  play 
being  followed  by  a  ballet,  **  Galatea  and  Acis." 
Paul,  who  was  then  ten  years  old,  took  the  part 
of  Hymen.  After  this  performance  Paul  acted  in 
several  plays  and  ballets ;  more  serious  pieces  were 
not  allowed.  Panin  had  noticed  that  the  Empress 
was  not  fond  of  tragedies. 

The  Grand  Duke,  being  of  a  highly  impres- 
sionable disposition,  was  naturally  greatly  affected 
by  this  excitement.  His  imagination  was  extremely 
developed,  and  at  an  early  age  he  began  to  grow 
conscious  of  vague  longings  and  sensations  which 

D 


A 


50    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

he  was  unable  to  explain  to  himself.  These  budding 
feelings  in  her  son  were  met  with  kindly  indulgence 
from  Catherine. 

Being  one  day  at  the  Convent  of  Smolna  she 
asked  her  son  in  jest  whether  he  would  not  like 
to  remain  there  with  the  young  girls.  On  another 
occasion,  when  at  the  theatre,  Catherine  interro- 
gated him  as  to  which  actress  he  liked  best ;  he 
answered  that  it  was  the  young  Mademoiselle 
Kadishe.  Then  she  went  on  to  question  him  as  to 
which  of  the  maids  of  honour  pleased  him  most- 
The  Grand  Duke  made  reply  that  he  had  no  choice ; 
whereupon  the  Empress,  laughing,  told  him  to 
whisper  his  confession  into  her  ear.  But  the  Grand 
Duke  made  answer  as  before,  at  the  same  time 
throwing  a  significant  glance  towards  his  tutor, 
which  was  luckily  unperceived.^ 

Count  Gregory  Orlov,  the  Empress's  favourite, 
was  equally  ready  to  give  encouragement  to  the 
prematurely  developed  feelings  of  the  Grand  Duke. 
He  suggested  to  the  latter  that  he  should  call  on  the 
maids  of  honour  who  were  living  in  the  palace, 
which  the  Tsarevitsh  would  have  been  delighted  to 
do,  if  it  had  not  been  for  his  mother,  whose  presence 
intimidated  him.  Her  Majesty,  however,  decided 
the  matter  by  telling  him  he  was  to  go.  Never  was 
order  executed  with  greater  alacrity.  Panin  and 
Orlov  followed  the  Grand  Duke,  and  they  visited 
all  the  maids  of  honour  in  turn.  The  Grand  Duke 
returned  home  full  of  enthusiastic  delight,  and  talked 
of  nothing  but  his  visits.  To  every  one  who  came 
in  he  immediately  turned  and  said,  '*  Where  do  you 
think  I  have  been  ?  " 

>  Poroshin,  Diary,  1844,  P-  403- 


MOTHERHOOD   AND   AMBITION    51 

At  last  overcome  with  languor,  he  lay  down  on 
the  couch  and  began  to  dream,  then,  calling  Poroshin 
to  him,  he  told  him  he  had  seen  the  lady  he  cared 
for,  and  liked  her  more  and  more.  Whereupon  they 
opened  the  Encyclopaedia  and  read  the  whole  article 
on  "  Love." 

The  youthful  Paul,  aged  eleven,  now  passed 
from  dreams  to  what  we  should  nowadays  call 
'*  flirtations."  Mademoiselle  Tshoglokov,  one  of  the 
maids  of  honour,  was  the  subject  of  his  attentions. 

Vera  Tshoglokov  had  been  left  an  orphan  by  the 
death  of  her  father,  Nicholas  Tshoglokov,  in  1754, 
and  that  of  her  mother,  Marie,  in  1756.  Taken  into 
the  Royal  household  with  her  elder  sister,  Elizabeth, 
the  pair  were  brought  up  at  Court  and  became 
maids  of  honour  to  the  Empress. 

Poroshin,  in  his  Diary,  gives  an  account  of  Paul's 
first  love,  of  his  feelings,  his  hopes,  and  his  childish 
jealousies.^ 

"  October  2/^h, — The  Grand  Duke  asked  me  if  I 
was  as  fond  of  my  sweetheart  as  he  was  of  his,  and 
when  I  answered  that  I  certainly  did  not  love  her 
any  less,  he  said,  our  feelings  were  in  geometrical 
proportion,  and  wrote  them  out  as  follows : — 
**  Paul  :  Vera  : :  Simeon  :  Anna. 

•*  October  25M. — The  Grand  Duke  has  been 
dancing  a  great  deal  lately,  yesterday  more  espe- 
cially, with  his  corresponding  factor  in  the  geo- 
metrical equation  ;  they  chatted  and  flirted  in  the 
most  open  manner.  She  certainly  looked  more 
than  usually  beautiful,  and  His  Highness  s  attentions 
were  not,  I  must  confess,  repulsed  with  over-much 
severity. 

1  Poroshin,  Diary,  pp.  460-535. 


/* 


52     THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

**  October  29M. — His  Highness  has  been  playing 
at  skittles,  and  making  endless  signs  through  the 
window  to  the  lady  of  his  heart.  The  room  in 
which  he  plays  looks  out  on  a  court  into  which  the 
windows  of  the  maids  of  honour  also  open.  They 
watch  the  Grand  Duke  at  his  game,  and  carry  on 
intercourse  with  him  by  signs,  more  particularly  our 
heroine.  It  is  this  which  makes  His  Highness  so 
fond  of  playing  at  skittles.  After  luncheon  had 
been  served  he  put  a  pear  in  his  pocket  to  offer  to 
his  lady-love  while  the  acting  was  going  on,  which 
intention  he  carried  out  during  the  course  of  the 
evening. 

"  October  ^ist. — The  Grand  Duke  has  spent  the 
whole  morning  talking  to  me  of  his  Dulcinea.  ex- 
pending all  his  flowers  of  rhetoric  on  the  description 
of  her  charms.  Then  he  wanted  to  know  if  I 
thought  that  he  would  be  allowed  to  marry,  and 
expressed  to  me  the  happiness  it  would  give  him 
to  do  so,  Panin  joked  with  the  Grand  Duke,  and 
reminded  him  how  much  in  love  he  was  at  one 
time  with  the  Princess  Hovansky,  whom  he  now 
cared  for  no  longer.  They  went  off  together  to 
the  theatre,  and  Panin  asked  permission  to  invite 
Count  Sch6r6m6tiev  into  their  box.  His  Highness 
throughout  the  whole  evening  talked  to  no  one  but 
to  us  two ;  we  were  very  much  amused  at  the  way 
in  which  the  opera-glasses  of  a  certain  lady  con- 
tinued to  be  turned  towards  the  Grand  Duke.  Our 
young  friend,  on  his  side,  though  without  opera- 
glasses,  kept  his  eyes  well  fixed  on  his  particular 
lady ;  the  Empress  herself  could  not  help  noticing 
it.  When  we  visited  the  Imperial  box  later  on,  to 
pay  our  respects  to  Her  Majesty,  she,  in  joke  (aware 


MOTHERHOOD   AND   AMBITION     53 

of  what  was  going  on),  told  the  Grand  Duke  that 
the  masked  ball  fixed  for  the  following  day  had 
been  put  off,  at  which  piece  of  news  he  appeared 
plunged  in  despair. 

**  November  \st. — We  have  been  to  the  masked 
ball ;  the  Grand  Duke  as  usual  talked  and  danced 
a  gjeat  deal  with  the  object  of  his  ardent  devotion. 
Just  at  first  the  relations  between  them  did  not 
appear  quite  amicable.  Our  charming  lady  mask 
went  off  in  a  fit  of  jealousy  (she  thought  her  elder 
sister,  Elizabeth,  was  coming  into  fashion) ;  this 
put  the  Grand  Duke  out  of  temper ;  but  the  clouds 
soon  dispersed,  and  the  dancing  and  talking  went 
on  again  without  intermission.  On  reaching  home, 
the  Grand  Duke  confided  to  me  that  during  the 
polonaise,  as  they  were  doing  the  chain,  he  had 
said  to  his  lady-love,  *  I  f  only  it  were  not  contrary 
to  etiquette,  I  should  love  to  kiss  your  hand  on  the 
spot/  She  lowered  her  eyes  and  responded,  *  That 
would  be  going  too  far.'  Then  she  went  on  and 
said  to  the  Grand  Duke,  *  See  how  the  Beaumont 
is  watching  you '  (this  was  an  actress  at  the  French 
theatre,  who  happened  to  be  at  the  ball).  Where- 
upon the  Grand  Duke  clasped  his  hands  together 
and  replied,  '  And  I,  I  have  no  eyes  for  any  one 
but  you.'  All  this  is  quite  natural,  for  he  has  had 
no  ideas  on  these  matters  given  him  from  outside. 

*'  November  2nd. — The  Grand  Duke  condescended 
to  talk  with  me  during  tea,  and  asked  about  whom 
I  was  talking  with  Vera  Nicolaevna.  Yesterday 
he  nicknamed  her  the  *  ten  of  hearts,'  since  she  dis- 
tributed her  heart  among  so  many  adorers.  She 
told  him  in  reply  that  as  she  had  only  one  heart, 
she  could  only  give  it  to  one  person.     Then  he 


r 


54    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

went  on  to  ask  her  if  she  had  already  given  it  to 
any  one,  and  on  her  answering  him  *  Yes,'  he  wished 
to  know  if  the  happy  possessor  of  it  was  far  off 
'  No,  close  at  hand,'  she  replied.  '  If  I  look  for  him 
among  those  around  you,  shall  I  find  him  ? '  he  con- 
tinued, and  was  assured  in  return  that  he  was  so 
neai-  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  miss  him.  '  You 
see  how  far  we  have  gone,'  he  then  said  to  me. 

'^November  12th. — The  Grand  Duke  spent  the 
evening  with  the  Empress ;  he  played  at  orelan 
with  the  ladies-in-waiting,  Tshoglokov  and  Stakel- 
berg;  he  sported  with  his  much  beloved  Vera 
Nicolaevna  and  they  tore  a  ten  of  hearts  to  pieces. 

''December  ^th. — The  Grand  Duke  went  to 
supper  with  the  Empress.  The  ladies-in-waiting 
were  Tshoglokov  and  Polianskaja,  who  sat  at  a 
separate  table  facing  the  Grand  Duke.  The  Em- 
press joked  with  her  son  about  his  keeping  his  eyes 
turned  in  their  direction,  and  at  his  seeming  to 
find  his  supper  so  amusing. 

'* December  2  2nd. — TheGrand  Duke  condescended 
to  relate  to  me  how  much  he  had  enjoyed  himself 
at  the  house  of  Count  Sievers,  the  Grand-Marshal. 
His  sweetheart,  Vera  Nicolaevna,  was  among  the 
invited,  and  he  had  plenty  of  dancing  and  talking 
with  her.  *  I  told  her,  what  I  am  always  telling 
you,  that  I  should  like  to  be  with  her  for  ever.' 
She  in  return  said  that  she  longed  to  kiss  his 
hand ;  whereupon  he  replied  that  he  longed  even 
more  for  her  to  do  it.  On  the  way  back  she  was 
in  a  little  sledge  ahead  of  the  Grand  Duke ;  she 
kept  continually  turning  round,  and  they  did  nothing 
but  kiss  their  hands  to  one  another.  The  Grand 
Duke  remarked  to  her  that  he  feared  they  would 


MOTHERHOOD   AND   AMBITION    55 

not  have  another  such  a  delightful  day  for  a  long 
time.  *  I  fear  not,  Monseigneur/  was  her  reply. 
*  Perhaps/  he  continued,  'you  would  have  enjoyed 
yourself  more  if  Devi^re  had  been  sitting  there  in 
my  place?'  But  in  answer  to  this  she  told  him 
that  it  was  wrong  of  him  to  doubt  her,  and  that 
she  perfectly  detested  Devi^re." 

The  Hereditary  Grand  Duke  went  to  a  soiree 
at  Count  Orlov's  on  the  3rd  January  1766.  The 
places  at  table  were  numbered,  and  the  company 
drew  lots  for  them.  The  Grand  Duke  drew  a 
number  which  placed  him  beside  his  beloved 
Tshoglokov,  or,  to  be  quite  correct,  Providence 
arranged  this  with  the  help  of  a  little  assistance. 
The  Grand  Duke  was  at  the  height  of  bliss,  his 
young  heart  bursting  with  love. 

Paul  Petrovitsh  was  fourteen  years  old  in  Octo- 
ber 1768.  This  was  the  period  fixed  by  Panin 
in  his  scheme  of  education  for  the  beginning  of  the 
preparatory  studies  which  were  to  initiate  his  pupil 
into  the  general  affairs  of  government.  These  were 
to  include  instruction  regarding  commerce,  the  ins 
and  outs  of  administration,  home  and  foreign  politics, 
the  navy,  the  army,  and  the  chief  manufactures — in 
short,  everything  that  goes  to  constitute  a  state. 
Among  the  masters  who  were  engaged  to  teach 
him  these  various  subjects  Teplov  may  be  especially 
mentioned.  He  was  employed  in  the  privy  service 
of  the  Empress,  and  all  petitions  passed  into  his 
hands.  A  cultivated  man  and  agreeable  in  manner, 
he  was  at  the  same  time  crafty  and  intriguing. 
Teplov,  it  is  not  without  interest  to  notice,  was  one 
of  the  murderers  of  Peter  III. 

"  Among  the  Grand  Duke's  masters,"  wrote  M, 


56    THE   CURSE   OF   THE    ROMANOVS 

de  Corberon,  *  *  I  see  Teplov,  very  clever,  it  is  true, 
and  well  versed  in  politics  and  history,  but  a  man 
whose  principles  render  him  even  more  degraded 
than  the  exceptionally  low  condition  from  which 
he  rose.  Being  a  strong  admirer  of  Machiavelli, 
and  familiar  with  all  the  great  crimes  to  which  the 
latter  lent  his  aid,  it  was  of  necessity  that  he  should 
lead  his  pupil  to  look  upon  an  uncivilised  policy 
such  as  he  inculcated  as  indispensable ;  accus- 
toming him  to  the  idea  that  it  was  necessary  to 
kill  with  the  sword  those  that  he  had  deceived  by 
his  subdety,  and  showing  him  daggers,  poison  and 
chains  as  the  only  sure  and  useful  instruments  for 
those  crowned  assassins,  those  illustrious  monsters 
of  history,  whom  our  fathers,  dazzled  by  their 
splendour,  transformed  into  heroes."^ 

With  the  change  in  the  roll  of  his  teachers  came 
a  change  also  in  his  daily  society.  He  had  now 
for  his  companions  Prince  Kourakin  and  Count 
Razoumovsky,  who  had  been  his  playmate  as  a 
child. 

No  place  had  been  given  in  the  scheme  for  the 
Tsarevitsh's  education  to  any  military  studies  or 
exercises.  When  young  the  Grand  Duke  had 
amused  himself  by  making  his  valets  go  daily  through 
their  musketry  practice,  but  as  soon  as  Panin  came 
into  authority  this  was  put  a  stop  to,  or  only  rarely 
allowed.  In  1770  nothing  seemed  to  denote  as  yet 
his  passion  for  military  exercises,  his  marotte  milt' 
taire,  which  manifested  itself  a  few  years  later,  and 
to  such  an  extent  influenced  Paul's  conduct  during 
his  short  reign.2 

*  Cf.  La  Cour  de  Russie,  p.  253,  and  Corberon,  Un  Diplomate 
Franqais,  '  Cf.  La  Cour  de  Russie^  p.  252. 


MOTHERHOOD   AND   AMBITION     57 

Poroshin  remarks  how  very  little  interest  was 
taken  in  military  affairs  by  those  who  formed  Paul's 
household.  Only  once  did  he  take  part  in  any 
manoeuvres;  this  was  in  June  1765,  at  Krasno6- 
Selo;  they  lasted  for  ten  days,  and  the  Grand 
Duke's  stay  ended  in  a  fit  of  illness.  His  friends 
were  not  best  pleased  when  Colonel,  afterwards 
Field  -  Marshal,  Kamensky  presented  the  Grand 
Duke  with  a  copy  of  the  work  he  had  edited  on 
the  celebrated  manoeuvres  of  Frederick  the  Great 
at  Breslau. 

It  is  evident  that  Paul  himself,  in  his  childhood, 
had  no  particular  leaning  towards  a  military  calling, 
and,  moreover,  that  the  details  of  a  soldier's  life  were 
not  in  any  way  to  his  taste.  ^ 

In  spite  of  his  feebleness  of  constitution,  how- 
ever, Paul  was  both  lively  and  alert. 

It  is  interesting  to  learn  what  contemporaries 
thought  of  Paul's  character  and  temperament  during 
his  childhood  and  adolescence.  In  the  first  instance, 
the  testimony  of  Poroshin  is  very  valuable,  as  it  is 
based  upon  daily  observations. 

"His  Highness,"  writes  Poroshin,  "has  that 
most  detestable  of  habits  of  doing  everything  in 
haste.  He  is  in  a  hurry  to  get  up,  in  a  hurry  to  eat, 
and  in  a  hurry  to  go  to  bed.  A  good  hour  before 
it  is  time  to  sit  down  to  dinner,  he  despatches 
his  sergeant  to  Panin  to  ask  if  it  is  not  time  to  send 
for  the  dishes,  and  invents  all  kinds  of  ruses  so  as 
to  get  a  few  extra  minutes  and  to  take  his  place 
at  table  sooner  than  usual.  The  same  performance 
is  gone  through  as  soon  as  it  nears  the  supper 
hour.     Then  he  is  perpetually  urging  the  valets  de 

^  Cf,  however,  Shilder,  Z.^.,  p.  56,  note. 


58    THE   CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

chambre  to  eat  as  quickly  as  possible  so  that  they 
may  be  able  to  get  to  bed  earlier.  His  mind  is 
occupied  before  going  to  sleep  with  the  fear  of  not 
waking  early  enough  to  get  up  before  the  accus- 
tomed hour.  And  this  goes  on,  over  and  over  again, 
nearly  every  day  of  the  week. 

"His  Highness  has  also  another  little  failing, 
peculiar  to  those  who  have  never  been  thwarted 
in  their  wishes  and  who  have  met  with  little  oppo- 
sition to  their  will.  He  always  wants  to  have  his 
own  way.  But  it  must  be  confessed  that  all  our 
desires  are  not  dictated  by  reason,  nor  that  they  are 
at  all  times  of  such  a  nature  that  those  who  watch 
over  our  safety  and  well-being  can  well  see  their 
way  to  accomplish  them. 

"  The  Grand  Duke,  being  of  a  responsive  and 
affectionate  disposition,  forms  an  attachment  very 
quickly,  but,  as  over-violent  feelings  are  never 
lasting,  the  object  of  his  sudden  affection  has  to 
exert  himself  to  retain  it  and  to  maintain  the 
relations  between  them  at  the  same  level,  otherwise 
the  whole  thing  is  very  soon  forgotten.  In  short, 
it  is  easier  to  make  the  Grand  Duke  immensely 
fond  of  you  all  at  once  than  to  remain  on  a  perma- 
nent footing  of  ordinary  friendship  with  him ;  and, 
as  to  the  continuance  of  any  lively  affection,  that  is 
out  of  the  question. 

"Any  remarks  passed  on  an  absent  person  in 
the  presence  of  the  Grand  Duke  make  a  great 
impression  upon  him.  If  any  one  is  spoken  well 
of  before  him,  one  may  count  on  the  Grand  Duke 
giving  him  a  cordial  greeting  the  next  time  he 
comes  across  him ;  on  the  contrary,  if  he  hears  ill 
said  of  a  person  in  conversation,  he  is  certain  at 


\ 


MOTHERHOOD   AND   AMBITION     59 

the  next  interview  to  be  cold  and  constrained  in 
manner  towards  him. 

"  His  Highness  sees  all  things  as  clearly  in  his 
mind  s  eye  as  if  they  had  actually  taken  place  be- 
fore him." 

Paul  retained  all  these  marked  traits  of  char- 
acter to  his  life's  end.  Poroshin  s  verdict  was  un- 
doubtedly correct,  and  he  had  himself  become  aware 
of  the  instability  of  his  pupil's  affection.  So  closely 
had  he  studied  the  latter's  character,  that,  being 
displeased  with  him  one  day,  he  said,  **With  all 
the  best  intentions  in  the  world,  Monseigneur,  you 
will  yet  make  yourself  hated."  ^ 

Aepinus,  another  of  his  tutors,  said  of  him : 
"He  has  intelligence,  but  the  mechanism  of  his 
head  is  only  held  together  by  a  thread;  if  the 
thread  should  happen  to  break,  the  mechanism 
will  all  be  out  of  gear,  and  then  good-bye  to  reason 
and  good  sense."  * 

The  Grand  Duke  was,  in  the  opinion  of  another 
contemporary — the  English  Envoy — not  without 
discernment;  but  the  critical  position  in  which  he 
found  himself  had  greatly  increased  his  natural  gift 
for  dissimulation,  which  he  had  inherited  from  his 
mother.*  Paul's  power  of  dissimulation  is  also 
attested  by  Sabathier  de  Cabres,  the  French 
Ambassador. 

"As  far  as  I  have  been  able  to  ascertain,  it 
seems  certain  that  the  Grand  Duke  is  naturally 
kindly  and  upright,  generous  and  benevolent,  and 
that  he  has  a  good  intellect,  and  quickly  understands 
and  seizes  the  meaning  of  what  he  sees  and  hears  ; 

*  €/•  Poroshin,  /.r.,  p.  302.  ■  Ibid,^  p.  488. 

Cf,  Sbomik,  vol.  xix,  p.  300. 


4 


6o    THE   CURSE  OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

that  he  is  fond  of  improving  himself,  and  has 
profited  by  what  his  tutors  have  taught  him.  But 
I  am  greatly  mistaken  if  his  passions  are  not  strong 
and  deep.  M.  Panin's  severity,  the  position  he  is 
in,  his  hatred  of  his  mother,  have  combined  to 
make  him  a  deliberate  dissembler;  so  much  so, 
that  he  gives  the  impression  of  being  naturally 
given  to  dissimulation.  Occasionally  his  impetuous 
temper  breaks  through  the  restraint  which  he  im- 
poses upon  himself;  he  is  generally  thought  to 
be  vindictive,  and  set  and  inflexible  in  his  own 
opinions.  He  has  often  given  signs  of  elevation 
of  soul.  It  is  to  be  feared  that  by  dint  of  check- 
ing his  aspirations  certain  traits  of  his  character, 
which  is  an  obstinate  one,  may  become  fixed,  and 
that  hypocrisy,  brooding  dislike,  and  perhaps  even 
cowardice,  may  take  the  place  of  the  higher 
qualities  that  might  have  been  developed  in  him, 
and  that  these  may  be  smothered  by  the  premature 
habit  of  exercising  this  outward  self-command,  and 
by  the  terror  with  which  his  mother  continually 
inspires  him.  This  feeling  dominates  all  others, 
and  must,  therefore,  be  a  main  influence  in  his 
future  progress  towards  good  or  ill. 

**  As  yet  he  has  shown  no  sign  of  that  over- 
powering love  of  military  affairs  which  generally 
develops  at  an  early  age  if  it  is  likely  to  grow  into 
an  over-mastering  passion.  He  is  so  backward  for 
his  age  in  physical  constitution,  and  his  impulses 
are  so  thwarted,  that  it  is  very  difficult  to  have  any 
definite  idea  of  what  he  might  be  if  in  a  different 
position."  ^ 

Asseburg,  who  had  managed  the  Holstein  affair, 

*  Cf.  La  Cour  de  Russie,  pp.  252-254. 


MOTHERHOOD   AND   AMBITION    6i 

gives  the  following  description  of  Paul's  character : 
"This  Prince,  who  possesses  the  gift  of  making 
every  one  of  his  words  sound  pleasant,  added  a  few 
flattering  remarks  and  made  me  regret  the  necessity 
of  leaving  him.  II  est  impossible  de  r^unir  plus 
d'esprit,  plus  de  douceur  et  plus  de  charmes  qu'il 
nen  fait  connattre  dans  ses  actions  et  dans  sa 
figure."  ^ 

In  1768  Catherine  induced  the  distinguished 
Englishman  Dr.  Th.  Dimsdale,  who  had  recently 
published  a  pamphlet  on  the  inoculation  for  small- 
pox, to  come  to  Russia.  A  small-pox  epidemic  had 
broken  out  in  St.  Petersburg,  and  Catherine  decided 
to  be  inoculated  herself  and  to  submit  the  Grand 
Duke  to  the  same  operation.  Dimsdale  set  out  for 
Russia,  and  on  his  arrival  in  St.  Petersburg  was 
received  by  Count  Panin.  "You  are  now  called, 
sir,"  said  Panin,  **  to  the  most  important  employ- 
ment that  perhaps  any  gentleman  was  ever  entrusted 
with.  To  your  skill  and  integrity  will  probably  be 
submitted  nothing  less  than  the  precious  lives  of 
two  of  the  greatest  personages  in  the  world ;  with 
whose  safety  the  tranquillity  and  happiness  of  this 
great  empire  are  so  intimately  connected  that, 
should  an  accident  deprive  us  of  either,  the  bless- 
ings we  now  enjoy  might  be  exchanged  for  the 
utmost  state  of  misery  and  confusion."  *  But  as  the 
dangers  of  the  small-pox  were  very  great,  and  as 
Russian  physicians  had  no  skill  in  the  practice  of 
inoculation,  the  two  precious  lives  '*  of  the  greatest 
personages  in  the  world"  were  entrusted  to  the 
English  doctor.     On  this  occasion  Dr.  Dimsdale, 

*  Cf.  Asseburg,  Denkwurdigkeiten^  Berlin,  1842,  p.  174. 

*  Cf.  Dimsdale,  "Tracts  on  Inoculation," &c.,  London,  1781,  p.  la 


i 


62     THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

in  investigating  the  state  of  Paul's  health,  found 
him  '*  well  formed,  active,  and  free  from  any  natural 
infirmity  " ;  he  had,  however,  suffered  much  by  im- 
proper treatment  as  a  child,  in  consequence  of  which 
his  constitution  had  been  enfeebled.* 

The  operation  on  Catherine  and  Paul  was  suc- 
cessfully performed,  and  Dimsdale  was  very  gene- 
rously rewarded.* 

The  relations  between  mother  and  son,  although 
outwardly  often  not  without  signs  of  affection  on 
the  part  of  Catherine,  continued  to  be  strained. 
According  to  some  contemporaries  they  were  of 
a  glacial  description,  and  the  Empress  took  no 
trouble  whatever  to  hide  her  feelings  towards  her 
son.  We  have  seen  that,  as  soon  as  Catherine 
was  on  the  throne,  Panin  urged  that  Paul  should 
be  nominated  as  successor,  but  the  Orlovs  obsti- 
nately refused  their  consent  to  this. 

Catherine  was,  moreover,  perfectly  aware  that 
the  majority  of  her  Russian  subjects  would  have 
preferred  to  see  the  son  rather  than  the  mother 
on  the  throne. 

During  her  reign  the  idea  of  Paul's  succeeding 
her  gradually  gained  ground,  and  became  the  sub- 
ject of  popular  discussion  as  well  as  giving  rise  to 
some  party  plots.  Catherine  knew  that  Panin 
himself  had  not  abilities,  resolution,  or  activity 
enough  to  attempt  placing  the  crown  on  the  head 
of  Paul,  even  if  the  latter  had  had  spirit  enough 
to  venture  to  wear  it.  It  was  this  which,  accord- 
ing to  Robert  Gunning,  the  English  Ambassador, 
prompted  her  to  confide  so  great  a  trust  as  the  sole 

^  Dimsdale,  /.^.,  pp.  46-48. 

'  Cf,  also  Sbornik,  vol.  ii,  pp.  295-322, 


MOTHERHOOD   AND   AMBITION    63 

care  and  government  of  the  Grand  Duke  to  Panin. 
"It  is,  however,  far  from  improbable,"  adds  Robert 
Gunning,  "  that  others  of  more  desperate  fortunes 
and  a  more  enterprising  turn  of  mind  may  gladly 
undertake  a  work  of  this  kind,  which  upon  a  near 
view  of  things  does  not  appear  very  difficult."  ^ 

The  Empress  had  occasion,  as  has  been  pointed 
out  above,  to  convince  herself  of  the  interest  taken 
in  the  Prince  by  the  population  during  his  illness 
in  Moscow.  "The  death  of  the  Prince,"  wrote 
Lord  Buckinghamshire  in  1764,  **  would  have 
been  fatal  for  Catherine,  for  the  population  would 
never  have  been  persuaded  that  it  was  natural. 
The  popular  anxiety  regarding  Paul's  condition 
was  equally  as  great  a  few  years  later  (1771),  when 
he  was  dangerously  ill.  The  common  people,  as 
soon  as  it  was  known  that  Paul  was  ill  and  thought 
to  be  in  danger,  suspected  he  was  poisoned.  The 
Empress  keenly  felt  at  that  time  the  danger  of  the 
consequences  with  which  the  death  of  the  heir 
apparent  would  have  been  attended.  The  people 
would  have  been  furious.  It  was  also  given  out 
that  he  was  a  State  prisoner."* 

"  The  low  people,''  wrote  Lord  Cathcart,  "  had 
no  less  in  view  than  to  dethrone  the  Empress,  as 
having  held  the  crown  only  for  her  son,  and  to 
set  the  Grand  Duke  in  her  place,  and  this  they 
intended  to  have  executed  on  St.  Peter's  Day." 

All  this  preyed  on  Catherine's  mind  and  awoke 
a  feeling  of  distrust  in  her  towards  her  son,  although 
Paul  himself  was  a  perfectly  innocent  factor  in  the 
whole  affair.     Paul,  when  ten  years  of  age,  con- 

^  Cf,  Sbomik^  vol.  xxix,  p.  298. 

'  JHd,  (Lord  Cathcaifs  Despatch);  vol.  xix,  p.  226, 


A 


64    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

fessed  that  nothing  caused  him  so  much  distress 
and  embarrassment  as  going  to  see  the  Empress, 
and  that  the  unpleasantness  of  the  visit  was  almost 
unbearable.  Sabathier,  the  French  Minister,  writ- 
ing on  the  20th  April  1770,  says:  "The  Empress 
Catherine,  who  usually  sacrifices  everything  to  the 
proprieties,  ignores  these  in  her  attitude  towards 
her  son-  With  him  she  never  unbends,  but  pre- 
serves the  haughty  tone  of  the  sovereign ;  her 
coldness  and  want  of  consideration  towards  him  is 
wounding  to  the  last  degree  to  the  Grand  Duke. 
She  has  never  lavished  upon  him  any  of  the  tender 
regard  of  a  mother.  When  with  her  the  Grand 
Duke  is  always  submissive  and  respectful.  It  is 
plain  that  this  hard-hearted,  and,  I  may  add,  un- 
becoming, behaviour  on  the  part  of  the  Empress 
is  due  to  the  harshness  of  her  character  and  not 
to  any  wish  to  give  her  son  a  rigorous  upbringing. 
Outwardly  she  treats  her  heir  with  the  most  formal 
politeness,  but  this  only  because  circumstances 
oblige  her  to  do  so.  As  for  the  Grand  Duke, 
he  might  be  a  criminal  before  his  judge ;  when 
not  with  her  he  is,  on  the  contrary,  perfectly  easy 
in  manner  and  has  no  appearance  of  timidity.  He 
has  no  difficulty  in  expressing  himself,  and,  more- 
over, is  courteous  and  by  no  means  backward  in 
his  efforts  to  render  himself  agreeable  and  enter- 
taining to  those  with  whom  he  is  in  company.  He 
is  by  nature  observant  of  what  is  going  on  around 
him ;  he  is  blamed,  however,  for  being  indiscreet 
and  inquisitive  to  the  last  degree."^ 

The   Grand    Dukes    studies  were    interrupted 
during  the  summer  of  1771  by  his  alarming  illness, 

^  Cf.  La  Cour  de  Russie^  p.  251. 


MOTHERHOOD   AND   AMBITION     65 

which  proved  to  be  typhus.  Catherine  endeavoured 
to  calm  her  fears  by  persuading  herself  that  the 
illness  was  only  due  to  her  son  being  at  the  transi- 
tion age  between  youth  and  manhood,  recalling  the 
proverb  that  "the  beard  does  not  grow  without 
suffering."  The  symptoms,  however,  became  such 
as  to  disturb  her  tranquillity  of  mind,  and,  although 
passionately  devoted  to  a  country  life,  she  left 
Peterhof  and  returned  to  St.  Petersburg,  where 
she  remained  for  two  months,  paying  visits  almost 
daily  to  her  son.  The  latter  happily  recovered, 
and  on  September  8  a  solemn  Te  Deum  was  said 
in  thanksgiving  for  his  restoration  to  health.  The 
fever,  however,  left  the  Grand  Duke  permanently 
weaker,  and  his  constitution  never  recovered  its 
former  vigour. 

This  illness  seems  to  have  awakened  Catherine 
even  more  to  the  consciousness  of  the  state  of  her 
own  dependence  upon  her  son.  Her  behaviour, 
therefore,  became  more  cordial  and  affectionate ; 
and  in  a  letter,  addressed  to  Madame  Byelke,  she 
expressed  the  exuberance  of  her  motherly  affection 
and  tenderness :  *'  We  never  had  a  more  enjoyable 
time  than  during  the  nine  weeks  we  spent  with 
our  son  at  Tsarsko^  -  Sdo.  He  is  growing  a 
charming  lad.  We  began  the  day  with  break- 
fasting in  a  delightful  room,  built  close  to  the 
side  of  the  lake,  and  we  never  separated  before 
we  had  both  laughed  till  we  cried.  After  break- 
fast we  each  followed  our  own  pursuits  until  it 
was  time  for  dinner ;  at  six  o'clock  we  walked  or 
went  to  the  theatre ;  an  uproarious  evening  fol- 
lowed, quite  to  the  taste  of  the  noisy  guests,  of 
whom  we  have  a  goodly  number  about  us.     My 

E 


66    THE   CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

son  is  never  a  foot's  space  away  from  me,  and  so 
diverting  does  he  find  my  company  that  he  changes 
the  numbers  of  the  places  at  supper  so  that  he 
may  sit  beside  me.  I  doubt  if  there  has  ever 
been  an  instance  of  such  complete  harmony  and 
such  compatibility  of  temper  as  in  our  case."  * 

That  Catherine's  sudden  affection  was  only 
feigned  is  equally  attested  by  Solms,  the  Prussian 
Minister,  as  by  Robert  Gunning.  Catherine's 
change  of  behaviour  towards  her  son  was  certainly 
not  wholly  free  from  hypocrisy,  but  it  was  also 
greatly  due  to  the  absence  of  Orlov  and  his 
influence. 

^  Sbornik,  vol.  xiii,  pp.  259-261,  265-266. 


CHAPTER   IV 

THE   MARRIAGE   OF   HAMLET 

*'  And  the  lad  grew  up ;   and  his  mother  took  him  a  wife  out  of  the 
land  of " 

Pftul's  first  liaison — Semeon  Velikij — ^Asseburg,  the  matrimonial  agent — 
Princess  Wilhelmina  of  Darmstadt — ^The  bride  is  coming — Paul  fiills 
in  love  with  his  fiancee — The  nuptial  ceremony — The  appointment  of 
General  Soltykov  as  personal  attendant  on  the  Prince — Conspiracy  to 
put  Paul  on  the  throne — The  revolt  of  Pougatshev — Catherine's  visit  to 
Moscow — Popularity  of  Paul — Catherine  mistrusts  her  daughter-in-law — 
The  Empress's  pilgrimage  to  the  Convent  of  Saint  Sergius — The  death  of 
the  Grand  Duchess — Andr^  Razoumovsky — Various  rumours. 

The  time  had  now  arrived  when  Paul  should  marry, 
and  Catherine  consequently  became  anxious  to  find 
a  suitable  daughter-in-law  among  the  German  prin- 
cesses. Her  son's  marriage  had,  for  some  time  past, 
been  a  matter  of  consideration  with  Catherine.  As 
far  back  as  1768  she  had  thought  of  commission- 
ing Asseburg  to  find  a  suitable  wife  for  her  son,  a 
princess  who  would  offer  no  danger  to  Catherine's 
ambition ;  but,  as  Paul  was  of  a  delicate  constitu- 
tion, it  was  thought  that  he  was  not  in  a  condition 
to  be  the  father  of  the  heirs  to  the  throne.  Some 
of  Catherine's  intimates,  however,  did  their  best  to 
dissipate  these  fears.  They  decided  upon  a  widow, 
Sophia  Ossipovna  Czartoriskaya,  the  daughter  of 
a  former  Goviernor  of  Novgorod — an  elegant  and 
affected  woman — and  she  was  invited  to  try  her 

charms  on  the  Grand  Duke.     The  result  of  this 

67 


68     THE   CURSE   OF   THE    ROMANOVS 

liaison  was  a  son,  who  was  named  Semeon  Velikij. 
C'est  dans  les  habitudes  des  maisons  Impdriales. 

Semeon  Velikij  was  reared  in  the  Empress's 
apartments.  When,  in  1770,  he  was  eight  years  of 
age,  he  was  placed  in  the  school  of  Peter  and  Paul, 
with  directions  that  he  should  be  given  the  most 
careful  education.  His  education  being  finished, 
Semeon  Velikij  expressed  a  wish  to  join  the  Navy ; 
he  was  given  a  lieutenancy,  went  to  England  to 
perfect  himself  in  his  naval  studies,  and  died  while 
in  the  English  service  at  the  Antilles  in  1794. 

Paul's  education  having  thus  been  thoroughly 
carried  out  in  all  respects,  his  marriage  was  decided 
upon.  Asseburg  had,  in  the  meantime,  been  en- 
trusted with  the  mission  of  finding  a  wife  for  the 
Grand  Duke.  Asseburg's  acquaintance  with  the 
different  foreign  Courts  made  him  a  suitable  person, 
Catherine  thought,  to  undertake  the  task  of  finding 
out  which  princesses  were  of  an  age  to  be  chosen 
from  for  her  son  s  wife.  Asseburg  left  Russia  in 
March  1768;  his  choice  fell  on  the  Princesses  of 
Hesse- Darmstadt,  on  the  Princess  of  Saxe-Gotha, 
and  on  the  Princess  Sophia- Dorothea  of  Wiirtem- 
berg.  The  one  finally  preferred  by  Catherine  was 
Wilhelmina,  daughter  of  the  Landgrave  of  Hesse- 
Darmstadt. 

At  first  the  reports  concerning  this  Princess 
did  not  impress  Catherine  very  favourably.  To 
Asseburg,  with  whom  she  was  in  constant  corre- 
spondence, she  wrote : — 

"  She  has  been  represented  to  me  as  a  model  of 
all  that  is  good  and  kind,  but,  apart  from  this  per- 
fection, in  the  possibility  of  which  in  this  world  I  do 
not  believe,  I  hear  that  she  is  volatile  and  inclined 


THE   MARRIAGE   OF    HAMLET      69 

to  be  contradictory.  This,  taken  in  conjunction  with 
the  celebrated  mental  capacities  of  the  papa,  and 
with  the  not  inconsiderable  number  of  sisters,  some 
already  established,  some  waiting  to  be  so,  obliges 
me  to  be  extremely  circumspect." 

Asseburg  sent  the  Empress  a  portrait  of  the 
Princess  Wilhelmina.  Catherine  acknowledged  it, 
saying  that  it  disposed  her  most  favourably  towards 
the  Princess,  who  certainly  had  a  face  with  which 
it  would  be  difficult  to  find  fault  in  any  particular. 

"The  features  are  regular;  I  have  compared 
this  portrait  with  the  one  you  sent  before,  and  have 
read  over  again  your  description  of  those  particular 
points  in  the  face  which  you  say  escaped  the  artist's 
notice.  My  examination  has  led  me  to  the  con- 
clusion that  the  face  has  lost  its  liveliness,  and  with 
it  the  pleasantness  of  expression  which  always  ac- 
companies it— owing,  I  doubt  not,  to  an  over-strict- 
ness in  the  bringing  up  and  to  a  life  of  too  little 
freedom.  The  expression  would  very  quickly  change 
if  this  young  person  could  be  led  to  understand 
that  a  starched  and  haughty  bearing  is  not  the  best 
help  towards  attaining  that  at  which  her  ambition 
aims.  When  you  are  next  with  her,  I  advise  you 
to  let  fall  a  word  or  two,  as  if  by  chance,  to  let 
her  know  how  highly  cheerfulness,  amiability,  and 
graciousness  of  disposition  are  prized  at  the  Russian 
Court. 

**Tell  her  that  I,  as  well  as  my  son,  are  both 
very  lively.  It  is  quite  possible,  if  vanity  is  the 
chief  motive  of  her  behaviour,  that  a  transformation 
may  take  place  in  her  that  very  same  evening  or  the 
following  morning,  for  the  generality  of  young 
people — I  may  say,  the  half  of  humanity — ^act  in  this 


70    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

kind  of  way.  By  degrees  she  will  lose  those  stiff 
and  affected  manners  of  which  you  speak.  All  you 
tell  me  of  her  moral  disposition  is  entirely  in  her 
favour ;  she  is  capable  of  becoming  strong  and 
dignified  in  character.  Some  inquiry,  however, 
ought  to  be  made  concerning  the  reputation  she  has 
of  being  fond  of  quarrelling.  Do  your  best  to  find 
out  the  cause  of  these  rumours,  and  to  determine 
yourself,  impartially,  whether  they  may  not  be  mere 
conjectures  without  any  foundation." 

Catherine  sent  her  instructions  to  Asseburg, 
either  directly  in  writing  or  through  the  medium  of 
Panin.^  Paul  himself  had  hardly  a  voice  in  the 
matter.  He  could  not,  of  course,  be  ignorant  that 
negotiations  were  going  on  in  order  to  procure  him 
a  wife,  for,  as  far  back  as  January  1772,  his  marriag-e 
was  being  talked  about  in  St.  Petersburg.  He  was 
allowed  to  admire  the  portraits  of  the  German 
princesses  sent  by  Asseburg,  but  it  is  to  be  doubted 
if  any  liberty  of  choice  was  vouchsafed  him. 

Throughout  all  these  transactions  Asseburg 
proved  himself  an  accomplished  diplomatist.  He 
was  the  faithful  and  zealous  servant  of  Catherine, 
while  at  the  same  time  acting  in  the  service  of  the 
King  of  Prussia,  who  favoured  this  marriage,  and 
being  equally  anxious  to  further  the  interests  of  the 
Hesse-Darmstadt  family. 

Finally,  in  October  1772,  Catherine  decided  to 
invite  the  Landgravine  and  her  three  daughters  to 
St.  Petersburg. 

This  invitation  caused  the  Landgrave  a  certain 
amount  of  embarrassment.  Pecuniary  resources 
were,  above  all  things,  necessary  for  such  a  journey, 

'  Cf*  Asseburg,  Denkwiirdigkeiten^  p.  258. 


\ 


\ 


THE    MARRIAGE   OF   HAMLET      71 

and  just  then  financial  conditions  at  the  Darmstadt 
Court  were  not  very  brilliant.  **With  an  income 
of  a  million  florins,"  wrote  Asseburg,  **the  family  of 
the  Landgrave  is  often  in  great  want."  ^  Catherine 
settled  this  primary  difiiculty  by  undertaking  all  the 
expenses  of  the  journey.^  The  Landgrave  was 
further  troubled  at  the  thought  of  the  talk  there 
would  be  if,  after  all,  the  visit  did  not  end  success- 
fully. But  here  Frederick  H  came  to  his  aid.  It 
was  quite  natural  that  the  Landgravine  should  pay 
a  visit  to  Berlin  to  see  her  daughter,  who  had 
married  a  Prussian  prince,  and  once  at  Berlin  it 
would  be  easy  to  find  a  pretext  which  would  explain 
the  extended  journey  to  St.  Petersburg. 

The  formal  invitation  from  Catherine  to  the 
Landgravine  was  written  in  a  letter  dated  (April 
28,  1 7  73, 0.  S. )  May  9.*  A  flotilla,  composed  of  three 
vessels — the  Saint  Marc^  the  Faulcotiy  and  the 
Rapid — under  command  of  Admiral  Knowles,  was 
sent  to  Liibeck.  The  last-named  vessel  had  as 
second  captain  Count  Andr6  Razoumovsky.* 

The  Landgravine  arrived  at  Reval  on  the  1 7th 
June  1773,  but  the  Rapidy  which  carried  her  suite 
and  luggage,  was  delayed  by  stress  of  weather. 

The  Grand  Duke  Paul  had  arranged  a  plan  of 
behaviour  for  himself  on  the  arrival  of  the  Princess. 
His  intention  was  to  become  as  friendly  as  possible 
with  the  Landgravine,  and  to  win  her  confidence  so 
as  to  secure  her  against  all  intrigues  that  might  crop 
up  around  her,  and  to  have  some  one  to  fall  back 
upon  in  case  there  should  be  an  endeavour  to  thwart 
his   wishes.     This    plan    received    Count    Panin's 

*  IhiiLy  p.  259.  ■  Ibid,^  p.  259. 

>  Ibid,^  p.  263.  ^  Ibid,y  p.  264. 


72     THE   CURSE   OF   THE    ROMANOVS 

sanction,  to  whom  Paul  confided  everything  that  he 
considered  doubtful  or  suspicious.^ 

The  Landgravine  had  started  for  Russia  in  the 
full  assurance  that,  by  her  marriage  with  the  Grand 
Duke,  her  daughter  s  happiness  would  be  secured, 
and  Paul  knew  how  to  show  himself  worthy  of  all 
the  praises  that  had  been  bestowed  upon  him.  "It 
would  not  be  difficult  for  any  girl  to  fall  in  love 
with  the  Grand  Duke,"  Solms  wrote  to  Asseburg. 
"  Although  not  tall,  his  figure  is  well  set  and  his 
face  attractive.  He  is  pleasant  in  his  speech  and 
manners,  unassuming,  polite,  and  of  a  lively  dis- 
position.  * 

In  order  to  enlighten  the  Grand  Duke's  future 
wife  regarding  what  would  be  required  of  her  when 
in  Russia,  the  Empress  wrote  her  a  sort  of  outline 
of  directions  as  to  her  conduct. 

"The  Princess  must  not  only  do  her  best  to 
avoid,  but  must  not  even  give  ear  to  those  who 
endeavour  by  their  evil  and  calumniating  talk  to 
destroy  the  harmony  of  the  Imperial  family.  The 
Princess,  whose  part  it  is  to  draw  closer  the  ties  of 
that  family  of  which  she  is  to  become  a  member, 
must  look  upon  it  as  her  duty  to  denounce  to  the 
Empress  or  to  the  Grand  Duke  any  one  who  shall 
be  guilty,  through  malice  or  indiscretion,  of  trying 
to  instil  into  her  feelings  contrary  to  those  which 
she  should  rightly  bear  towards  her  mother-in-law 
and  her  husband. 

"  The  Princess  may  be  assured  that  she  will  find 
every  kind  of  diversion  and  pleasure  awaiting  her 

*  C/o  Vasilchikov,  A.  A.,  L^s  Rctzoumovskyy  ed.  Brueckner,  1893, 
ii,  pp.  19-20. 

*  Cf,  Asseburg,  Denkivurdigkeiten^  pp.  266-267. 


THE   MARRIAGE   OF   HAMLET      73 

at  the  Court  She  must,  nevertheless,  always  bear 
in  mind  the  position  she  holds,  and,  whether  danc- 
ing, walking,  or  conversing,  must  never  forget  that 
familiarity  quickly  leads  to  a  want  of  respect,  and 
that  there  is  but  a  step  from  this  to  contempt. 

"  The  Princess  must  avoid  all  gossip  with  foreign 
Courts.  Although  the  Princess  will  be  surrounded 
by  every  appearance  of  abundance,  she  must  still 
remember  that  order  and  economy  are  the  true 
sources  of  riches  ;  the  administration  of  her  personal 
income  must  therefore  be  carefully  regulated  ;  there 
should  be  no  useless  expenditure,  but  at  the  same 
time  there  must  be  no  palpable  economy.  One 
may  be  generous  on  occasions,  but  never  wasteful. 
This  is  the  secret  of  avoiding  debts."  * 

The  frigate  Saint-Marc  cast  anchor  at  Reval  on 
June  17,  1773.  The  Landgravine  rested  at  Reval 
for  five  days,  and  then  continued  her  journey, 
reaching  Gatshina  on  the  25th  of  June.* 

Prince  Orlov,  who  owned  Gatshina,  met  the 
Landgravine  and  invited  her  to  dinner,  telling  her 
that  she  would  meet  another  lady  at  table.  This 
proved  to  be  no  other  than  Catherine  herself,  who 
wished  to  spare  the  Princesses  a  formal  reception.* 
Her  Majesty  had  only  a  few  attendants  with  her, 
having  come  simply  to  make  the  acquaintance  of 
the  mother  and  daughters.  After  dinner  the  Em- 
press started  with  her  guests  for  Tsarsko6-Selo. 
The  Grand  Duke  Paul  met  them  half-way.  It 
was  with  undisturbed  mind,  but  with  some  secret 

^  Cf.  Sbornik,  vol.  xiii,  pp.  332-336. 

*  For  the  marriage  of  Paul,  cf.  also  Walther,  Ph.  A.  E.,  Die 
Grosse  Landgrafin^  1873,  PP*  35~46. 
>  IHd.^  p.  42. 


i. 


74    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

emotion  and  a  slight  timidity,  that  he  had  pre- 
pared himself  for  this  meeting.  The  Landgravine 
confessed  that  she  felt  more  nervous  than  her 
daughters.^ 

On  the  29th  June  Catherine  made  a  formal  re- 
quest for  the  hand  of  the  Landgrave's  daughter 
Wilhelmina.  Both  mother  and  daughter  were 
willing,  and  a  courier  was  despatched  to  the  Prin- 
cess's father  to  obtain  his  consent. 

The  Landgravine  was  favourably  impressed 
with  the  Grand  Duke.  According  to  her  descrip- 
tion, although  not  tall,  there  was  nothing  mean 
about  his  appearance ;  he  was  amiable,  very  polite, 
a  good  talker,  and  apparently  cheerful.  She 
found  it,  however,  impossible,  after  having  become 
thoroughly  acquainted  with  him,  to  follow  Asse- 
burg's  advice,  and  to  put  herself  on  a  footing  of 
any  serious  intimacy  with  her  future  son-in-law. 
She  even  went  so  far  at  times  as  jokingly  to  call 
him  etn  Kindskapf. 

The  Princess  Wilhelmina  began  to  study  the 
Russian  language,  and  the  Archimandrite  Platen 
was  charged  with  her  conversion.  On  being  re- 
ceived into  the  Greek  Church  she  took  the  name 
of  Nathalie  Alexeevna.  The  betrothal  took  place 
on  the  following  day,  the  17th  August.  The 
Archimandrite  Platon  having  duly  instructed  the 
Princess  in  all  the  mysteries  of  the  Mass,  she 
received  the  Communion  at  his  hands,  the  cere- 
mony being  followed  by  a  short  and  eloquent 
address.     From  that  day  he  became  her  confessor. 

While  the  preliminary  arrangements  had  been 
going  on  at   Darmstadt,  Asseburg  had  hinted  at 


\ 


THE   MARRIAGE   OF   HAMLET      75 

the  possibility  of  the  Princess  being  allowed  to 
retain  her  faith.  The  future  showed  that  the 
diplomatist  was  in  this  case  entirely  mistaken* 
During  her  first  interview  with  the  Landgravine, 
Catherine  made  it  plain  that  the  conversion  was 
an  absolute  necessity.  According  to  her,  the 
Russian  people  would  never  have  given  the  new 
Grand  Duchess  any  confidence  or  affection  if  she 
had  not  adopted  the  orthodox  religion. 

The  Grand  Duke  meanwhile  became  more  and 
more  enamoured  with  his  betrothed,  and  hurried  for- 
ward the  preparations  for  the  marriage.  Catherine 
had  given  him  three  days  to  make  his  choice,  but  he 
had  at  once  fallen  in  love  with  Wilhelmina.  "  My 
son,"  wrote  Catherine  to  Madame  Byelke,  "fell 
in  love  with  the  Princess  as  soon  as  he  saw  her."  ^ 

In  spite  of  his  youth  and  gaiety  it  seemed  as  if, 
from  the  moment  he  entered  upon  his  new  life,  a 
feeling  of  isolation  took  possession  of  the  Grand 
Duke  and  as  if  some  secret  sadness  entered  into  his 
soul.  He  began  to  reflect  seriously  about  his  posi- 
tion. "  Our  friendship,"  he  wrote  to  Count  Razou- 
movsky,  *'has  worked  a  miracle  in  me.  I  am  be- 
ginning to  lose  my  mistrust,  but  you  are  making  war 
against  habits  that  have  been  deeply  rooted  in  me 
for  a  score  of  years  or  more,  and  you  will  end  by 
overcoming  feelings  that  are  due  in  me  to  cowardice 
and  an  habitual  nervousness."  ^ 

"  I  have  imposed  it  as  a  duty  on  myself  to  live  in 
as  cordial  relations  with  every  one  as  is  possible. 
Away  with  fancies !  away  with  cares !  To  regulate 
my  life  and  accommodate  myself  to  circumstances, 
that  is  my  rule  for  the  future.     I  am  forcing  myself 

^  Cf*  Sbornik,  vol.  xiii,  pp.  347-348.  '  Les  Rcuoumovsky^  p.  9. 


76    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

to  keep  under  my  natural  vivacity.  I  endeavour 
every  day  to  enlarge  my  ideas  and  to  make  my 
mind  active  by  improving  it  with  choice  readings."^ 

Catherine,  now  the  Duke  was  engaged,  availed 
herself  of  the  opportunity  to  dismiss  Panin  from  his 
post  as  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Duke's  house- 
hold. At  the  time  of  her  doing  so  Catherine  ex- 
pressed her  gratitude  to  him  and  loaded  him  with 
presents.  Now  that  the  Grand  Duke  was  twenty 
years  of  age,  and  that  his  marriage  had  naturally 
put  an  end  to  his  studies,  she  felt  it  her  duty,  she 
said,  to  let  his  tutor  know  how  grateful  she  felt  for 
all  the  care  he  had  taken  in  his  education. 

**  My  house  is  now  swept  and  clean,  or  very 
nearly  so,"  she  wrote  on  October  i6,  1773.  "  There 
was  a  show  of  feeling,  but  this  I  expected,"  she 
added  ;  "  the  will  of  God  has,  however,  been  ful- 
filled, for  which  I  was  equally  prepared."  * 

Paul,  on  his  part,  never  forgot  any  one  to  whom 
he  felt  himself  indebted.  In  1787,  before  taking 
the  field  at  the  beginning  of  the  Swedish  War,  he 
made  a  will  in  which  he  left  a  legacy  to  all  those 
of  his  former  teachers  who  were  still  alive.  He  did 
not  forget  his  Grand  Master,  although  at  that  time 
he  was  already  dead  ;  he  left  injunctions  to  his 
eldest  son,  and  to  all  his  descendants,  to  guard 
the  memory  of  the  debt  which  he  owed  to  the 
whole  family  of  the  deceased  Count  Panin.' 

The  marriage  of  the  Grand  Duke  Paul  Petro- 
vitsh  with  the  Grand  Duchess  Nathalie  Alexeevna 
was  celebrated  on  October  10  (the  29th  September, 
O.S.)  1773. 

*  Les  Rasoumovsky,  •  Cf.  Sbornik,  vol.  xiii,  p.  361. 

*  Cf.*^'  Russian  Archives"  {Rousky  Archiv\  1887,  vol.  ii,  p.  33. 


i 


THE   MARRIAGE   OF   HAMLET      77 

The  nuptial  ceremony,  which  was  of  exceptional 
magnificence,  was  followed  by  a  series  of  ffttes. 
The  Landgravine  and  her  daughters  waited  upon 
Her  Majesty  towards  eleven  o'clock,  and  the  pro- 
cession then  started  for  the  Cathedral  of  Kazan. 
At  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  after  congratu- 
lations had  been  offered  to  the  Empress,  the  com- 
pany sat  down  to  table.  The  banquet  was  served 
in  the  throne-room.  Catherine  took  her  place  in 
the  middle  of  the  table  with  the  Grand  Duke  and 
his  wife  on  either  side  of  her.  The  Princes  of 
Darmstadt  and  Holstein  were  seated  beside  the 
Grand  Duchess,  and  the  Landgravine  and  her 
daughters  beside  the  Grand  Duke.  Tables  for 
the  other  guests  were  prepared  in  three  other 
rooms.  Healths  were  drunk  to  the  sound  of 
cannon.  Immediately  after  dinner  the  wedding- 
party  made  their  way  to  the  gallery,  where  the 
ball  was  opened  without  delay.  The  Grand 
Duchess,  oppressed  with  the  weight  of  a  dress 
made  of  cloth  of  silver  and  covered  with  diamonds, 
looked  tired  and  could  only  dance  a  minuet  or 
two.  At  nine  o'clock  the  Empress  conducted  her 
to  the  apartments  which  had  been  prepared  for 
her  reception.  The  ladies-in-waiting  undressed 
her,  and  the  Grand  Duke  put  on  a  dressing-gown 
made  of  cloth  of  silver  similar  to  his  wife's  dress, 
only  that  his  garment  was  trimmed  with  lace.  '*  It 
was  not  as  ridiculous  as  you  would  have  thought," 
wrote  the  Landgravine.  Then  the  Empress  with- 
drew, but  the  Landgravine,  Count  Panin,  and  the 
Countess  Roumyanzev  remained  to  supper  with 
the  newly  married  pair.  The  Grand  Duke  was 
extremely  lively. 


78    THE  CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

The  Empress  gave  her  daughter-in-law  some 
diamond  clasps  on  her  wedding  day,  and  the  fol- 
lowing day  presented  her  with  a  set  of  emeralds 
and  diamonds ;  the  Grand  Duke  gave  her  a  set 
of  rubies  worth  twenty-five  thousand  roubles.  The 
Landgravine  received  a  ring  with  a  magnificent 
single  diamond  of  the  first  water,  and  an  enamelled 
snuff-box,  with  a  miniature  of  Catherine  upon  it, 
and  studded  with  diamonds ;  and  the  Princesses 
Amelie  and  Louise  had  each  a  set  of  diamonds, 
with  which  they  were  delighted.  A  further  gift  of 
over  a  hundred  thousand  roubles  was  also  made 
to  the  Landgravine,  and  to  each  of  the  girls  fifty 
thousand  roubles.  The  whole  of  their  suite  was 
also  loaded  with  presents.  The  Grand  Duchess 
received  a  yearly  sum  of  fifty  thousand  roubles. 
''  I  had  only  thirty  thousand  when  I  was  Grand 
Duchess,"  wrote  Catherine  to  M^^dame  Byelke, 
"but  I  was  always  in  debt."^ 

No  separate  establishment  was  assigned  to  the 
Grand  Duke  after  his  marriage.  The  General-in- 
Chief,  Nicholas  Soltykov,  was  in  November  1773 
appointed  to  take  Panin's  place  as  personal  atten- 
dant on  His  Imperial  Highness. 

Catherine,  when  announcing  this  fact  to  her 
son,  wrote  : — 

"  I  know  that  all  you  do  is  in  itself  perfectly 
innocent — of  this  I  am  fully  assured — but  you  are 
still  very  young,  all  eyes  are  rivetted  on  you,  and 
you  know  the  public  judges  without  much  mercy. 
The  bulk  of  the  people  in  all  countries  see  no 
difference  between  a  young  man  of  no  particular 
class  and  a  Grand  Duke,  and,  more  often  than  not, 

*  Cf,  Sbornik,  vol  xiii,  p.  353. 


THE   MARRIAGE   OF   HAMLET      79 

the  conduct  of  the  one  helps  to  tarnish  the  honour 
of  the  other.  Your  education  came  to  an  end 
with  your  marriage.  It  was  impossible  for  you 
then  to  continue  in  the  position  of  a  child,  or  to 
remain  under  tutelage  at  twenty  years  of  age. 
From  to-day,  therefore,  public  opinion  will  hold 
you  responsible  to  yourself  alone  for  all  your 
actions.  Every  movement  of  yours  will  be  watched 
with  hungry  eyes.  The  world  spies  upon  and 
notices  everything,  and  do  not  imagine  that  you, 
and  even  I,  can  ever  escape  its  criticism.  Of  me 
they  will  say :  She  left  her  young  son  to  the 
guidance  of  his  own  will  before  he  had  any  ex- 
perience of  the  world  ;  she  has  allowed  him  to  be 
surrounded  by  frivolous  young  friends  and  flat- 
tering courtiers  ;  they  will  turn  his  head  and  ruin 
him  in  mind  and  soul.  They  will  pass  their  ver- 
dict on  you  according  to  whether  your  acts  are 
thoughtless  or  judicious,  but,  believe  me,  it  will  be 
I  who  will  have  to  come  to  your  help,  to  appease 
all  these  sycophants  and  tattlers,  who  want  you  to 
be  a  veritable  Cato  at  twenty  years  of  age,  and 
would  be  dissatisfied  as  soon  as  you  became  one. 
Come  to  me  whenever  you  are  in  need  of  advice ; 
I  shall  give  it  you  as  frankly  as  I  am  able,  and 
if  you  will  but  listen  to  me  you  will  have  no  cause 
to  regret  it.  In  order  to  satisfy  public  opinion, 
and  to  furnish  you  with  more  occupation,  I  will 
allow  you  to  come  and  listen,  for  two  or  three  hours 
a  week,  while  my  Ministers  are  transacting  business. 
You  will  thereby  become  acquainted  by  degrees 
with  the  progress  of  affairs,  and  with  the  laws  of 
the  country  and  the  policy  of  my  government."  ^ 

^  Cf.*^  Russian  Archives,''  1864,  p.  485. 


8o    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

The  Grand  Duke  did  not  seem  to  be  very 
pleased  at  the  appointment  of  General  Soltykov. 
One  of  the  Imperial  Chamberlains,  Matoushkin, 
called  his  attention  to  the  fact  that  Soltykov  had 
been  attached  to  him  in  the  quality  of  a  spy.  Paul, 
**with  his  accustomed  warmth,"  went  immediately 
to  his  mother,  and  not  only  acquainted  her  with 
the  information  but  with  the  author  of  it  The 
Empress  convinced  her  son  of  the  falsehood  of 
the  information,  and  then  ordered  a  letter  to  be 
written  to  this  Chamberlain,  in  which  she  told  him 
that  "  in  a  late  reign,  such  a  behaviour  would  have 
been  rewarded  with  the  knout;  but  as  she  attri- 
buted it  more  to  his  absurdity  than  to  ill  design, 
and  out  of  regard  to  his  family,  she  would  not 
proceed  to  that  extremity."  ^ 

Among  other  instructions  which  Catherine  gave 
to  Soltykov,  she  impressed  upon  him  to  make  him- 
self agreeable  to  the  Grand  Duke,  to  show  him  as 
much  consideration  as  possible,  and  to  try  and  win 
his  confidence.  The  Grand  Duke  s  more  innocent 
escapades,  which  were  natural  at  his  age,  he  was  to 
look  over,  and  to  reserve  the  exercise  of  his  autho- 
rity for  such  cases  as  more  gravely  demanded  it, 
showing  firmness  where  this  was  called  for.  If 
necessary,  Soltykov  was  authorised  to  appeal  to 
Catherine  to  support  his  decision.^ 

Paul's  honeymoon  passed  off  very  happily. 
The  Empress  was  full  of  praise  for  her  daughter- 
in-law. 

"  Your  daughter  is  well,"  wrote  Catherine  to 
the   Landgravine  on   November  21,   1773.     **  She 

*  Cf,  Sbomik,  vol.  xix,  pp.  393-394. 
'^  Cf,^^  Russian  Archives,"  1864,  p.  482. 


b 


THE    MARRIAGE   OF    HAMLET      8i 

continues  modest  and  amiable,  such  as  you  knew 
her  of  old.  Her  husband  worships  her ;  he  is 
never  tired  of  boasting  of  her  merits  and  singing 
her  praises.  I  listen  to  him,  and  at  times  cannot 
help  laughing.  As  far  as  I  am  concerned,  his 
recommendation  is  superfluous,  for  she  has  already 
won  her  way  to  my  heart,  and  I  love  her;  she 
deserves  all  that  can  be  said  of  her,  and  I  am  in 
every  way  pleased  with  her.  And,  indeed,  one 
would  have  to  look  about  for  an  excuse  for  dis- 
satisfaction and  be  a  regular  shrew  one's  self  not 
to  be  contented  with  the  Grand  Duchess,  as  I  am 
to  the  full.  In  short,  we  all  live  happily  together. 
Our  children  are  delighted  at  having  come  to 
Tsarsko6  with  me." 

"The  Grand  Duchess  is  in  excellent  health," 
the  Empress  writes  in  another  letter ;  '*  we  are 
becoming  more  and  more  attached  to  one  another, 
and  all  get  on  happily  together.  I  like  her  char- 
acter, and  it  suits  mine/'  ^ 

*•  My  son  has  set  up  house,"  Catherine  wrote 
to  Madame  Byelke,  "and  intends  to  live  in  a 
homely  way,  never  losing  sight  of  his  wife.  Heaven 
grant  that  their  attachment  be  of  long  duration. 
I  acknowledge  with  pleasure  and  thanks  your  kind- 
ness in  wishing  me  to  see  a  little  Grand  Duke 
at  the  end  of  the  year  ;  a  little  Grand  Duchess 
would  be  equally  welcome."*  In  another  letter 
the  Empress  again  praised  the  excellent  qualities 
of  the  Grand  Duchess.  "The  Landgravine  has 
left  me  a  treasure  in  the  person  of  her  daughter." 

*  Cf,  Walthcr,  Briefwechsel  der  grossen  Landgrdfin^  vol.  i,  pp. 
340- 342 J  and  Sbomik. 

'  Sbomik,  vol.  xiii,  p.  400. 

F 


82     THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

Sir  Robert  Gunning,  the  English  Chargd 
d'Affaires,  also  testified  to  the  excellent  relations 
that  existed  between  the  Empress  and  the  Grand 
Duchess.  "The  Grand  Duchess  has  a  heart  of 
gold  {est  une  femme  d'or),  and  possesses  sterling 
qualities.  I  am  in  all  respects  pleased  with  her. 
Her  husband  adores  her,  and  those  about  her  are 
extremely  attached  to  her."  * 

Whatever  policy  the  Empress  may  have  adopted 
of  late,  it  was  certain  that  no  part  of  it  was 
based  upon  the  conduct  of  the  Grand  Duke,  with 
whom  she  had  every  reason  to  be  satisfied.  Cathe- 
rine had  also  declared  that  it  was  the  Grand  Duchess 
to  whom  she  was  indebted  for  having  restored 
her  son  to  her,  and  that  it  should  be  the  study 
of  her  life  to  repay  this  obligation.  Catherine 
omitted  no  opportunity  of  caressing  her  daughter- 
in-law,  who  had  obtained  a  very  great  ascendency 
over  Paul. 

*'  Her  society,"  wrote  Sir  Robert  Gunning,  "  is 
the  only  one  the  Grand  Duke  seems  to  have  any 
relish  for  at  present,  nor  does  he  partake  of  any 
other  whatever  except  young  Count  Razoumovsky  s. 
That  desire  of  becoming  popular  which  appeared 
for  some  time  in  His  Imperial  Highness  seems  to 
have  entirely  subsided,  and  to  be  succeeded  by  the 
other  extreme  of  a  want  of  common  attention  to 
those  who  approach  him.  This  change  in  his  con- 
duct, which  cannot  but  be  agreeable  to  the  Empress, 
may  possibly  be  affected  ;  but  I  own,  from  what  I 
have  lately  seen  and  heard  of  His  Imperial  High- 
ness, I  am  not  inclined  to  attribute  it  to  so  political 
a  motive.      Circumstanced  as  he  is,   it  is  indeed 

^  C/,  Sbomik,  vol.  xiii,  p.  388. 


THE   MARRIAGE   OF   HAMLET      83 

difficult  to  determine  his  character  from  any  of  his 
actions;  but  at  present  he  may  rather  be  said  to 
be  without  any,  easily  receiving  impressions  and 
allowing  them  to  be  as  easily  effaced."  ^ 

The  friendly  relations  existing  between  the 
Empress  and  the  young  couple  were,  however,  of 
no  long  duration.  Dark  clouds  soon  gathered  on 
the  family  horizon.  Not  only  was  the  Grand  Duke 
allowed  no  further  share  in  the  affairs  of  government, 
but  Catherine  kept  jealous  watch  to  prevent  any- 
body appealing  to  him.  Some  one,  on  a  certain 
occasion  having  written  to  the  Grand  Duke  to  ask 
for  his  patronage,  received  a  severe  reprimand  from 
the  Empress. 

There  were  reasons  which  accounted,  however, 
for  this  mistrust  on  the  part  of  the  Empress 
towards  her  son  s  advisers,  and  for  her  refusing  to 
entrust  him  with  any  branch  of  the  administration. 
Rumours  had  reached  her  early  in  1774  of  certain 
proposals  tending  to  upset  the  established  govern- 
ment that  had  been  submitted  to  the  Grand  Duke 
by  Panin,  and  to  which  Paul  had,  moreover,  put  his 
signature,  at  the  same  time  taking  an  oath  to  allow 
them  to  remain  unaltered  when  he  mounted  the 
throne.  The  moving  spirit  in  this  conspiracy  was 
the  Grand  Duchess  Nathalie. 

It  was  not  long  before  the  whole  matter  came 
to  Catherine's  ears.  She  sent  for  her  son,  and 
violently  reproached  him  with  his  conduct.  Paul 
lost  his  head,  grew  frightened,  and  gave  his  mother 
the  list  of  the  conspirators.  The  Empress  was 
seated  by  the  fire ;  she  took  the  list  without  look- 
mg  at  it  and  threw  it  in  the  flames,  saying  that 

^  Sbomik,  vol.  xix,  pp.  409-410. 


84    THE   CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

she  had  no  wish  to  know  the  names  of  the 
wretched  men.^ 

The  Grand  Duke,  however,  although  taking  no 
active  part  in  the  government,  kept  himself  well 
informed  of  the  position  of  Russia  and  of  her  rela- 
tions with  other  nations,  and  more  particularly  took 
pains  to  learn  all  about  her  home  policy  and  the 
condition  of  the  army.  In  1774  Paul  submitted  to 
the  Empress  a  memorandum,  in  which  he  not  only 
expressed  his  views  on  the  general  policy  of  the 
government,  but  ventured  to  make  various  sugges- 
tions. Catherine  recognised  in  this  memorandum 
of  the  Grand  Duke  the  influence  of  Panin's  politi- 
cal wisdom.  The  result  was  that  Paul  was  hence- 
forth carefully  excluded  from  any  participation  in 
the  government  of  the  country.  In  the  meantime 
Potemkin  had  become  the  favourite — in  the  place 
of  Vassiltshikov — ^and  soon  gained  the  entire  con- 
fidence of  the  Empress.  The  Grand  Duke  was 
condemned  to  inactivity.  All  this  could  not  but 
increase  Paul's  feeling  of  anger  and  annoyance. 
He  could  not  so  easily  forget  the  fact  that  Soltykov 
had  been  attached  to  him  in  order  to  spy  on  all  his 
movements  and  to  report  to  the  Empress.  From 
time  to  time  he  had  fits  of  irritability. 

•*  One  evening  at  supper,"  relates  Sir  Robert 
Gunning,  **  a  plate  of  sausages,  of  which  he  was 
very  fond,  was  put  before  him  ;  while  eating  he  came 
across  some  splinters  of  glass*  Extremely  incensed, 
he  rose  from  table,  carried  the  plate  to  the  Empress, 
and  angrily  declared  that  here  was  proof  of  the 
wish  to  poison  him.  Catherine  was  gready  upset, 
and  carried  her  son  off  to  Tsarsko^,  in  order  to 

^  Cf,  Sbornik,  vol.  xiX|  p.  389. 


THE   MARRIAGE   OF  HAMLET      85 

watch  and  find  out  if  this  accusation  was  only  the 
result  of  a  temporary  irritation,  or  of  a  fixed  idea 
which  had  grown  up  in  his  mind  owing  to  his  want 
of  confidence  in  her."  ^ 

Another  circumstance,  which  again  convinced 
Catherine  of  the  attachment  of  the  people  for  Paul, 
made  her  more  jealous  of  him  and  increased  the 
strain  already   existing  in   the   relations   between 
mother  and  son.     A  Cossack  of  the  Don,  named 
Pougatshev,  suddenly  raised  the  banner  of  revolu- 
tion against  the  Tsaritza.    The  rumour  that  Peter 
HI  was  still  alive  had  long  been  current  among 
the  people,  and  Pougatshev,  availing  himself  of  the 
popular  belief,  gave  himself  out  as  the  dethroned 
Emperor.      From   the   first,    Pougatshev   made   it 
known  that  his  intention  was  to  put  Paul  on  the 
throne.    "  I  do  not  wish  to  reign  myself,"  he  kept  on 
saying,  "but  I  wish  to  wipe  Catherine's  name  out 
of  the  public  prayers,  and  if  God  allows  me  to  get 
as  far  as  St.  Petersburg,  I  shall  shut  the  Empress 
up  in  a  convent,  there  to  expiate  her  crimes  with 
prayer.     My  son  is  quite  a  young  man,  and  there- 
fore not  able  to  recognise  me."     Pougatshev  used 
to  kneel  before  the  images,  and  in  a  loud  voice 
entreat  God  to  enable  him  to  reach  St.  Petersburg, 
and  to  grant  that  he  might  find  his  son  in  good 
health.     A  citizen,  Dolgopolov,  who  had  betrayed 
the  cause  of  the  government,  went  to  Pougatshev, 
pretending  to  be  sent  by  Paul  and  to  be  bringing  him 
presents  from  the  latter.     This  step  added  greatly 
to  the  credit  of  the  impostor.     The  crowd  every 
moment  expected  to  see  Paul  himself,  and  at  last 
a  rumour  was  spread  that  he  was  at  Kazan,  on  his 

^  Cf.  Sbornik,  vol.  xix,  p.  389. 


/- 


86    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

way  to  meet  Pougatshev.  Wherever  he  halted, 
Pougatshev  found  fresh  adherents ;  so  that  not- 
withstanding that  his  party  was  always  defeated 
whenever  it  met  with  any  detachments  of  the  mili- 
tary, he  had  no  difficulty  in  raising  forces  again  as 
formidable  as  ever.^  Pougatshev  was  finally  arrested 
by  some  of  his  accomplices,  but  he  threatened  the 
Cossacks  who  put  him  in  irons  with  the  anger  of  the 
Grand  Duke.  The  insurgents  showed  deep  respect 
for  the  name  of  the  heir,  but  Paul  himself  looked 
with  extreme  severity  on  the  whole  affair.  The  Em- 
press herself  was  most  painfully  affected  by  the  fact 
that  the  rising  had  been  against  her,  there  being  no 
question  of  assailing  her  son's  rights.  Furthermore, 
a  banner  with  the  Holstein  arms  had  been  noticed 
among  the  rebels,  in  all  probability  a  stolen  one; 
but  this  detail  seemed  of  particular  importance  to 
Catherine,  who  made  searching  inquiry  to  try  to 
discover  how  the  enemy  had  got  possession  of  it. 

The  execution  of  Pougatshev,  on  January  21, 
1775,  put  an  end  to  the  whole  matter.  On  the  5th 
of  the  next  month  Catherine,  accompanied  by  the 
Grand  Duke  and  Duchess,  made  a  solemn  entry 
into  Moscow  to  celebrate  the  conclusion  of  the 
treaty  of  Koutshouk  Kainardji. 

Catherine  met  with  an  exceedingly  cold  recep- 
tion at  Moscow,  whilst  the  Grand  Duke  was  evi- 
dently a  popular  favourite.  Referring  to  her  entry 
into  Moscow,  Sir  Robert  Gunning  informed  his 
Government  that  "the  whole  passed  with  scarce 
any  acclamations  amongst  the  populace,  or  their 
manifesting  the  least  degree  of  satisfaction."*    Paul, 

1  Cf,  Sbornik,  vol.  xix,  p.  433. 
*  Ibid,y  p.  448. 


THE   MARRIAGE   OF    HAMLET      87 

on  the  contrary,  won  great  popularity,  and  when  he 
rode  at  the  head  of  his  regiment  through  Moscow, 
he  allowed  the  common  people  to  crowd  round  his 
person  and  conversed  with  them.  Such  marks  of 
condescension  are  well  calculated  to  win  the  favour 
of  any  crowd,  much  more  that  of  Russian  moujiks 
in  1774.  But  the  satisfaction  of  the  people  gave 
Catherine  much  displeasure.^  Andr^  Razoumovsky 
is  supposed  to  have  said  to  the  Grand  Duke  on  this 
occasion  :  '*  You  see,  sir,  how  much  you  are  beloved, 
if  you  only  wished  to — "  to  which  Paul,  however, 
gave  no  reply.* 

But  if  one  is  to  believe  the  diplomatic  de- 
spatches of  the  French  Ambassador,  Catherine  really 
met  with  a  genuinely  enthusiastic  reception  and 
won  all  hearts  with  her  charm  of  manner,  whilst  the 
Grand  Duke  and  his  wife  were  rather  unpopular, 
on  account  of  their  somewhat  haughty  attitude.'* 

Catherine,  in  one  of  her  letters  to  Grimm,  also 
expressed  her  pleasure  at  her  reception  in  Moscow  ; 
everybody  was  delighted  to  see  her.*  It  seems, 
however,  that  the  statement  of  the  English  Am- 
bassador was  nearer  the  real  state  of  things.  For, 
in  a  subsequent  despatch,  the  French  Ambassador 
too  mentions  the  fact  that  the  Empress  was  very 
greatly  annoyed  at  the  lack  of  enthusiasm  with 
which  her  birthday  was  celebrated.*  Certain  it  is 
that  the  relations  between  Catherine  and  Paul, 
and  especially  between  mother  and  daughter-in-law, 
became  more  strained. 

1  Sbomik,  vol.  xix,  p.  451. 

*  Cfn  Cast^ra,  Histoire  de  Catherine  11^  1800,  vol.  ii,  p.  201. 

'  Cf.  Archives  de  la  Btbliothique  Nationale  and  I^s  Razoumovsky , 

P-35- 

*  Sbomik,  vol.  xxiii,  p.  15.  ^  La  Cour  de  Russie,  p.  292. 


88    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

Catherine's  policy  went  so  far  as  to  make 
her  do  her  best  to  awaken  anger  and  suspicion 
in  her  son,  in  order  to  isolate  him,  for  she 
knew  well  that  he  was  quite  incapable  of  him- 
self of  rebelling  against  her,  or  indeed  of  offering 
her  the  slightest  opposition.  Even  before  leaving 
for  Moscow  Catherine  thought  it  incumbent  on  her 
to  warn  the  Grand  Duke  that  Razoumovsky  was 
abusing  his  confidence  and  kindness  and  acquiring 
influence  over  the  Grand  Duchess.  This  painful 
disclosure  caused  great  trouble  to  Paul  Petrovitsh, 
but  he  made  every  effort  to  hide  his  feelings.  He 
believed  his  wife's  assurances  ;  grieved  at  her  tears, 
he  only  loved  her  for  them  the  more,  convinced 
that  she  was  the  victim  of  his  mother's  hatred 
towards  her,  and  his  mistrust  of  the  Empress  only 
became  stronger.^ 

The  relations  between  Catherine  and*  the  Grand 
Duchess  had  been  growing  more  and  more  un- 
pleasant since  the  journey  to  Moscow.  The 
character  of  each  of  the  two  women  was  sufficient 
to  account  for  the  change  of  feeling  towards  one 
another.  Catherine  had  become  convinced  that  it 
was  for  ambitious  reasons  alone  that  the  Princess 
Wilhelmina  had  so  eagerly  desired  to  marry  the 
Tsarevitsh.  **  A  person  who  never  amuses  herself 
with  anything,  and  who  takes  an  interest  in  nothing, 
must  be  consumed  with  ambition ;  it  is  an  axiom 
which  always  holds  true."  Such  were  Catherine's 
words.  But  there  was  no  room  for  Nathalie  to 
exercise  her  ambition  on  the  ground  where  the 
Empress  chose  to  display  hers,  and  it  was  impos- 

1  Cf.  Archives  dela  BibliotJUque  NtUionaU^xA  Les  Raxoumovsky^ 
p.  36. 


THE   MARRIAGE   OF   HAMLET      89 

sible  for  them  to  sympathise  with  one  another.  A 
crisis  that  was  bound  to  end  in  an  open  quarrel 
seemed  to  be  at  hand,  when  an  event  which  the 
Empress  had  been  eagerly  expecting  occurred. 
The  Grand  Duchess  began  to  complain  greatly 
of  her  health.  Phthisis  was  feared.  '*  The  Grand 
Duchess  is  constantly  ill,  but  how  is  it  possible  for 
her  not  to  be  ill!"  wrote  Catherine  to  Grimm. 
"It  is  a  lady  who  knows  only  of  extremes  in  all 
that  she  does.  If  we  go  out  for  a  walk  we  must  do 
twenty  versts  at  least.  If  we  dance,  it  must  be  at 
least  twenty  quadrilles,  as  many  minuets,  without 
enumerating  the  German  dances.  To  avoid  being 
too  hot  in  our  rooms  we  do  not  have  them  warmed 
at  all.  When  we  are  advised  to  rub  our  face  with 
ice  we  must  needs  rub  the  whole  body  with  it ;  in 
short,  all  moderation  in  our  actions  is  far  from  us. 
For  fear  of  those  who  are  evil-minded  we  no  longer 
put  trust  in  any  one;  we  refuse  to  follow  either 
good  or  bad  advice.  In  a  word,  up  to  the  present 
moment  we  are  neither  amiable,  prudent,  or  sen- 
sible ;  God  knows  how  it  is  all  going  to  end,  for  we 
will  listen  to  no  one,  whoever  it  may  be,  and  decide 
everything  according  to  our  own  ideas.  After 
being  a  year  and  a  half  in  Russia,  we  cannot  yet 
speak  a  word  of  Russian ;  we  are  anxious  to  be 
taught,  but  are  not  willing  to  give  up  an  hour  in  the 
day  for  this  purpose.  Our  head  is  all  in  a  fume  and 
fuss ;  we  cannot  bear  this  person  or  that ;  we  have 
debts  amounting  to  double  the  amount  of  our  pro- 
perty, and  it  is  doubtful  if  anybody  in  Europe  has 
more  of  them."  ^ 

»  

While  at  Moscow,  Catherine  made  a  pilgrimage 

1  Cf,  Sbornik,  vol.  xxiii,  p.  12. 


90    THE   CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

to  the  Convent  of  Saint  Sergius,  which  took  her 
from  the  29th  of  May  to  the  17th  of  June.      On 
September  7th  she  wrote  to  Grimm :  '*  You  hoped 
that  my  devotion  at  Saint  Sergius'  would  bring  about 
a  miracle.     No  sooner  said  than  done.     You  hoped 
that  heaven  would  do  for  the  Grand  Duchess  what 
it  formerly  did   for  Sarah  and  Elizabeth.      Your 
prayers  are  heard,  my  daughter-in-law  is  enceinte, 
and  she  seems  to  be  stronger  in  health."  ^    This  event 
hastened  the  return  of  the  Court  to  St.  Petersburg. 
Paul   and   the   Grand    Duchess    left    Moscow   for 
Tsarsko^-S61o  on   the   i8th   December,  Catherine 
following  on  the  3 1  st  of  the  same  month.     On  the 
17th  April  1887,  Low  Sunday,  the  Grand  Duke  rose 
at  four  o'clock  in  the  morning  to  fetch  his  mother, 
the  Grand  Duchess  having  been  in  pain  since  mid- 
night.    The   Empress  rose  at  once,  and  remained 
with   her    daughter-in-law   till   ten   o'clock   in   the 
morning.      Everything  apparently  going  on  well, 
the  Empress  went  away  to  dress  herself,  and  re- 
turned at  noon.    Towards  evening  the  pains  became 
so  violent  that  the  birth  of  the  child  was  expected 
every   minute.     The    Empress,  the   Grand   Duke, 
Countess    Razoumovsky,  the  best  midwife  in  the 
city,   and    the    head    lady's-maid    were    the    only 
persons  admitted  into  the  room.     The  doctor  and 
his  assistant  waited  outside  in  the  vestibule.     The 
night   passed,  the   Grand   Duchess,  still   in   great 
suffering,   slumbering  at  intervals,  and  rising  and 
lying  down  again  as  she  felt  inclined.     The  follow- 
ing day  brought  no  change,  and  Doctors  Kruze  and 
Tode  were  sent  for.     The  midwife  carried  out  the 
doctors'  orders,  but  there  seemed  little  hope  now  of 

^  Cf.  Sbomik,  vol.  xxiii,  pp.  16,  33. 


THE   MARRIAGE   OF   HAMLET      91 

the  child  being  safely  born.  On  Tuesday  Rogerson 
and  Lindemann  were  sent  for,  the  midwife  finding 
the  delivery  impossible.  On  Wednesday  Tode  re- 
turned, but  without  success.  The  child  was  dead, 
but  everything  that  was  possible  was  done  to  save 
the  life  of  the  mother.  On  Thursday,  Prince  Henry 
of  Prussia,  who  had  lately  arrived,  offered  the  assist- 
ance of  his  doctor.  A  fresh  consultation  was  held, 
but  the  doctors  all  declared  that  their  science  was 
of  no  avail.  Death  was  rapidly  approaching.  The 
Grand  Duchess's  friend  and  confessor,  the  Arch- 
bishop Platon,  came  to  bring  her  the  succours  of 
religion,  and  while  he  was  thus  ministering  to  her, 
she  breathed  her  last.^ 

Various  reports,  however,  were  circulated  con- 
cerning the  death  of  the  Great  Duchess,  and 
were  very  injurious  to  Catherine's  reputation.  Sir 
Nathaniel  Wraxall  heard  these  reports  from  two 
Princes  of  Hesse-Philipstahl,  relatives  of  the  de- 
ceased Duchess.  The  medical  men  attending  the 
Grand  Duchess  had  declared  that  she  would  never 
be  able  to  give  birth  to  another  child,  on  account 
of  an  operation  which  she  underwent  in  her  early 
youth.  As  Catherine  was  particularly  anxious  that 
an  heir  to  the  throne  should  be  forthcoming,  it  was 
decided  to  sacrifice  the  young  Duchess  in  the 
interest  of  the  State.  It  is  doubtful  whether  Paul's 
consent  was  first  asked.  The  midwife,  however, 
suddenly  became  very  wealthy,  and  was  on  very 
familiar  terms  with  the  Empress.* 

In  one  of  her  letters  to  Madame  Byelke,  Cathe- 

*  Cf.  Shilder,  "The  Emperor  Paul,*'  p.  103. 
«  Cf.  Golovkin,  La    Cour,  &c.,  p.   106,  and    Sir    N.    Wraxall, 
''  Memoirs,"  1884,  p.  142. 


92    THE  CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

rine  practically  seems  to  admit  the  fact  that  the 
Grand    Duchess   had    been   sacrificed.*      '•  I    have 
been  here  with  my  son   and  Prince  Henry  since 
the  death  of  the  Grand  Duchess/'  writes  Catherine. 
"No  human  power  could  have  saved  the  Princess; 
she  was  unfortunately  so  formed  that  she  could  not 
give  birth  to  her  child ;  hers  is  perhaps  an  unique 
case.     For  three  days  she  was   in  the  pangs  of 
labour,  and  when  the  midwife  declared  that   she 
could  do  nothing  for  her,  we  sent  for  accoucheurs ; 
but,  imagine,  even  these  were  unable  to  do  any- 
thing, nor  was  any  instrument  of  avail ;  the  passage 
was  completely  obstructed,  and   the  post-mortem 
revealed  that  it  was  only  four  fingers  wide,  while 
the  child's  shoulders  were  eight.    Only  two  years 
ago  she  was  telling  us  that,  showing  an  inclination 
as  a  child  to  grow  crooked,  the  Landgrave  sent  for 
a  quack,  who  knocked  her  about  with  his  fists  and 
knees.     It  was  now  also  discovered  that  the  bottom 
of  the  spine  was  in  the  shape  of  an  3  9  ^^^  that 
at  the  base,  where  the  bone  ought  to  have  curved 
outwards,  it  curved  inwards.     So  this  also  proved 
that  it  was  no  haughtiness  on  her  part,  but  an  im- 
possibility to  her  to  bend  forwards«     The  quack's 
blows,  it  seems,  hastened  her  transit  to  another 
world.      I    felt  the   death   of   this    Princess    very 
deeply,  and  I  did  all  I  could  to  save  her ;  for  five 
days  and  nights  I  never  left  her ;  however,  as  it  is 
now  ascertained  that  she  could  never  have  had  a 
living  child,  or  rather  have  given  birth  to  one,  it  is 
as  well  not  to  think  about  it  any  more."  * 

Asseburg,  informed  of  the  fact  that  on  account 

^  C/.  Golovkin,  I.e.,  pp.  105-106. 
*  C/.  Sbornik,  vol.  xxvii,  p.  79. 


\ 


\ 


THE   MARRIAGE   OF   HAMLET      93 

of  the  operation  which  the  Grand  Duchess  under- 
went when  young  it  was  impossible  for  her  to  give 
birth  to  a  child,  was  greatly  concerned.  Asseburg, 
therefore,  thought  it  best  to  excuse  himself  in  a 
letter  to  Count  Panin,  and  solemnly  to  declare  that 
he  had  been  perfectly  ignorant  of  the  operation  in 
question.  Catherine,  however,  exculpated  him, 
assuring  him  that  no  blame  whatever  was  attached 
to  him,  as  he  had  done  all  he  could.  When,  eight 
years  later,  Paul  travelled  through  Europe  in  com- 
pany with  his  second  wife,  he  ordered  his  chamber- 
lain, Prince  Kourakin,  to  pay  a  visit  to  Asseburg, 
and  to  assure  the  latter  of  his  Imperial  goodwill. 

On  the  very  day  of  the  Grand  Duchess's  death, 
the  Empress,  with  the  Tsarevitsh  and  Prince 
Henry  of  Prussia,  left  for  Tsarsko6.  The  follow- 
ing day  Catherine  sent  Betzky  orders,  as  soon 
as  the  body  of  the  Grand  Duchess  had  been 
removed,  to  take  away  the  hangings  from  all  the 
four  rooms  occupied  by  Her  Highness,  namely^ 
the  green  hangings  from  the  bedroom,  the  striped 
hangings  from  one  of  the  boudoirs,  and  the  silk 
hangings  from  the  other  one,  and  those  from  the 
rose-coloured  room.  She  further  ordered  that  the 
hangings,  couches,  chairs,  and  carpets  were  to  be 
given  to  the  Archbishop  Platon ;  that  the  wooden 
partitions  were  to  be  broken  up  and  taken  away, 
especially  the  panels  lined  with  silk  damask  in  the 
boudoir,  and  to  have  this  done  quickly,  as  the 
atmosphere  of  the  rooms  had  become  unbearable 
and  a  source  of  danger  to  the  survivors. 


CHAPTER  V 

LOVE  IN  A  PALACE;  or,  THE  LOVE  LETTERS 

OF  A  PRINCESS 

"  And  the  king  has  brought  me  into  his  apartments." 

Paul's  second  marriage — ^The  guilt  of  his  late  wife.  Une  liaison  tr^  inno- 
cente — Princess  Sophia  Dorothea  of  Wiirtemberg — Her  delight  at  the 
splendid  prospect — Paul  journeys  to  Berlin — Description  of  the  bride 
by  Madame  d'Oberkirch — Paul  £bi11s  in  love  with  the  bride-elect—LoTe 
letters  of  a  Princess — ^The  character  of  the  new  Grand  Duchess — 
Catherine  jealous  of  her— <The  birth  of  Alexander. 

The  death  of  his  wife  produced  a  deep  impression 
upon  Paul.  He  was  inconsolable  at  first,  but  his 
mother  and  Prince  Henry  of  Prussia  succeeded  in 
eradicating  the  image  of  the  dead  from  his  heart  by 
revealing  the  reprehensible  conduct  of  the  Duchess- 
She  had  been  unworthy,  so  they  said,  of  his  love 
and  esteem.  Catherine,  however,  clever  woman 
though  she  was,  was  not  such  a  deep  psychologist 
as  to  understand  that  the  operation  was  a  dangerous 
one.  Paul's  faith  in  human  nature  was  under- 
mined. His  wife,  and  his  best  friend,  Andre 
Razoumovsky,  had  been,  according  to  the  testi- 
mony of  his  mother,  untrue  to  him.  This  shock, 
although  it  stunned  his  grief  for  the  moment,  was 
undoubtedly  instrumental  in  developing  in  later 
years  that  feeling  of  distrust  and  the  lower  passions 
which  had  lain  dormant  in  Paul,  and  which  became 
so  prominent  when  he  ascended  the  throne.     We 

94 


LOVE    IN   A   PALACE  95 

shall  have  occasion  to  notice  how  in  future  the 
slightest  cause  was  sufficient  to  make  him  distrust 
not  only  his  friends  but  even  his  second  wife  and 
children. 

But  not  only  did  Catherine  endeavour  to  make 
Paul  forget  his  first  wife  ;  she  also  set  about  to  find 
him  a  new  one.  And  here  again  she  availed  her- 
self of  the  services  of  Prince  Henry  of  Prussia. 
The  latter  then  conceived  the  project  of  cement- 
ing the  alliance  between  Russia  and  his  brother, 
Frederick  of  Prussia,  by  the  marriage  of  the  Grand 
Duke  Paul  with  the  Princess  Dorothea  of  Wiir- 
temberg-Montbeliard,  grand-niece  of  the  great 
Frederick.  Catherine  was  pleased  with  the  idea, 
and  Prince  Henry  undertook  to  negotiate  the 
marriage.^  Catherine  was  anxious  to  see  her  son 
re-married. 

"  Seeing  the  vessel  go  down  on  one  side," 
Catherine  wrote  to  Grimm,  "  I  made  haste  to 
throw  it  over  on  to  the  other;  I  lost  no  time 
in  setting  to  work  to  repair  the  loss,  and  so  suc- 
ceeded in  dissipating  the  gloom  into  which  our 
trouble  had  plunged  us.  I  began  by  suggesting 
trips,  little  journeys  to  and  fro,  and  at  last  I  said, 
the  dead  being  dead  we  must  now  think  of  the 
living ;  because  we  have  been  disappointed  of  the 
happiness  that  we  had  expected,  is  there  any 
reason  for  despairing  ever  to  find  it  again  ?  Let 
us  look  about  for  the  other  one  ;  who  ?  you  ask. 
Oh  !  I  have  her  all  ready  !  How,  so  soon  ?  Yes, 
and  a  treasure  into  the  bargain,  and  then  was  not 
my   gentleman's   curiosity   aroused.      Who   is   it? 

*    M/motres   de   la   Baronne   d^Oberkirchy  Paris,    1853,  vol.  i, 
pp.  70-71. 


% 


96    THE   CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

What  is  she  like?  Is  she  dark,  fair,  short,  tall, 
amiable,  pretty,  charming,  a  dear,  a  darling  ?  The 
thought  of  such  a  treasure  is  cheering,  and  brings 
a  smile  to  the  face  ;  so,  from  one  thing  to  another, 
as  a  third  move,  a  certain  brisk  traveller  is  sent 
forth,  who  leaves  every  one  behind  in  a  state  of 
anxiety  and  expectation  ;  before  long  he  is  on  the 
spot,  come,  as  it  is  understood  of  course,  with  the 
hope  of  bringing  comfort  and  diversion  ;  and  there 
he  is,  installed  as  go-between,  negotiator,  now  off 
as  a  messenger,  now  returning ;  and  now  we  have 
the  journey  settled,  the  interview  arranged,  and  all 
with  the  utmost  celerity,  and  troubled  hearts  begin 
to  expand  ;  still  sad,  but  forced  to  think  about 
such  arrangements  for  the  journey  as  health  and 
diversion  demand.  Meanwhile  let  us  have  a  por- 
trait. A  portrait,  there  is  no  harm  in  that !  There 
are  very  few,  however,  that  are  pleasing  ;  a  paint- 
ing gives  no  true  idea.  The  first  messenger 
who  arrives  brings  one ;  what  is  the  good  of  it  ? 
It  might  produce  an  unfavourable  impression. 
Better  leave  it  unpacked  in  its  box.  There  it 
remains  a  week  untouched  in  the  place  where  it 
was  deposited  on  arriving,  on  my  table  beside 
my  writing-desk.  But  is  it  pretty  ?  Well,  that 
is  according  to  taste ;  I  think  so  myself.  Finally, 
it  is  looked  at  and  immediately  put  into  the 
pocket,  then  looked  at  again,  and  then  some 
one  busies  himself  with  hastening  forward  the 
preparations  for  the  journey."^ 

Paul  offered  no  resistance  to  the  proposal  of 
a  second  marriage.  The  death  of  the  Grand 
Duchess    having    brought   to    light    secrets    con- 

^  Sbornik,  vol.  xxiii,  p.  49. 


LOVE    IN   A   PALACE  97 

nected  with  her  life,  her  husbands  feelings  to- 
wards her  obviously  became  modified,  and  the 
Court,  following  suit,  ceased  to  mourn  the  Princess. 

That  the  late  Grand  Duchess  had  manifested 
ai>  attachment  for  the  handsome  Razoumovsky, 
who  was  the  darling  of  the  aristocratic  ladies  of 
St.  Petersburg,  is  beyond  doubt  Harris,  the 
English  Ambassador,  referring  to  the  relations 
existing  between  the  Grand  Duke  and  his  wife, 
wrote  as  follows  : — 

"  It  appeared  soon  after  his  marriage  with  the 
Princess  of  Darmstadt  that  she  easily  found  the 
secret  of  governing  him,  and  that  so  absolutely 
that  he  dismissed  the  few  companions  that  seemed 
to  have  been  of  his  own  choice,  and  in  his  society 
his  amusements  and  his  sentiments  was  entirely 
directed  by  her.  .  .  .  She,  in  her  turn,  was  governed 
by  Count  Andr6  Razoumovsky,  her  paramour,  and 
he  again  received  his  lessons  and  the  greater  part 
of  his  income  from  the  Ministers  of  the  House  of 
Bourbon."  ^ 

That  intimate  relations  should  have  existed 
between  the  daughter-in-law  of  Catherine  and  the 
handsomest  man  in  St.  Petersburg  is  certainly  no 
matter  for  surprise.  Such  things  were  bon  ton  at 
the  Court  of  the  Northern  Cybele.  There  was  no 
need  for  Catherine,  after  the  death  of  her  daughter- 
in-law,  to  forge  love-letters,  supposed  to  have 
passed  between  the  late  Grand  Duchess  and 
Andr6  Razoumovsky,  so  as  to  convince  her  son 
of  his  late  wife  s  guilt  Such  letters  did  undoubt- 
edly exist  And  if  French  diplomatists  seem  to 
be   inclined   to   style   the   intimacy   of  the   Grand 

^  *'  Diaries  and  Correspondence  of  James  Harris,"  i,  1844,  p-  212. 

G 


98    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

Duchess  and  the  Count  a  ^^  liaison  trh  innocente,'' 
Frederick  1 1  thought  that  it  was  not  so.* 

There  is,  however,  no  reason  to  assume  that 
the  Grand  Duchess  and  Count  Andr6  had  been 
mixed  up  in  a  political  conspiracy  of  which 
Catherine  was  said  to  have  proofs.  Had  it  been 
so,  the  Empress  would  not  have  entrusted  him 
afterwards  with  a  diplomatic  post' 

In  any  case,  immediately  after  the  burial  of  the 
Grand  Duchess,  Razoumovsky  received  orders  to 
leave  St  Petersburg  and  was  exiled  to  RevaL 
Thanks  to  the  influence  of  his  friends  and  of  his 
father,  the  hetman  of  the  Ukraine,  he  was  allowed 
to  return  to  his  father  at  Batourin.  Catherine  sub- 
sequently appointed  him  Russian  diplomatic  agent 
at  Naples.* 

Before  long  Paul  amply  consoled  himself.  The 
two  months  immediately  following  his  wife's  death 
were  spent  with  his  mother  at  Tsarsko6  -  Sdo. 
Their  life  went  on  just  in  the  usual  way.  Pleasure- 
parties  at  Taitzi,  Gatshina,  Peterhof ;  christenings, 
marriages,  as  well  as  the  regular  performances  g^iven 
by  the  officers  of  the  Mounted  Guard,  theatres  and 
concerts — everything,  in  spite  of  the  Court's  mourn- 
ing, resumed  its  usual  course  as  soon  as  the  Grand 
Duchess  was  buried. 

The  news  now  arrived  from  Berlin  that  the 
Princess  of  Wurtemberg  had  given  her  consent  to 
the  marriage  of  her  daughter,  and  on  June  24th, 
1776,  Paul  started  for  Berlin,  accompanied  by 
Count  Roumyanzev.  Prince  Henry  left  Tsarsko^ 
S6I0  the  following  day,  so  as  to  be  at  Riga  to  re- 

*  Works,  vi,  p.  120. 

^  Vasilchikov,  Les  Razoumovskyy  i,  p.  56.  '  /3fV£,  p.  58. 


I 


LOVE    IN   A  PALACE  99 

ceive  the  Princess  Sophia- Dorothea.  On  the  very 
day  that  the  Grand  Duke  reached  Berlin,  Catherine, 
fully  assured  of  the  success  of  the  affair,  sent  the 
Countess  Roumyanzev  to  M6mel  to  meet  Sophia- 
Dorothea.  The  object  of  the  Countess's  journey 
was  kept  a  secret;  it  was  pretended  that  she  had 
gone  to  look  after  a  property  which  her  husband 
had  given  her. 

Sophia-Dorothea,  who  was  just  entering  her 
seventeenth  year,  spoke  with  childish  delight  of 
everything  that  was  awaiting  her  in  Russia;  she 
had  hopes  of  perfect  happiness,  and  spoke  of  her- 
self as  the  most  favoured  Princess  in  the  world. 
Catherine  s  magnificence  somewhat  dismayed  her. 

"  The  Empress  kissed  me,  that  is  true,"  she 
said  afterwards,  ''but  I  am  sure  she  thought  me 
a  simpleton.  However,"  she  added,  not  without  a 
certain  self-assurance  in  her  own  moral  qualities,  ''if 
I  manage  to  make  myself  agreeable  to  the  Empress 
and  the  Grand  Duke  ..." 

Things  were  set  on  foot  preparatory  to  the  de- 
parture from  Berlin.  The  Princess's  father  and 
her  two  brothers  were  to  accompany  her;  her 
mother  did  not  wish  to  come  until  after  she  had 
had  her  first  interview  with  the  Grand  Duke 
Paul.  The  Princess  reached  Potsdam  on  12th  July 
1776. 

The  Grand  Duke  arrived  at  Riga  on  July  ist 
and  there  awaited  Prince  Henry,  who  was  to  accom- 
pany him  to  Berlin,  which  place  he  reached  on  July 
2 1  St.  Every  place  he  passed  through  was  given 
up  to  festivities,  the  people  being  mad  with  joy  at 
the  victories  won  by  their  King.  The  latter  stood 
at  the  threshold  of  his  apartments   to  greet  his 


loo    THE  CURSE  OF  THE  ROMANOVS 

august  guest.  Prince  Henry  presented  the  Grand 
Duke  to  his  brother. 

•*Sire/'  said  Paul  to  him,  "the  reasons  which 
have  induced  me  to  travel  from  the  extreme  north 
to  this  fortunate  country,  were  partly  the  wish  I 
had  to  assure  you  of  the  friendship  which  will  be 
a  bond  between  the  two  countries  for  ever,  and 
the  impatient  desire  I  had  to  see  the  Princess  who 
is  one  day  to  ascend  the  Russian  throne.  In  re- 
ceiving her  from  your  hands  she  will  be  doubly 
dear  to  me,  as  also  to  the  people  over  whom  she 
will  reign.  Finally,  my  aspiration  is  at  last  ful- 
filled, and  I  am  able  to  look  upon  the  greatest 
hero  of  the  age,  who  is  also  the  glory  of  his  country 
and  will  be  the  wonder  of  posterity." 

The  Grand  Duke  and  the  Princess  Sophia- 
Dorothea  met  for  the  first  time  at  a  supper  given 
by  the  Queen  Elizabeth-Christina.  The  next  day 
they  dined  together  with  the  King. 

"  The  Princess  Dorothea,"  writes  Madame  Ober- 
kirch,  "born  in  1759,  was  then  seventeen  years  of 
age.  She  was  beautiful  as  Aurora ;  of  that  majestic 
stature  which  sculptors  love  to  imitate,  combining 
with  a  delicate  regularity  of  features  the  most  noble 
and  imposing  grace.  Hers  was  indeed  a  regal 
beauty."^ 

The  Tsarevitsh,  as  every  one  expected,  dazzled 
by  her  beauty  and  grace,  fell  in  love  with  the  Prin- 
cess who  was  his  destined  wife.  He  was  delighted 
with  the  honour  lavished  upon  him  on  all  sides,  not 
being  accustomed  to  this  at  home.  He  confessed 
his  feelings  to  Prince  Henry,  who  communicated 
them  to  the  Princess's  father.   As  on  her  side  Sophia- 

^  Mim&ires  de  Madame  d^Oberkirch^  i,  p.  73. 


LOVE   IN   A   PALACE  loi 

Dorothea  was  greatly  taken  with  the  Grand  Duke, 
Prince  Henry,  to  whom  the  Empress  had  given  full 
power  to  act,  made  a  formal  request  for  the  hand  ot 
the  Princess  on  July  23rd,  and  at  the  same  time 
read  a  letter  aloud  that  the  Empress  had  written  to 
him  on  the  22  nd  of  the  previous  month.  Prince 
Henry  was  able  to  carry  back  to  the  Grand  Duke 
the  favourable  acceptance  of  his  request,  and  the 
betrothal  was  celebrated  the  same  day. 

"  Dear  Friend,"  wrote  Sophia- Dorothea  to  the 
Baroness  d'Oberkirch,  on  the  evening  of  her  be- 
trothal, "  I  am  happy,  more  than  happy — it  would 
be  impossible  to  be  more  so.  No  one  could  be 
more  lovable  than  the  Grand  Duke.  I  may  justly 
be  proud  of  my  charming  betrothed  and  of  his  affec- 
tion for  me,  which  fills  me  with  satisfaction  and 
pleasure,"^ 

Colonel,  the  Count  Goertz,  Frederick's  aide-de- 
camp, was  immediately  despatched  to  St.  Peters- 
burg, to  communicate  the  good  news  to  Catherine. 
The  King  looked  upon  the  conclusion  of  this 
marriage  as  a  successful  political  move  on  the  part 
of  Prussia. 

Rejoicings  of  every  description  took  place — 
dinners,  theatres,  entertainments  by  day  and  night, 
at  the  royal  residences  of  Charlottenburg,  Mon- 
Bijou,  and  Sans-Souci,  and  the  reviews  at  Potsdam 
went  on  without  interruption  up  to  the  4th  of  August. 
On  that  day,  which  was  a  Sunday,  a  grand  dinner 
given  by  the  Queen  wound  up  the  festivities,  which 
had  lasted  for  a  fortnight.  That  evening,  after  the 
concert  and  supper  were  over,  preparations  were 
begun  for  the  departure.     The  Princess  made  the 

^  Mimoires  de  Madame  cPOberkirch^  i,  p.  74. 


I02    THE  CURSE  OF  THE  ROMANOVS 

first  move.  She  bid  a  respectful  adieu  to  the  King, 
and  after  supper  drove  off  with  her  parents  and 
Prince  Ferdinand,  in  order  to  spend  the  first  night 
of  her  journey  at  Rheinsberg,  the  residence  of 
Prince  Henry,  who  had  gone  before  to  make  ready 
for  their  reception.  Paul,  at  the  summit  of  his 
happiness,  left  Berlin  the  following  morning,  so  as 
to  meet  his  betrothed  again  at  Rheinsberg. 

There  they  spent  two  days  in  each  others 
company.  The  Grand  Duke  then  hastened  back  to 
St.  Petersburg  to  prepare  for  the  marriage.  He 
left  the  Castle  in  company  with  Prince  Henry,  who 
went  with  him  as  far  as  Schwedt,  and,  as  in  going, 
he  was  accompanied  all  along  his  return  route  by 
the  populace  in  crowds.  On  the  1 9th  August  he  was 
at  Riga,  reaching  Tsarsko6-S61o  on  the  evening  of 
the  25th,  happy  as  he  only  was  but  once  in  his  life. 

The  following  description  of  his  betrothed  has 
been  found  in  a  letter  written  to  his  mother : — 

**  I  found  my  betrothed  just  as  nice  as  I  expected. 
Rather  pretty,  tall  and  graceful ;  not  in  the  least 
shy,  but  quick  and  intelligent  in  answering  when 
questions  are  put  to  her.  That  she  is  good  and 
sensible  at  heart  I  had  several  opportunities  of 
perceiving.  The  King  spoke  to  me  of  her  mas- 
culine power  of  mind ;  he  has  talked  with  her  a 
great  deal  about  her  future  duties,  and  has  reported 
their  conversations  to  me ;  he  loses  no  opportunity 
of  impressing  upon  her  the  duty  which  she  owes  to 
you.  She  has  been  highly  educated,  and  surprised 
me  one  day,  when  we  were  talking  of  geometry, 
by  saying  that  it  was  a  science  which  led  the  mind 
to  reflect.  She  is  very  simple  in  her  habits  and 
domestically  inclined  ;   she  employs  her  leisure  in 


LOVE   IN   A  PALACE  103 

reading  and  playing.  She  is  longing  to  begin  the 
study  of  Russian,  realising  how  necessary  it  is  for 
her  to  understand  it,  and  taking  warning  by  the 
example  of  the  one  who  preceded  her."  ^ 

Sophia- Dorothea  remained  at  Rheinsberg  with 
her  parents  till  the  12th  of  August ;  the  Qwner  of  the 
Castle  soon  returned,  delighted  with  his  grand-niece 
and  highly  pleased  with  the  result  of  his  negotia- 
tions. He  bid  a  tender  farewell  to  Sophia-Dorothea, 
who  reached  the  Castle  of  Schwedt  with  her  parents 
and  Prince  Ferdinand  and  his  wife  on  the  same  day. 
The  Countess  Roumyanzev  and  M.  Semolin,  Russian 
Minister  at  Mitau,  accompanied  them  thither,  having 
received  orders  to  go  with  them  as  far  as  Riga.  The 
Prince  and  Princess  of  Wurtemberg  did  not  part 
with  their  daughter  until  they  had  got  to  Memel. 
The  Grand  Duke  met  his  betrothed  at  lamburg, 
and  together  they  entered  Tsarsko6-S61o  on  the 
nth  September.  The  Grand  Duke  was  beaming 
with  happiness. 

The  Empress  was  in  love  with  her  from  the  first 
'*  Know,"  she  wrote  to  Grimm,  on  the  12th  of  Sep- 
tember 1776,  "that  my  Princess  arrived  last  night, 
and  immediately  won  all  hearts,  for  she  is  charming ; 
after  this  what  am  I  to  say  to  you  about  your 
Laharpe  and  his  crew,  about  their  forebodings 
and  other  clumsy  mistakes ;  my  Princess  is  not 
clumsy.  I  should  like  very  much  to  have  one  of 
Mengs'  pictures  in  my  gallery,  but  just  now  I  am 
quite  taken  up  with  my  Princess.  The  Psyche,  by 
the  mistaken  name  of  Siriel,  would  also  suit  me 
very  well  if  at  this  moment  my  head  was  not  turned 
by  my  Princess,  who  is  as  pretty  as  Psyche.     Your 

>  Shilder,  "The  Emperor  Paul,"  p.  115. 


d 


I04    THE   CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

young  man  did  not  know  what  he  was  about  when 
he  gave  her  up  without  regret."  ^ 

The  Empress,  too,  had  produced  a  very  favour- 
able impression  upon  the  bride-elect,  who  was 
delighted  with  her  future  mother-in-law.  The 
affectionate  heart  of  the  Princess  was  brimming 
over  with  joy,  and  her  love  for  her  betrothed  knew 
no  bounds.     She  did  not  hesitate  to  tell  him  so. 

**  I  cannot  go  to  bed,"  she  wrote  to  Paul,  "  my 
dear  and  adorable  Prince,  before  telling  you  once 
more  that  I  love  and  adore  you  to  distraction  ;  my 
friendship  for  you  has  increased  since  the  conver- 
sation we  had  this  evening.  God  alone  knows  what 
pleasure  it  will  be  to  me  soon  to  belong  to  you 
entirely  ;  all  my  future  life  will  prove  to  you  my 
sentiments  ;  yes,  dear,  adorable,  dearest  Prince,  all 
my  life  will  I  devote  to  you  and  give  you  constant 
proofs  of  my  attachment  and  of  the  love  with  which 
my  heart  is  beating  for  you.  Good-night,  adorable 
Prince  ;  sleep  well,  banish  all  phantoms,  but  dream 
of  one  that  adores  you."  There  is  certainly  a  note 
of  passion  in  this  epistle. 

The  Grand  Duke's  marriage  was  hastened  for- 
ward. On  September  13th  Archbishop  Platon 
began  the  religious  instruction  of  the  Princess  ;  the 
baptism  took  place  on  the  25th,  the  Princess  taking 
the  name  of  Maria  F^odorovna.  On  the  26th  she 
and  the  Grand  Duke  were  betrothed,  and  the 
marriage  was  celebrated  on  the  7th  October  in 
presence  of  the  Duchess  of  Courland  and  the  whole 
Court,  who  were  all  enthusiastic  about  the  beauty 
and  elegance  of  the  new  Grand  Duchess,  who  was 
herself  overwhelmed  with  happiness. 

^  Sbornik,  vol  xxiii,  p.  59,  and  vol.  xxvii,  pp.  1 17-1 19. 


LOVE   IN   A   PALACE  105 

At  the  close  of  the  first  year  of  their  married 
life  she  wrote  to  the  friend  of  her  childhood,  Lanele, 
Baroness  of  Oberkirch  : — 

"  The  Grand  Duke  is  the  most  adorable  of  hus- 
bands. ...  I  am  very  glad  that  you  do  not  know 
him,  for  you  would  certainly  have  fallen  in  love  with 
him  and  then  I  should  have  been  jealous.  My 
dear  husband  is  an  angel,  and  I  love  him  to  dis- 
traction."^ 

At  a  Court,  however,  like  that  of  Catherine's,  full 
of  intrigues  and  temptations,  the  young  Duchess 
was  exposed  to  many  dangers ;  and  her  very  virtues 
and  qualities,  her  character  and  beauty,  were  such 
as  to  make  Catherine  soon  jealous  of  her.  With 
her  candour,  innocency  and  chastity,  the  Grand 
Duchess  Maria  Fdodorovna,  who  entered  upon  her 
marriage  with  the  firm  intention  of  fulfilling  its 
duties  and  preserving  its  sanctity,  could  hardly  have 
felt  at  home  in  the  midst  of  a  society  of  such  dif- 
ferent aspirations  to  her  own. 

"  As  the  character  of  the  present  Grand  Duchess 
differs  entirely  from  that  of  the  deceased,"  wrote 
Harris,  *'  so  the  Grand  Duke,  on  his  side,  appears 
under  quite  a  new  light.  Maria  F6odorovna  is 
modest  and  kind,  and  has  a  strong  sense  of  her 
wifely  duties.  The  Grand  Duke  has  grown  talkative 
and  cheerful  as  well  as  very  tactful.  She  is  atten- 
tive to  his  wishes  and  watchful  to  please,  and  he 
loves  her  with  all  his  heart.  So  far  they  are  as 
happy  as  they  can  be,  but  I  tremble  for  the  duration 
of  this  happiness  in  the  midst  of  such  a  corrupt  and 
ill-assorted  Court.  Paul  manifests  at  times  a  kind- 
liness to  the  ladies,  and  a  certain  frivolity  of  tone 

^  Mimoires  de  Madame  d^ Oberkirch^  vol.  i,  p.  8i. 


/^ 


io6    THE   CURSE  OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

in  conversing  with  them,  which  has  something  of 
affectation  about  it  The  Grand  Duchess  will  need 
much  strength  of  character  and  a  remarkably  large 
share  of  virtue  to  avoid  the  countless  temptations 
which  beset  her  daily  life.  But  she  is  thoroughly 
virtuous,  and  her  conduct  of  the  most  upright"^ 

The  morality  which  formed  the  basis  of  the 
Grand  Duchess's  character  lent  strength  to  it  She 
was  an  idealist  in  every  acceptation  of  the  word. 
Gentle,  modest,  loving,  devoted  to  duty,  easily  satis- 
fied, she  had  the  faculty  of  finding  something  attrac- 
tive in  the  simplest  things  and  in  the  details  of  daily 
life ;  if  anything,  she  was  too  sentimental,  and  united 
in  her  person  all  the  characteristics  of  the  German 
woman.  It  is  very  certain  that  from  her  first  arrival 
in  Russia  she  won  the  hearts  of  every  one  about 
the  Court,  not  excepting  the  Empress, 

"  I  have  grown  passionately  fond  of  this  delight- 
ful creature,*'  wrote  the  latter  to  Madame  Byelke, 
on  September  i6,  1776;  "passionately  is  the  only 
word.  She  is  just  such  as  I  had  hoped  her  to  be. 
She  has  the  figure  of  a  nymph  and  a  complexion 
of  lilies  and  roses.  Her  skin  is  transparent ;  she 
is  well  proportioned,  and  walks  with  grace  and 
elegance.  She  has  an  excellent  heart,  and  is  gentle 
and  equable  in  temper,  and  her  face  is  expressive 
of  all  the  beautiful  qualities  of  her  soul.  She  wins 
everybody's  love,  and  those  who  did  not  appreciate 
her  would  really  be  in  the  wrong,  for  she  is  worthy 
of  universal  affection."  * 

But  in  spite  of  her  sense,  her  goodness,  and  all 
her  moral  qualities,  Maria  F6odorovna  was  still 
unable  to  bring  her   mother-in-law  and   husband 

^  Harris,  '^  Diaries,"  pp.  212-213.        '  Sbomik,  xxvii,  pp.  117-119^ 


1 


LOVE   IN   A   PALACE  107 

into  better  relations  with  each  other.  It  was  not 
long  before  a  change  came  over  Catherine's  be- 
haviour even  to  her  daughter-in-law.  At  the 
bottom  of  this  state  of  affairs  was  the  unfortunate 
influence  exercised  by  the  Court  favourites. 

As  in  the  days  when  Paul  was  young,  Orlov 
still  continued  to  do  his  best  to  increase  the 
estrangement  between  Catherine  and  her  son,  and 
in  the  same  way  Potemkin,  later  on,  kept  the 
Empress  in  constant  fear  of  the  Grand  Duke.  He 
persuaded  her,  and  got  his  friends  and  partisans — 
and  these  were  numerous — to  support  his  asser- 
tion, that  he  would  be  the  only  one  in  a  posi- 
tion to  protect  her  at  any  given  moment  from 
all  the  imaginable  plots  which  Paul  was  devising 
against  her. 

*'The  estrangement  between  the.  Empress  and 
her  son  becomes  daily  more  noticeable,"  wrote 
Harris.  "  She  treats  him  with  perfect  indifference, 
I  might  even  say  with  contempt.  He  takes  no 
pains  to  hide  his  dislike,  and  at  times,  when  he  has 
the  courage  to  do  it,  gives  voice  to  it  in  violent  lan- 
guage. He  has,  however,  no  firmness  nor  decision 
of  character,  and  he  will  never  have  the  courage  to 
put  himself  at  the  head  of  a  party  unless  made  to  do 
so  by  force.  Potemkin  and  his  set  treat  the  Grand 
Duke  and  Grand  Duchess  as  persons  of  no  impor- 
tance. The  Tsarevitsh  feels  it  very  much,  and  is 
weak  enough  to  show  that  he  suffers — it  is  all  that 
he  is  capable  of.  Thanks  to  his  natural  timidity  and 
his  versatile  humour,  failings  which  do  not  grow  less 
as  he  grows  older,  he  is  not  able  to  give  the  lie  to 
Potemkin,  who  fills  Catherine's  mind  with  appre- 
hension concerning  the  character  of  her  son.     The 


io8    THE   CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

Grand  Duchess  behaves  with  the  most  perfect 
tact,  and  knows  how  to  avoid  all  that  might  give 
offence  either  to  the  Empress  or  to  the  Grand 
Duke." ' 

"The  tenderness  and  affection  between  their 
Imperial  Highnesses  were  equal  on  either  side.  It 
would  have  been  impossible  for  two  to  live  in  more 
perfect  harmony-  We  were  never  tired  of  looking 
on  at  this  state  of  conjugal  happiness,  which  was 
a  matter  of  rejoicing  to  all  of  us.  This  marriage 
exercised  a  considerable  influence  on  the  people  of 
St.  Petersburg,  and  augmented  the  devoted  affec- 
tion which  the  whole  country  lavished  on  its  future 
sovereign." 

Very  shortly  before  the  birth  of  their  first  son, 
Alexander,  on  the  anniversary  of  the  birth  of  Paul, 
Maria  F6odorovna  congratulated  her  husband  in  the 
following  terms : — 

**  My  soul  is  full  of  joy,  of  happiness  and  of  satis- 
faction, on  this  day  which  gave  the  existence  to 
the  most  adorable  and  dearest  of  husbands.  Live 
happy  and  contented,  live  a  thousand  years  to 
do  good  to  millions  of  subjects.  Such  is  the  wish 
of  your  tender  and  faithful  friend  and  wife.  I 
adore  you,  I  love  you  to  distraction.  You  are  my 
Idol,  my  supreme  good,  and  I  cherish  you  beyond 
expression." 

On  the  23rd  of  December  (12th)  1777,  Maria 
Fdodorovna  gave  birth  to  a  son,  who  was  baptized 
under  the  name  of  Alexander.  St.  Petersburg  gave 
vent  to  a  burst  of  joy.  The  succession  to  the  throne 
of  Russia  was  now  assured.  Only  the  happiness  of 
the  parents  of  the  Prince  was  marred.    The  Empress 

^  Harris,  "  Diaries  and  Correspondence,"  vol.  i,  p.  228. 


k 


LOVE    IN   A  PALACE  109 

had  at  once— like  Elizabeth  in  the  case  of  Paul — 
taken  the  infant  to  her  own  apartments,  and  de- 
cided to  look  after  him  herself.  The  Imperial 
parents  were  deprived  of  the  pleasure  and  privileges 
granted  to  the  meanest  subject  of  Her  Majesty. 
And  when,  in  1779,  the  Grand  Duchess  gave  birth 
to  another  son,  Constantine,  the  Empress  again 
deprived  the  parents  of  the  joy  of  taking  care  of 
their  little  one.  This  attitude  did  not  lessen  the 
tension  already  existing  in  the  family  relations. 
Paul  became  again  morose,  and  his  heart  was 
full  of  a  dissatisfaction  with  his  mother  which  de- 
veloped into  a  deep  and  violent  hatred.  Husband 
and  wife,  however,  continued  to  love  and  trust 
each  other. 

At  the  close  of  1777,  on  the  birth  of  his  eldest 
son,  the  Empress  gave  the  Grand  Duke  a  property 
situated  about  five  versts  from  Tsarsko6-S61o. 
Here  the  Grand  Duke  built  a  palace,  which  he 
called  "  Paul's  Delight,"  and  which  was  later  known 
as  Pavlovsk. 

This  palace  became  the  favourite  residence  of 
the  Grand  Duchess  Maria  F^odorovna.  She  was 
passionately  fond  of  flowers  and  herself  undertook 
to  arrange  the  gardens  and  the  park  ;  various  build- 
ings were  erected  about  the  latter,  which  were  in 
later  days  to  remind  her  of  the  happy  years  of  her 
youth. 

A  few  familiar  friends  made  up  the  every-day 
society  of  Paul  and  his  wife ;  these  were  Count 
Panin,  Soltykov,  Count  Roumyanzev,  Prince  Kou- 
rakin,  Lafermiere,  Nicolai,  and,  later,  Wadkovski 
and  Plestsheev.  The  reigning  personality  in  this 
small  circle  of  intimates  was  Maria  Fdodorovna. 


no    THE   CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

Paul  had  no  longing  for  public  amusements,  much 
preferring  the  quiet  pleasures  of  home  life.  He 
frequently  gave  balls  and  theatrical  performances, 
and  he  did  his  best  to  introduce  as  much  variety 
as  possible  at  his  little  Court. 


CHAPTER  VI 

THE  JOURNEY  OF  THE  COUNT  AND  COUNTESS 

DU  NORD 

Paal  and  his  wife  go  abroad— Joseph  II — Paul's  letter  to  Archbishop  Platon 
— Sir  James  Harris's  despatches — Panin's  intrigues — Paul  and  his  wife 
met  by  King  Stanislaus — The  Austrian  Emperor's  letter  to  his  brother — 
The  Grand  Duke  and  Duchess  visit  Italy — They  proceed  to  France — 
Reception  at  Versailles — Marie  Antoinette — ^The  visit  to  Brussels — 
Paul's  mysterious  tale — The  ghost  of  Peter  I — The  return  home — Cold 
reception — Orders  relating  to  the  dresses  of  the  ladies  at  Court — Cathe- 
rine endeavours  to  annoy  the  Grand  Duchess. 

In  1780  Joseph  II  paid  a  visit  to  St  Petersburg, 
being  desirous  of  becoming  acquainted  with  the 
hereditary  Grand  Duke  and  his  wife.  He  travelled 
under  the  name  of  Count  Falkenstein.  When 
acquainting  her  son  and  daughter-in-law  of  the 
Emperor's  intention,  Catherine  assured  them  that 
they  would  find  Count  Falkenstein  a  very  enter- 
taining guest.  "  He  is  clever  and  very  well  in- 
formed, and  will  not,  like  the  King  of  Sweden, 
prove  himself  a  bore  to  you." 

This  visit  is  of  special  interest  to  us  in  the 
further  information  it  affords  concerning  Paul  him- 
self. The  Tsarevitsh  and  his  consort  produced  a 
very  favourable  impression  upon  the  Emperor.  He 
wrote  to  his  mother  as  follows : — 

"  The  Grand  Duke  is  far  more  entitled  to  con- 
sideration than  is  generally  thought  outside  Russia. 
His  wife  is  very  beautiful  and  seems  to  have  been 


ItZ 


112    THE   CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

made  for  the  position  she  holds.  They  understand 
one  another  perfectly ;  two  sons  are  the  happy 
addition  to  the  family.  The  Empress  concerns 
herself  very  much  with  these  children.  The  latter 
are  allowed  all  the  liberty  that  is  necessary  for  the 
development  of  the  intellect  and  the  establishment 
of  their  health.* 

"  The  Grand  Duke  and  Duchess,  who  may  be 
looked   upon   as  one,  so   entirely  are  they  bound 
to  each  other  by  the  ties  of  affection  and  mutual 
understanding,   are  a  most   interesting  couple  to 
study.     They  are  clever  and  lively  and  extremely 
well  educated,  and  are  also,  in  all  ways,  exceedingly 
upright,  frank,  just ;  the  happiness  of  their  fellow- 
creatures  is  to  them  of  higher  worth  than  all  the 
riches  of  the  world.     (It  is  difficult  to  believe  that 
they  are  not  sincere.)     In  their  intercourse  with  the 
Empress  they  are  ill  at  ease  and  constrained  in 
manner,  the  Grand  Duke  especially ;  there  is  lacking 
that  cordiality  of  relation   between   them  without 
which    I   should  find  it  impossible  to  live.      The 
Grand  Duchess  is  more  natural ;    she  has  a  great 
deal  of  power  over  her  husband ;  she  loves  him,  and 
she  rules  him  ;  she  is  absolute  mistress  in  her  own 
house.     She  will,  I  feel  sure,  play  a  prominent  part 
in  affairs  some  future  day.     She  is  very  affectionate 
towards  me,  but  one  has  to  be  on  one's  guard  with 
both  of  them ;  there  might  be  disadvantages  attached 
to  a  too  close  friendship  between  us.     Of  this  I 
have  already  had  proof ;  the  occasions  which  afforded 
it   me  are  best   to   be  henceforth  avoided.      The 
Empress  being  indisposed  yesterday,  I  dined  out  of 

^  Ameth,  Maria    Theresa  u,  Joseph  11^  Vienna,  1868,    voL  iiiy 
p.  266. 


\ 


COUNT  AND  COUNTESS  DU  NORD    113 

town  with  the  Grand  Duke.  As  usual,  there  was 
a  theatrical  performance  given  in  the  evening.  On 
Monday  I  spent  the  day  tite-d-tite  with  the  Em- 
press, and  was  invited  to  sup  with  the  Tsarevitsh. 
After  dining  with  the  Grand  Duke,  or,  more  cor- 
rectly, with  the  Grand  Duchess,  at  their  country 
house,  they  insisted  on  my  being  present  at  the 
inauguration  of  a  temple  dedicated  to  Friendship. 
I  was  forced  to  accept  the  invitation,  which  was 
accompanied  with  a  thousand  marks  of  politeness 
and  an  equal  number  of  assurances  of  eternal  friend- 
ship. Panin,  Potemkin,  and  many  others  were 
present  at  this  opening  festival.^ 

"  The  Grand  Duke  said  a  few  words  to  me  about 
the  false  position  he  was  in,  and  also  spoke  of  an 
illegitimate  son  of  the  Empress.  It  was  a  proof  of 
the  confidence  he  places  in  me,  but  it  is  difficult  to 
please  two  parties  at  once.  The  Grand  Duke  is 
endowed  with  a  great  number  of  qualities  which  en- 
title him  to  respect,  but  it  is  almost  impossible  to  play 
second  fiddle  here  when  Catherine  1 1  plays  the  first. 

"  The  Grand  Duke  appears  quite  at  his  ease  with 
me,  as  does  also  the  Grand  Duchess.  The  more 
I  become  intimately  acquainted  with  the  latter  the 
more  I  appreciate  her  character.  She  is  a  woman 
of  rare  mind  and  spirit ;  added  to  this  her  physique 
is  charming  and  her  behaviour  irreproachable.  If, 
ten  years  ago,  I  could  have  met  a  Princess  like  her, 
I  should  have  been  delighted  to  marry  her.  Her 
nature  responds  entirely  to  my  own  aspirations, 
and,  as  far  as  I  am  concerned,  there  is  no  higher 
praise  that  I  could  give  her."  * 

*  Ameth,  Maria  Theresa  u,  Joseph  11^  vol.  iii,  pp.  271-272. 

*  IMd,<t  pp.  272,  275,  28a 

H 


■p. 


114    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

After  her  interview  with  Joseph  H,  and  still 
more  after  the  death  of  Maria  Theresa,  Catherine 
was  anxious  to  form  a  closer  alliance  with  Austria. 

The  Emperor's  visit  had  facilitated  the  carrying 
out  of  the  great  desire  of  the  Grand  Duchess  to  go 
and  see  her  parents  in  Germany.  This  journey 
fitted  in  with  the  Empress's  political  projects,  while 
the  Grand  Duke,  always  ready  to  fall  in  with  his 
wife's  wishes,  was  equally  pleased  at  the  prospect 
of  getting  away,  if  only  for  a  short  time,  from  the 
monotonous  and  aimless  existence  to  which  he  was 
condemned,  and  looked  forward  to  enlarging  his 
intellectual  horizon  by  a  visit  to  the  more  cultured 
countries  of  Europe. 

The  Prince  was  sick  of  the  tediousness  of  a  life 
which  was  without  any  duty  or  occupation  in  con- 
nection with  his  position.  The  melancholy  en- 
gendered in  him  by  this  inactivity  was  increased  by 
the  extreme  susceptibility  of  his  temperament  and 
the  high-strung  state  of  his  nerves.  His  mother 
having  made  it  impossible  for  him  to  take  any  share 
in  the  government  and  to  bring  his  personal  views 
to  bear  upon  it,  he  ended  by  taking  no  interest  in 
public  affairs.  He  began,  however,  on  his  own 
account,  to  write  down  his  opinions  concerning  the 
different  branches  of  the  administration,  and  corre- 
sponded on  these  matters  with  two  of  his  warmest 
adherents.  Prince  N.  V.  Repnin  and  Count  P.  I. 
Panin. 

On  June  30,  1781,  the  Grand  Duke  wrote  to 
Platon  from  Pavlovsk  as  follows  : — 

"  You  have  done  me  an  honour  by  comparing 
me  with  Cyrus.  I  have  done  nothing  as  yet  glori- 
ous and  distinguished  as  he  did ;  so  far  I  have  not 


v, 


r 

V 


COUNT  AND  COUNTESS  DU  NORD    115 

got  beyond  intentions ;  my  occupations  are  of  the 
most  ordinary — I  try  to  amuse  myself,  and  that  is 
about  all.  I  am  getting  our  new  residence  into 
order.  The  chief  merit  of  the  existence  which  we 
lead  here  is  that  it  enables  one  to  forget.  My 
brow  is  wet  with  sweat — not  from  fatigue,  but  from 
boredom.  You  will  see  from  this  that  there  is 
not  the  slightest  similarity  between  me  and  Cyrus. 
When  Cyrus  took  his  ease  it  was  to  rest  after 
having  performed  great  deeds  and  to  fit  himself 
for  farther  ones.  But  I — there  is  no  reason  why 
I  should  take  my  ease,  seeing  that  I  have  done 
nothing ;  if  I  seek  repose,  it  is  from  the  fatigue  of 
mental  worries.  The  rustic  life  I  lead  will  explain 
this  which  I  tell  you,  and  also  be  my  excuse — but 
I  need  not,  I  feel,  excuse  myself  to  you — you  who 
know  all  the  enthusiasm  of  my  heart  and  all  my 
secret  aspirations,  and  who,  beyond  this,  have  had 
affection  for  me." 

The  Archbishop  Platon,  touched  by  the  melan- 
choly tone  of  his  august  pupil's  letters,  did  all  he 
could  to  encourage  him,  begged  him  not  to  grow 
low-spirited  but  to  make  an  effort  to  rouse  himself. 

Paul  replied  to  him  on  the  27th  of  July  1781,  just 
after  he  had  received  permission  from  Catherine  to 
start  on  his  travels : — 

"  I  feel  the  truth  of  all  that  your  Eminence  says 
about  my  melancholy,  and  I  will  do  my  best  to 
follow  your  good  advice.  Melancholy  takes  away 
all  one's  energy  and  paralyses  one's  powers ;  there 
is  no  better  cure  for  it  than  occupation,  according 
to  one's  station  in  life.  Then,  if  work  allows  one 
some  hours  of  leisure,  there  is  the  satisfaction  of 
feeling  that  the  rest  of  one's  time  has  been  usefully 


! 


ii6    THE   CURSE   OF   THE    ROMANOVS 

employed.  This  should  bring  peace  to  the  souL 
But  have  we  it  always  in  our  own  power  to  find  occu- 
pation? This  is  a  question  which  requires  con- 
sideration. It  is  possible,  of  course,  if  there  is  no 
obstacle  to  oppose  us ;  but  supposing  we  have  all 
the  best  intentions  in  the  world,  and  that,  apart 
from  any  power  of  our  own  will  to  prevent  it,  all 
possibility  of  activity  is  taken  away,  what  are  we 
to  do?  I  do  not  say  that  we  are  to  give  up  in 
despair,  but  can  we  help  feeling  that  we  are  not 
doing  the  work  that  we  ought,  and  that  we  are 
not  as  useful  as  we  might  be.  You  understand,  I 
am  sure,  that  I  fully  appreciate  your  words,  and, 
believe  me,  among  the  reasons  for  our  undertaking 
this  journey  is  the  wish  to  waste  no  more  time  in 
melancholy,  and  to  enlarge  our  knowledge  by  a 
further  acquaintance  with  men  and  things.  Give 
me  your  blessing,  and  ask  God  for  peace  of  soul 
and  health  of  body,  that  our  steps  may  be  directed 
in  the  right  way." 

This  being  the  state  of  her  husband's  mind,  the 
Grand  Duchess  had  no  difficulty  in  persuading  him 
to  ask  Catherine  s  permission  to  extend  their  jour- 
ney to  Austria  and  Italy.  Her  consent  was  the 
more  easily  obtainable  on  account  of  the  Emperor 
Joseph  ITs  concurrence  with  Maria  F6odorovna's 
wish,  the  change  of  policy  in  the  home  Cabinet  also 
helping  to  facilitate  the  matter.  However  hard  they 
felt  it  to  part  from  their  children,  the  longing  of  the 
young  couple  to  get  away  was  quite  comprehensible, 
especially  as  it  was  an  opportune  moment  for  ob- 
taining the  Empress's  consent.  There  was,  however, 
a  hidden  purpose  in  Catherine's  mind,  which  this 
journey  was  to  help  to  accomplish.     Harris,  the 


COUNT  AND  COUNTESS  DU  NORD    117 

English  diplomatic  agent  at  St.  Petersburg,  relates 
that  Catherine,  wishing  to  send  her  son  to  Vienna, 
commissioned  Repnin  to  suggest  the  idea  of  the 
journey  to  the  Grand  Duke  and  Duchess,  giving 
them  to  understand  that  for  persons  in  their  high 
position  it  was  not  only  useful  but  indispensable 
that  they  should  study  the  different  systems  of 
government  in  other  Courts  of  Europe. 

"Catherine  ended  by  promising  Prince  Repnin, 
if  he  succeeded,  some  very  distinguished  mark  of 
her  favour ;  and  I  should  have  premised  that,  pre- 
vious to  giving  him  this  commission,  she  had,  from 
a  very  trifling  motive,  affected  to  be  extremely 
displeased  with  him,  and  the  above-mentioned  re- 
ward and  a  return  to  favour  were  the  terms  promised 
him  in  case  of  success.  Prince  Repnin  executed 
his  orders  very  ably.  By  talking  continually  of  for- 
eign countries,  and  of  the  many  advantages  to  be 
acquired  by  visiting  them,  he  raised  in  the  Grand 
Duke  an  eager  desire  of  travelling  and  a  still 
stronger  one  in  the  Grand  Duchess.  It  became 
the  first  object  of  their  wishes,  and  they  were  per- 
petually lamenting  the  impossibility  of  its  taking 
place.  While  they  were  in  this  disposition  of  mind 
they  received  letters  from  the  Emperor,  with  a 
pressing  invitation  to  come  to  Vienna;  he  wrote 
he  would  engage  the  Grand  Duchess's  mother  and 
other  relations  to  meet  her  there,  and  was  certain 
that  the  Empress,  if  they  would  ask  it,  would 
not  refuse  them  their  request.  Count  Panin  was 
consulted,  and  as  Prince  Repnin  had  faithfully  kept 
the  Empress's  secret  they  met  with  no  opposition 
in  that  quarter.  In  fact,  Panin  at  once  thought  of 
turning  the  journey  to  the  advantage  of  the  King 


ii8    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

of  Prussia,  and  of  making  Berlin,  not  Vienna,  the 
principal  goal  of  the  travellers.  The  Grand  Duke 
and  the  Duchess  waited  on  the  Empress  and  made 
their  request.  She  received  it  with  a  countenance 
of  surprise,  and  told  them  that  they  had  put  her  in 
an  embarrassing  situation,  since  '  either  by  granting 
what  they  asked,  she  must  deprive  herself  for  so 
long  a  time  of  their  society,  or,  by  declining  it, 
check  in  them  a  thirst  after  knowledge  and  instruc- 
tion she  could  not  but  approve.*  At  last  the  per- 
mission was  given,  on  condition  that  Catherine 
should  draw  up  the  plan  of  the  journey  and  name 
the  attendants."^ 

It  was  Her  Majesty's  desire  that  the  young 
couple  should  travel  incognito,  that  they  should, 
as  far  as  possible,  avoid  public  f&tes,  and  should 
only  dine  with  princes  and  private  persons  where 
it  was  absolutely  necessary  to  do  so.  The  Em- 
press further  wished  that  one  or  other  of  the 
travellers  should  write  to  her  once  or  twice  a  week, 
and  fixed  the  sum  of  three  hundred  thousand  roubles 
for  the  expenses  of  the  journey.  The  suite  was  com- 
posed of  the  Court  Marshal,  Soltykov,  and  his  wife, 
of  Prince  Goussoripov,  a  celebrated  art  connoisseur, 
and  of  Lieutenant-Colonel  Benckendorff  with  his 
wife.  They  were  to  journey  through  Russia  by  the 
route  that  Catherine  had  taken  on  the  occasion  of 
her  interview  at  Mohilev  with  the  Emperor  Joseph. 
On  the  programme  of  the  voyage  the  "hours  of 
departure  "  and  "  directions  as  to  route  "  are  written 
without  alternative  hours  or  ways  being  indicated, 
Catherine  being  evidently  determined  to  settle  all 
these  matters  beforehand  for  her  children.     As  it 

^  James  Harris,  '*  Diaries,''  torn,  i,  pp.  462-463. 


COUNT  AND  COUNTESS  DU  NORD    119 

happened,  however,  the  projected  journey  was  fin- 
ally extended,  for  the  Grand  Duke  expressed  a  wish 
to  visit  France  as  well  as  Austria  and  Italy.  On 
the  23rd  July  he  wrote  to  Sacken  : — 

**  It  is  settled  about  this  journey  of  mine ;  I  am 
only  waiting  until  the  children  have  been  inoculated 
with  the  small-pox.  I  begin  with  Vienna — I  intend 
to  visit  the  whole  of  Italy,  and  on  my  way  back  to 
pass  through  Switzerland  and  the  Netherlands.  As 
to  France,  I  can  say  nothing  as  yet  about  that,  but 
it  would  be  a  shame,  I  think,  to  be  so  near  and  not 
to  become  acquainted  with  it.  In  returning  I  shall 
pass  through  the  very  heart  of  Germany." 

Paul  and  his  wife  acquiesced  in  all  the  arrange- 
ments of  the  Empress,  and  asked  only  that  Prince 
Kourakin  might  be  added  to  their  retinue,  and  Ver- 
sailles to  the  Courts  they  were  to  visit.  Berlin  was 
also  mentioned.  The  request  concerning  Kourakin 
was  granted  readily,  but  the  Empress,  though  ready 
to  allow  her  son  to  go  to  France,  was  extremely 
angry  when  he  asked  for  permission  to  visit  the 
Court  at  Berlin,  and  replied  by  a  distinct  refusal. 
No  doubt  it  was  due  also  to  the  Empress  that  they 
were  not  allowed  to  pass  through  Moscow,  and  that 
her  daughter-in-law  missed  the  opportunity  of  be- 
coming acquainted  with  the  ancient  capital  of  the 
Empire;  probably  she  recalled  the  ovation  the 
Grand  Duke  and  his  first  wife  had  met  with  there 
on  the  occasion  of  their  visit  in  1775,  when  all  the 
inhabitants,  high  and  low,  vied  with  one  another  in 
their  welcome.  Everything  else  that  Paul  Petro- 
vitsh  asked  for  was  granted  him,  and  he  was 
allowed  to  take  his  intimate  friends  with  him.^ 

^  Ibid.^  p.  463. 


/■ 


I20    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

The  Empress  placed  no  obstacle  to  their  speedy 
departure,  and  it  was  decided  that  their  Imperial 
Highnesses  should  start  in  September. 

The  children  having  been  inoculated,  their 
Imperial  Highnesses  had  nothing  further  to  de- 
tain them  ;  their  last  letter  before  starting  was 
written  on  September  12,  1781,  to  the  Archbishop 
Platon : — 

"  We  are  writing  to  bid  you  good-bye,"  wrote 
Paul,  "  and  to  ask  for  your  prayers  and  blessings, 
not  only  for  us  who  are  going  away,  but  also  for 
the  precious  pledges  we  are  leaving  behind." 
"  Country  "  first,  and  next  to  that  *'  the  children/ 

A  few  words  about  the  latter  were  added  by 
Maria  F6odorovna.  "  The  children  are  well  at 
the  present  moment,  thank  God,  may  they  con- 
tinue so,  and  the  time  of  our  separation  pass 
quickly.  I  cannot  tell  you  how  g  ready  I  am 
suffering  in  heart  and  mind." 

So  that  they  might  be  able  to  start  without 
anxiety,  the  departure  was  put  off  until  the  children 
had  recovered  from  the  inoculation,  and  all  danger 
for  them  was  over.  Again,  on  September  21st,  the 
Grand  Duke  wrote  to  Platon.  "The  inocula- 
tion has  been  a  perfect  success,  particularly  with 
the  eldest  of  my  boys  ;  there  has  been  no  bad 
symptom,  and  if  all  continues  to  go  on  as  well 
I  shall  be  able  to  sing  a  Te  Deum  for  their  com- 
plete recovery  before  I  start" 

Finally,  on  September  30,  1781,  their  Imperial 
Highnesses  left  St.  Petersburg,  this  being  the  eve 
of  the  Grand  Duke's  birthday,  who  was  now  twenty- 
seven  years  of  age.  When  the  English  Ambas- 
sador, Harris,  waited  upon  them  to  take  leave,  on 


COUNT  AND  COUNTESS  DU  NORD    121 

the  evening  before  their  departure,  he  found  both 
the  Grand  Duke  and  the  Duchess  extremely  agi- 
tated, and  their  eyes  red  and  full  of  tears.  ^  The 
Grand  Duchess  fainted  the  following  morning  when 
saying  good-bye  to  her  children,  and  had  to  be  car- 
ried in  a  state  of  unconsciousness  to  her  carriage. 
She  and  her  husband  had  the  appearance  of  people 
going  into  exile  rather  than  on  a  journey  of  pleasure. 

'*  There  is  not  the  smallest  doubt,"  wrote  Sir 
James  Harris,  "  that  this  very  uncommon  sensi- 
bility of  their  Imperial  Highnesses  does  not  arise 
solely  for  quitting  their  children.  Count  Panin  has 
filled  their  heads  with  apprehensions,  and  they  are 
gone  away  under  the  strongest  impressions  of 
terror.  He  plays  a  very  heavy  stake  ;  he  may  be 
assured  that  the  Empress  is  not  unacquainted  with 
the  part  he  has  acted,  and  will  not  leave  such 
conduct  unnoticed."  * 

In  bidding  good-bye  to  her  children  the  Em- 
press addressed  them  as  follows :  "  Go  and  travel 
and  then  come  back  to  Russia — when  you  see  your 
own  country  again  you  will  be  filled  with  entirely 
new  ideas.  I  pray  God  to  keep  my  son  in  health. 
May  the  Most  High  strengthen  him  in  body  and 
soul,  and  bring  you  both  back  safe  and  sound  for 
the  sake  of  my  own  happiness  and  that  of  others,  and 
that  both  I  and  my  subjects  may  have  occasion  to 
rejoice  that  you  have  been  given  the  opportunity  of 
improving  yourselves  by  seeing  people  and  things 
with  your  own  eyes,  a  chance  which  all  our  equals 
do  not  enjoy.  I  trust  you  may  reap  such  good  from 
your  travels,  that  you  will  both  be  enabled  thereby 

*  Harris,  "  Diaries  and  Correspondence,"  i,  p.  469. 

*  IbicL^t  P<  454* 


^ 


r 


122     THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

to  be  of  greater  service  to  others,  and  that  neither 
person  or  thing  may  ever  have  occasion  to  regret 
your  going."  ^ 

In  accordance  with  the  Empress's  wish  that 
they  should  avoid  the  burden  of  etiquette,  the 
Grand  Duke  and  Duchess  travelled  under  the 
name  of  the  Count  and  Countess  du  Nord.  Doctor 
Kruze  and  the  priest,  Sambo vsky,  were  added  to 
their  suite.  Plestsheev,  as  a  rule,  went  ahead  of  the 
travellers  to  find  rooms  for  them  and  to  arrange  the 
resting-places,  while  Soltykov  and  his  wife  brought 
up  the  rear. 

Paul  Petrovitsh  and  Maria  F^odorovna  both 
kept  a  diary,  in  which  they  wrote  down  everything 
which  struck  them  as  interesting  or  curious.  Un- 
fortunately, one  of  these  diaries  has  been  destroyed, 
and  the  other  has  disappeared  no  one  knows  where. 

The  Grand  Duke  and  Duchess  were  absent 
from  Russia  a  long  time.  Before  leaving  their 
own  domains  they  followed  the  route  which  had 
been  drawn  up  for  them  by  the  Empress. 

At  Vishnevza  they  were  met  by  King  Stanislaus, 
who  was  accompanied  by  the  chief  of  the  Polish 
magistrates.  He  was  anxious  to  give  a  suitable 
reception  to  the  children  of  the  sovereign  who 
had  placed  him  on  the  throne.  The  Grand  Duke 
and  Grand  Duchess  on  their  side  were  so  de- 
lightfully agreeable  that  they  quite  turned  the 
heads  of  the  King  and  his  suite.  At  Brodi  the 
Count  and  Countess  du  Nord  entered  Austrian 
territory  and  were  there  met  by  the  suite  sent  by 
the  Emperor  Joseph.  At  Troppau,  about  two 
hundred  versts  from  Vienna,  Joseph  himself  was 

^  Sbomik,  ix. 


COUNT  AND  COUNTESS  DU  NORD    123 

awaiting  them.  There  they  were  entertained  at 
a  dinner,  which  was  followed  by  a  theatrical  per- 
formance, the  evening  winding  up  with  a  ball ;  the 
following  day  the  travellers  continued  their  journey, 
travelling  in  the  same  carriage  as  the  Emperor. 
Theatrical  entertainments  and  balls  were  held  in 
their  honour  at  all  the  chief  resting-places. 

At  last,  on  21st  November  1781,  the  Count  and 
Countess  du  Nord  arrived  at  Vienna.  The  parents 
of  the  Grand  Duchess,  travelling  under  the  name  of 
the  Count  and  Countess  of  Greningen,  were  there 
already  awaiting  them.  Paul  Petrovitsh  and  Maria 
F^odorovna  stayed  at  the  Amalienhof  Palace. 
After  the  family  dinner,  at  which  Joseph  II,  who 
had  been  really  the  one  to  arrange  this  meeting, 
presided,  the  royal  party  went  to  the  National 
Theatre.  Then  followed  a  series  of  f^tes,  and  the 
Grand  Duke  and  Duchess  by  degrees  became 
thoroughly  acquainted  with  Vienna,  its  society,  and 
its  chief  buildings  and  institutions.  The  Emperor, 
when  apprising  his  brother,  Leopold  of  Tuscany, 
of  the  departure  of  his  guests,  wrote  as  follows  : — 

"  The  Grand  Duke  and  the  Grand  Duchess, 
besides  being  endowed  with  natural  gifts  of  no 
ordinary  kind,  have  also  a  wide  knowledge  of  things, 
and,  moreover,  are  extremely  desirous  of  seeing 
and  understanding  everything ;  at  the  same  time, 
they  are  anxious  that  their  visit  shall  be  a  success 
and  produce  a  favourable  impression  on  Europe 
generally.  .  One  may  trust  implicitly  in  their 
perfect  frankness  and  in  their  extreme  discretion. 
Nothing  gives  them  so  much  pleasure  as  to  arrange 
for  them  to  see  everything  without  preparation  or 
adornment,  to  speak  openly  to  them  on  matters 


r 


124    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

without  hiding  from  them  the  drawbacks  or  defects 
which  their  own  perspicacity  could  not  fail  to 
perceive,  and  to  draw  their  attention  to  any  good 
scheme,  even  when  it  has  resulted  in  no  appreciable 
advantage.  Any  kind  of  subterfuge  or  hypocrisy 
is  to  be  avoided  with  them,  and  this  particularly 
because  they  are  suspicious  of  temperament,  which 
is  the  result  not  so  much  of  their  natural  character 
but  of  the  surroundings  amid  which  fate  has  placed 
them. 

*'  Also,  you  must  not  lose  any  of  the  short  time 
that  they  will  spend  with  you  in  display  or  in  any  of 
the  usual  complimentary  observances.  But  let  them 
know  at  once  that,  having  had  word  from  me  of 
their  way  of  thinking,  you  wish  to  talk  openly  and 
naturally  with  them,  and  treat  them  in  a  friendly 
manner  as  if  they  were  old  acquaintances,  so  as  to 
make  good  use  of  the  short  interval  that  you  can  be 
together,  and,  on  your  side,  to  make  yourself  known 
to  them  and  so  enjoy  the  pleasure  of  their  society  to 
the  full.  You  can  talk  to  them  about  everybody; 
but  as  you  will  be  dealing  with  parents  who  are 
tenderly  fond  of  their  children  and  anxious  for  their 
welfare,  it  is  most  likely  that  they  will  be  interested 
in  hearing  about  the  education  of  your  daughters, 
whom  you  have  looked  after  with  what  I  know  to 
be  the  liveliest  affection. 

*'They  lead  a  very  regular  kind  of  life,  and  as, 
moreover,  the  Grand  Duke  does  not,  unfortunately, 
enjoy  very  robust  health,  it  is  better  to  avoid  too  late 
hours  and  too  repeated  fatigue.  You  must  arrange 
so  that  they  may  not  have  to  go  out  before  nine  or 
ten  o'clock  in  the  morning,  and  may  be  able  to  retire 
towards  ten  or  eleven  o'clock  at  night,  for  they  spend 


COUNT  AND  COUNTESS  DU  NORD    125 

the  greater  part  of  their  mornings  and  evenings  in 
writing.  They  are  particularly  interested  in  any- 
thing that  is  old  or  curious,  and  in  buildings  which 
are  at  all  remarkable  either  for  size  or  beauty.  And 
that  is  why  they  must  not  be  over-wearied  by 
seeing  too  many  things  the  same  day,  but  have, 
if  possible,  the  opportunity  of  examining  all  that  is 
remarkable  and  interesting  in  detail. 

"They  have  given  extraordinary  attention  to 
public  institutions,  whether  charitable  or  educational, 
and  as  they  wish  to  derive  practical  benefits  from 
these  visits,  you  must  have  an  account  of  these  pre- 
pared for  them  with  all  such  particulars  as  they  are 
likely  to  wish  to  know  about.  It  is  even  better  to 
forestall  their  wishes  and  to  propose  that  information 
of  this  kind  should  be  furnished  them  beforehand. 
This  can  be  the  better  done  since  institutions  of 
this  kind  are  not  meant  to  be  carried  on  in  secrecy ; 
and  they  are  extremely  pleased  with  marks  of 
confidence  and  attention  of  this  kind,  for  it  shows 
that  you  are  anxious  to  help  in  rendering  their 
travels  as  productive  of  useful  results  and  of  plea- 
sure as  they  themselves  wish  them  to  be. 

"  But,  above  all  things,  they  are  curious  to  be- 
come acquainted  with  those  who  are  noted  for  their 
superior  enlightenment  or  who  are  in  any  way 
remarkable  ;  and  as  their  chief  desire  is  to  be  intro- 
duced to  a  select  circle,  and  to  profit  by  intercourse 
with  its  members,  you  must  organise  some  dinners 
and  evening  entertainments  which  will  give  them 
the  opportunity  of  knowing  men  and  women  of 
note  in  whatsoever  way  it  may  be,  not  only  as 
regards  the  elegance  of  their  manners,  but  as  re- 
gards their  intellect  and  their  culture.     On  these 


i- 


fi.  •. 


r 


y 


126    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

occasions  their  Imperial  Highnesses  can  display 
their  own  knowledge;  the  fame  of  their  refine- 
ment and  culture,  becoming  thus  known  to  those 
who  are  capable  of  appreciating  it,  will  not  fail  to 
be  spread  abroad  and  to  turn  public  opinion  in 
their  favour."* 

On  the  4th  January  their  Imperial  High- 
nesses left  the  Austrian  capital,  and  were  accom- 
panied, during  the  first  stage  of  their  journey,  as 
far  as  Wiener-Neustadt,  by  the  Emperor,  his 
brother  Maximilian,  and  the  Princess  Frederick- 
Eugene,  and  Ferdinand  of  Wiirtemberg.  But 
their  departure  from  Vienna  was  not  accompanied 
by  favourable  auspices.  Just  then  an  epidemic  of 
influenza  was  raging  in  Vienna,  as  elsewhere 
throughout  Europe.  The  Princess  Dorothea's 
daughters  were  attacked  by  it  just  on  the  eve 
of  starting  from  Vienna,  and  the  Grand  Duchess 
herself  fell  ill  at  Neustadt.  The  latter  was  ill 
for  two  days,  and  the  journey  had  to  be  delayed. 
The  Emperor  remained  with  his  guests,  and  did 
his  utmost  to  make  this  enforced  rest  as  pleasant 
as  possible. 

Reading  and  conversation  of  the  most  lively 
description  made  the  time  pass  quickly  during 
the  necessary  halts.  *'  The  Grand  Duke  read  us 
extracts  from  his  diary,  which  was  remarkably 
well  written.  One  day  the  Grand  Duchess,  who 
had  been  reading  the  bulletins,  left  off  to  relate  to 
us  some  interesting  details  about  her  youth,  her 
way  of  looking  at  things,  and  about  her  education, 
telling  us  that  at  ten  years  old,  so  quickly  could  she 

*  Ameth,  Joseph  II  u,  Leopold  von  Toscana^  1 781-1785,  Vienna, 
1872,  vol.  i,  pp.  333-335- 


\ 


i 


COUNT  AND  COUNTESS  DU  NORD    127 

grasp  what  was  taught  her,  she  knew  geometry. 
Before  supper  she  read  aloud  to  us  some  passages 
from  Pliny's  eulogium  of  Trajan.  Both  the  choice 
of  these  passages,  as  well  as  the  expression  with 
which  she  read,  spoke  alike  in  favour  of  her  heart 
and  of  her  intellect" 

Having  said  good-bye  at  Trieste  to  the 
dominions  of  the  liberally-minded  sovereign,  who 
represented  what  the  eighteenth  century  styled 
enlightened  despotism,  the  Count  and  Countess 
du  Nord  finally  reached  Venice  on  January  18, 
1782. 

The  week  spent  there  was  taken  up  with  the 
festivities  provided  for  the  august  guests  by  the 
Most  Serene  Republic.  The  Grand  Duke  arid 
Duchess  visited  every  spot  of  interest  in  this 
romantic  city.  At  Venice  they  began  their  study 
of  Italy. 

**  In  passing  through  Italy,"  wrote  the  Grand 
Duchess,  later  on,  "one  experiences  a  feeling  of 
profound  regret  at  the  want  of  harmony  that  exists 
between  this  beautiful  country  and  its  inhabitants. 
Nature  is  magnificent,  life-giving,  and  productive — 
that  is,  wherever  there  has  been  the  will  to  make 
it  so,  as,  for  example,  in  Lombardy  and  Tuscany — 
but  sterile,  and  even  hurtful,  in  the  Pontifical  States, 
on  account  of  the  carelessness  and  want  of  super- 
vision on  the  part  of  the  Government.  The  absence 
of  individual  security  is  a  continual  terror  to  the 
inhabitants  and  a  disgrace  to  the  age,  which,  in 
many  respects  enlightened,  should  fight  against 
everything  that  engenders  disorder  and  obscur- 
antism. The  condition  even  of  the  ancient  monu- 
ments is   deplorable.      In   some   places   they  are 


128    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

covered  with  rubbish  and  are  threatened  with 
complete  ruin,  all  owing  to  the  want  of  care  be- 
stowed on  them  by  those  in  authority  and  to  the 
greediness  of  the  people." 

'*  I  should  hardly  know  Rome  ag^n,"  wrote 
Maria  F^odorovna,  Empress  at  that  time,  to 
Laharpe,  who,  in  1819,  was  travelling  with  her 
son,  the  Grand  Duke  Michael,  in  Italy.  "  All  the 
grand  and  beautiful  things  which  I  saw  there  must 
have  undergone  a  complete  change,  and  have  be- 
come even  more  imposing  now  that  they  have  been 
restored  by  the  French.  It  is  to  be  regretted  that 
the  present  Government  is  not  in  a  position  to 
continue  the  work,  but  this  is  impossible  until  it 
receives  assistance  from  the  awakened  enthusiasm 
of  the  nation  .  .  .  but  one  has  to  be  happy  before 
one  can  be  enthusiastic.  ...  I  do  not  finish  my 
sentence,  for  one  cannot  enlarge  on  thoughts  of 
this  kind,  and,  more  than  that,  it  is  not  safe  to 
confide  them  to  the  post" 

Their  Imperial  Highnesses  stopped  at  Rome 
on  their  way  to  Naples,  to  which  they  were  travel- 
ling by  canal.  So  eager  were  they  to  see  all  the 
chief  monuments  and  works  of  art,  that  they  had  no 
sooner  disembarked,  it  being  then  the  5th  February, 
than  they  ordered  a  post-chaise  and  drove  at  once 
to  St.  Peter  s.  They  neither  of  them  ever  forgot 
the  impression  produced  on  them  by  this  building ; 
nevertheless,  the  Grand  Duchess  was  even  more 
struck  by  the  Pantheon.  **  I  must  confess,"  she 
wrote,  ''that  I  have  an  enthusiastic  admiration  for 
St.  Peter  s,  which  I  enter  daily,  but  the  Pantheon 
awakens  in  me  yet  stranger  feelings  of  emotion. 
Its  vault,  open  to  the  sky,  here  so  blue,  affects  me 


COUNT  AND  COUNTESS  DU  NORD    129 

more  deeply  than  the  enclosed  cupola  of  St. 
Peter's." 

After  resting  for  a  while  in  their  apartments 
their  Royal  Highnesses  went  to  the  theatre,  and 
the  following  day  they  again  visited  St.  Peter  s, 
and,  later  on,  the  Capitol,  the  Colosseum,  and  other 
places.  They  returned  a  third  time  to  St.  Peter  s 
after  dinner,  having  declined  an  official  reception ; 
the  Pope,  Pius  VII,  was  c'lficiating  in  person,  and 
they  waited,  we  read  in  the  bulletin  of  the  day, 
to  thank  the  Sovereign  Pontiff  for  all  the  facilities 
he  had  accorded  them  in  their  journey  through 
the  Papal  States,  and  especially  for  the  relays  of 
horses  which  they  had  found  everywhere  awaiting 
them. 

Paul  Petrovitsh  and  Maria  F6odorovna  spent 
over  a  fortnight  at  Naples,  where  they  met  with 
a  cordial  reception  from  the  King  and  Queen. 
They  were  in  time  to  take  part  in  the  Carnival ; 
but  at  Naples,  as  elsewhere  in  Italy,  they  took  less 
interest  in  their  fellow-creatures  than  in  the  natural 
beauties  and  the  objects  of  art. 

In  Naples  the  Duke  met  Count  Razoumovsky, 
whose  liaison  with  Queen  Caroline  was  no  longer 
a  secret.  The  Grand  Duke  was  naturally  unable 
to  feel  well  disposed  to  this  former  friend  who  had 
so  cruelly  betrayed  him.*  Count  Roumyanzev,  in 
his  account  to  Catherine,  wrote  as  follows  : — 

"  Last  Wednesday  His  Majesty  left  for  Persana, 
which  is  about  seventy  miles  distant,  to  organise  a 
boar-hunt  in  honour  of  his  august  guests.  The 
distance,  however,  the  bad  weather,  and,  still 
more,   the  short  interval  of  time  at  their  disposal 

^  Les  Razoumovsky^  vol.  iii,  p.  62. 

I 


I 

i 


130    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

for  this  journey,  obliged  their  Imperial  Highnesses 
to  refuse  the  King's  invitation.  As  it  was  impos- 
sible during  their  brief  sojourn  at  Naples,  to  fit  in 
many  different  styles  of  entertainment,  they  gave 
the  choice  to  visiting  places  of  interest  The  King, 
having  made  great  preparations  for  this  boar-hunt, 
did  not  give  it  up  ;  he  went  alone,  but  returned 
home  the  same  day  so  as  to  accompany  his  guests 
to  C.  .  .  .  Meanwhile,  during  his  absence,  the 
Queen,  as  far  as  she  was  able  in  her  delicate 
state  of  health,  did  her  utmost  in  lavishing  atten- 
tions of  every  possible  kind  on  their  Imperial 
Highnesses.  Prince  Belmonte,  Grand  Marshal  of 
the  Royal  Household,  had  orders  to  accompany 
the  Grand  Duke  and  Duchess  wherever  they  went, 
and  to  carry  out  all  their  commands,  so  that  nothing 
might  hinder  them  from  seeing  everything  which 
they  wished." 

The  travellers  left  Naples  on  the  23rd  February, 
and,  returning  to  Rome,  spent  another  three  weeks 
there,  devoting  their  time  to  the  detailed  study  of 
the  antiquities  and  works  of  art 

"  The  kind  of  life  you  are  leading  in  Rome," 
wrote  Catherine  to  them,  "is  quite  in  accordance 
with  the  aim  you  had  in  view  in  starting  on  your 
travels,  but  it  must  be  very  fatiguing  to  those  who 
are  not  fond  of  walking."  ^ 

The  Grand  Duke  Leopold  of  Tuscany  and  his 
wife,  Marie  Louise,  joined  their  Imperial  Highnesses 
at  Rome,  and  they  all  journeyed  together  to  Flor- 
ence, which  they  reached  on  the*  i8th  March. 

On  the  27th  March  Maria  F6odorovna  wrote 
as  follows  to  Catherine: — 

^  Sbornik,  vol.  ix,  p.  131. 


COUNT  AND  COUNTESS  DU  NORD    131 

"Nothing  could  be  more  delightful  than  our 
visit  here ;  I  cannot  tell  you  how  the  acquaintance 
with  my  future  brother-in-law  (the  Archduke 
Francis,  who  is  thirteen  years  of  age)  has  pleased 
me.  He  looks  nothing  more  than  a  child,  but  his 
mind  and  his  manner  of  expressing  himself  are  be- 
yond his  years.  No  expense  or  care  is  spared  on 
his  education,  and  it  is  truly  a  pleasure  to  see  the 
way  the  Grand  Duke  and  the  Grand  Duchess  of 
Tuscany  behave  to  their  children.  I  should  say,  on 
the  whole,  that  urbanity  was  the  most  prominent 
feature  of  their  characters.  The  Grand  Duke  is 
very  easy  of  access,  and  does  everything  to  make 
his  subjects  happy.  We  have  visited  several  insti- 
tutions in  Florence ;  everything  is  carried  on  in  the 
most  orderly  manner,  in  contrast  to  the  neighbour- 
ing states,  where  order  is  unknown." 

Having  left  Florence  behind,  their  Imperial 
Highnesses  continued  their  journey  to  Leghorn, 
where  they  reviewed  the  Russian  squadron  which 
was  on  the  point  of  returning  home.  They  then 
passed  through  Parma,  Milan,  and  Turin  on  their 
way  to  France,  stopping  to  view  all  that  was  of 
interest,  and  paying  visits  to  the  ruling  Princes  of 
the  countries  they  traversed.  They  were  especially 
pleased  with  their  visit  to  Turin  ;  there  they  made 
the  acquaintance,  which  grew  to  friendship,  of  Victor- 
Am6d6e  III,  the  Prince  of  Piedmont,  the  heir  to 
the  Sardinian  throne,  and  of  his  wife,  Marie- Clotilde, 
the  sister  of  Louis  XVI. 

Having  received  notice  that  the  Count  and 
Countess  du  Nord  were  nearing  the  French 
frontiers,  the  King  and  Queen  expressed  to  Baria- 
tinsky  their  ^great  wish  to  entertain  them  in  Paris. 


/* 


132     THE   CURSE   OF   THE    ROMANOVS 

The  Russian  diplomatist,  in  a  report  he  sent  to  the 
Empress,  writes  :  "  I  know  from  the  Queen  herself 
how  delighted  she  is  at  the  thought  of  making  the 
acquaintance  of  the  Count  and  Countess  du  Nord, 
and  that  she  is  most  anxious  to  give  them  as  sin- 
cerely cordial  a  welcome  as  possible." 

**  I  would  do  my  very  utmost  to  make  their  stay 
here  a  pleasant  one  to  them,"  said  the  Queen. 

After  a  week  spent  at  Lyons,  the  Count  and 
Countess  du  Nord  bid  farewell  to  their  parents,  and 
continuing  their  journey  to  Paris,  reached  the  latter 
place  on  the  i8th  May.     They  alighted  at  Prince 
Bariatinsky  s   house,   preserving    the    strictest    in- 
cognito,  having   declined  the  formal  entry  which 
had    been    proposed    by   the  French    Court.     At 
Fontainebleau,  the  last  halt  before  reaching  Paris, 
Madame  d'Oberkirch,  who  had  been  her  friend  as 
a  child,  came  to  meet  the  Grand  Duchess.     They 
were  mutually  overjoyed  at  seeing  each  other  again, 
and  from  this  moment  till  the  Grand  Duchess  again 
entered  Russian  territory,  Madame  d'Oberkirch  ac- 
companied the  latter  in  her  travels.     She  has  left 
us  a  detailed  account  of  these  journeys.     "When 
we  got  to  Paris,"  she  writes,  *'  I  went  with  their 
Imperial    Highnesses  to  their  residence,  where    I 
found  my  adorable  Princess   Dorothea,  just  as    I 
had  known  her  at  Montb^liard,  simple,  good,  and 
confiding."^ 

The  Grand  Duchess  begged  the  Grand  Duke, 
out  of  his  love  for  her,  to  love  the  companion  of 
her  childhood ;  the  Grand  Duke  lifted  Madame 
d'Oberkirch's  hand  and  kissed  it  Maria  F6odor- 
ovna  opened  her  heart  to  her  dear  Lane  (the  pet 

^  Mimoires  de  Mcuiame  d^Oberkirch^  i,  p.  184. 


COUNT  AND  COUNTESS  DU  NORD    133 

name  which  the  Grand  Duchess  gave  to  Madame 
d'Oberkirch),  and  told  her  how  she  suffered  at  being 
so  far  away  from  her  children.  **  Although  I  am 
continually  receiving  detailed  accounts  of  my  dear 
children,  I  suffer  very  much  at  this  prolonged  sepa- 
ration. My  heart  is  divided  into  many  parts ;  it 
is  a  sad  necessity  attendant  upon  us  Princesses  that 
we  can  never  have  around  us  at  one  time  all  those 
whom  we  love."  ^ 

The  Count  and  Countess  du  Nord  rested  during 
the  first  day  of  their  sojourn  in  Paris.  The  people 
came  flocking  at  all  hours  round  the  Russian  Lega- 
tion, filling  the  air  with  their  huzzas.  At  last  the 
Grand  Duke  could  stand  it  no  longer,  and  on  May 
19th  slipped  away  quietly  without  escort  to  Ver- 
sailles to  watch  the  procession  of  the  Knights  of  the 
Holy  Ghost.  He  was  much  struck  by  the  magni- 
ficence of  the  castle,  although  accustomed  to  the 
splendour  of  Catherine  I  Ts  Court  On  May  20th  he 
and  the  Grand  Duchess  were  presented  to  the  King. 
The  Queen  kept  her  word,  and  every  imaginable 
entertainment,  accompanied  by  the  display  and 
elegance  peculiar  to  that  epoch,  was  devised  in 
honour  of  the  Imperial  guests.  Other  members  of 
the  royal  family  vied  with  the  King  and  Queen  in 
hospitality,  and  friendships  were  formed  between 
several  members  of  the  Bourbon  house  and  the 
Grand  Duke  and  Duchess. 

Paul  Petrovitsh  had  a  lively  sympathy  for 
France  and  its  royal  house.  Going  in  one  day  to 
see  the  infant  Dauphin,  **  Be  so  kind,  Madame,"  he 
said  to  the  lady  in  attendance,  "as  to  tell  him  of 
this  visit  I  have  paid  him,  and  let  him  know  that  I 

^  Mimoires  de  Madame  d^Oberkirch^  i,  p.  185. 


'y?»  '■'^'*  ■ 


■If'*- 


t 


134    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

swear  friendship  to  him  from  his  infancy ;  and  may 
it  serve  to  unite  our  two  countries."  * 

Louis  XVI,  encouraged  by  the  plain  unassuming 
appearance  of  Paul,  was  soon  at  ease  with  his  guest, 
and  conversed  openly  and  cheerfully  with  him.  The 
Countess  du  Nord,  however,  was  somewhat  stiff- 
in  her  German  fashion — and  made  the  Queen  rather 
nervous.  Before  the  latter  went  in  to  dine  with 
her  guests  she  asked  for  a  glass  of  water,  and  con- 
fessed that  *'  She  had  now  experienced  how  much 
more  difficult  it  was  to  play  the  part  of  a  Queen  in 
the  presence  of  other  sovereigns,  or  of  Princes  born 
to  become  so,  than  before  courtiers."  * 

Marie  Antoinette,  anxious  to  afford  as  much 
pleasure  as  possible  to  Maria  Fdodorovna,  put  aside 
the  rules  of  etiquette,  and  invited  all  the  Russian 
ladies  who  happened  to  be  in  Paris — among  them 
Madame  d'Oberkirch — to  her  private  evenings. 
"  Madame,"  said  the  Queen  to  the  Countess  du 
Nord,  "  it  would  have  been  a  strange  oversight  in 
me  to  have  separated  you  from  your  friend  at  die 
very  moment  that  I  was  seeking  to  surround  you 
with  everything  that  could  give  you  pleasure."  • 

Their  Imperial  Highnesses,  however,  still  kept  in 
view  the  more  educational  purpose  of  their  travels. 
Paris  at  this  time  was  the  intellectual  centre  of 
Europe,  and,  having  been  kept  in  touch  with  the 
literary  movement  of  the  day  by  their  correspon- 
dents, Laharpe  and  Blaise  de  Saint- Maure,  they 
were  prepared  to  enter  thoroughly  into  many  ques- 

^  Mimoires  de  Madame  d^Oberkircky  i,  p.  197. 
>  '*  Memoirs  of  Marie  Antoinette,"  ed.  Mme.  de  Campan,  19041 
vol.  i,  p.  278. 

'  Mimoires  de  Madame  dOberkirch^  i,  p.  201. 


\ 


COUNT  AND  COUNTESS  DU  NORD    135 

tions  of  interest  Their  sympathies  were  not  en- 
tirely with  the  Encyclopaedists,  to  whose  doctrines 
they  thought  much  of  the  immorality  of  society  was 
owing.  They  suffered  a  certain  disillusionment  as 
regards  some  of  the  works  of  art. 

"One  can  see  that  you  have  been  in  Italy/' 
writes  Catherine  II ;  "you  are  not  impressed  with 
the  big  bell  of  Notre- Dame,  you  do  not  admire  the 
pictures  of  the  French  school ;  and  then,  my  dear 
daughter-in-law  laughs  at  French  music — another 
heresy  of  the  Italians,  and  strengthened  by  the  re- 
cent visit  to  their  country.  How  is  it  that  in  Paris, 
where  the  people  are  so  passionately  fond  of  the 
theatre,  there  are  no  better  performances  than  ours  ? 
But  I  think  I  can  guess  at  the  cause :  it  is  the  bad 
taste  of  the  public  that  is  at  the  bottom  of  it ;  the 
public  prefers  bad  pieces  to  good ;  instead  of  fine 
tragedies  being  performed,  only  worthless  ones  are 
put  upon  the  stage ;  and  the  comedies,  instead  of 
making  one  laugh,  cause  one  rather  to  weep,  for 
nothing  is  in  its  right  place."* 

Paul  and  his  wife  were  a  great  success  in 
France.  Everybody  raved  about  them,  and  every- 
thing they  said  or  did  was  reported  and  met 
with  appreciative  admiration.  The  Grand  Duke's 
enthusiasm  for  the  good  King  Henry  won  the 
hearts  of  the  Parisians.  Being  present  one  day 
at  a  representation  of  La  Chasse  du  rot  Henriy 
the  Grand  Duke  was  moved  to  tears,  and  asked 
for  the  piece  to  be  performed  again.  An  ovation, 
which  had  been  prepared  for  the  Grand  Duke  and 
Duchess,  and  which  lasted  through  the  whole  per- 
formance, took  place  on  the  26th  May  at  the  Com^die 

^  Sbornik,  vol.  ix,  p.  156. 


^ 


!rV 


136    THE   CURSE   OF   THE    ROMANOVS 

Fran9aise ;    their    Highnesses    were    accompanied 
home  at  its  close  by  the  cheers  of  the  multitude- 

**  On  June  14th/'  wrote  Prince  Bariatinsky,  *^  their 
Imperial  Highnesses  went  to  the  opera  at  Versailles ; 
the  Queen  had  preceded  them.  On  their  arrival 
they  were  met  by  Her  Majesty's  Equerry,  who  con- 
ducted them  to  the  royal  box.  They  no  sooner 
appeared  than  the  whole  house  rose,  cheering 
loudly." 

"  His  Imperial  Highness,"  writes  Madame 
d'Oberkirch,  "  has  great  tact  and  perfect  self- 
command  ;  he  never  shows  himself  offended  by 
the  most  disagreeable  truth,  but  conducts  him- 
self in  a  manner  that  adds  additional  lustre  to  his 
character.  One  day  he  heard  a  person  near  him 
in  the  crowd  say  that  he  was  very  ugly,  which, 
however,  is  not  the  case  ;  he  turned  to  the  Russian 
Ambassador  and  said :  *  Though  the  French  may  be 
very  polite,  it  cannot  be  denied  that  they  are  also 
very  candid.' "  ^ 

Their  Imperial  Highnesses  being  anxious  to 
continue  their  travels  the  King  and  Queen  advised 
them  to  choose  the  route  through  Choisy,  whither 
they  wished  to  accompany  them  before  saying 
good-bye.  Speaking  to  Bariatinsky  about  their 
departure,  the  King  said :  "  I  cannot  deprive  my- 
self of  the  pleasure  of  seeing  them  before  they 
leave.  I  confess  I  am  delighted  at  having  made 
their  acquaintance.  I  beg  you  to  make  known  my 
feelings  to  Her  Majesty  the  Empress,  and  to  assure 
her  of  my  affection ;  tell  her  also  that  I  look  upon 
her  permission  to  the  Grand  Duke  to  visit  France 
as  a  true  mark  of  friendship.     I  shall  recall  with 

'  M^moires  de  Madame  d^Oberkirch^  i,  p.  306. 


COUNT  AND  COUNTESS  DU  NORD    137 

genuine  pleasure  the  moments  that  I  have  spent 
with  their  Imperial  Highnesses." 

One  day  the  King  asked  the  Grand  Duke  if  it 
was  true  that  there  was  not  a  single  person  of  his 
suite  in  whom  he  could  place  entire  confidence. 
Paul  Petrovitsh,  who  was  irritated  at  the  thought 
of  Kourakin's  recall,  which  he  was  daily  expecting, 
answered:  "I  should  have  been  sorry  even  for  a 
poodle  that  had  grown  attached  to  me,  for  my 
mother  would  certainly  have  had  it  thrown  in  the 
Seine  before  we  left  Paris."  ^ 

The  Count  and  Countess  du  Nord  left  Paris 
well  pleased  with  the  reception  they  had  been 
given,  but  troubled  with  the  misgiving  of  a  storm 
brooding  in  Russia.  They  had  received  a  letter 
from  the  Empress  in  the  middle  of  May  telling 
them  that  letters  between  the  aide-de-camp  Bibi- 
kov  and  Prince  Kourakin,  one  of  their  suite,  had 
been  seized,  and  that  they  contained  insulting 
remarks  about  Prince  Potemkin  and  even  about 
Her  Majesty.  The  Grand  Duke's  feelings  may 
be  imagined ;  his  affection  for  Kourakin  was 
well  known,  and  he  was  trembling  for  the  fate 
of  the  latter,  who  had  apparently  made  a  party 
with  Bibikov.* 

Their  Imperial  Highnesses  passed  on  now  to 
the  Austrian  Netherlands,  travelling  by  Brest  and 
Lille,  where  they  were  met  on  the  frontier  by  the 
Emperors  sister,  Marie-Christine,  and  her  hus- 
band, the  Stadtholder,  Prince  Albert  of  Saxe-Tes- 
chen.  A  special  meeting  was  held  by  the  Academy 
of  Science  at  Brussels  in  their  honour,  the  Grand 

'  Madame  de  Campan,  Mdmoires^  torn,  i,  p.  241. 
'  Sbomik^  vol.  ix,  pp.  157-159. 


138    THE  CURSE  OF   THE  ROMANOVS 

Duchess  choosing  from  among  the  addresses  that 
were  presented  one  on  the  progress  of  science  to 
be  read  aloud. 

During  supper  one  evening  in  Brussels,  after 
the  theatre,  the  conversation  turned  upon  dreams, 
presentiments,  &c.,  and  everybody  told  some  mys- 
terious tale.  The  Grand  Duke  was  silent  The 
Prince  de  Ligne,  addressing  His  Imperial  High- 
ness, asked  :  **  And  you,  Monseigneur,  have  you 
nothing  to  tell  us  ?  Is  Russia  without  the  mar- 
vellous ?  Have  devils  and  sorcerers  failed  to  cast 
their  spells  around  you  ?  " 

"  Kourakin  knows,"  replied  the  Grand  Duke, 
'*  that  I  could  tell  a  strange  tale,  and,  if  you  promise 
me  secrecy,  I  shall  relate  it  to  you." 

And  Paul  continued  as  follows : — 

'^  I  happened  one  evening,"  so  his  tale  runs, 
"  or,  more  correctly,  one  night,  to  be  walking  with 
Kourakin  in  the  streets  of  St  Petersburg.  We 
were  attended  by  two  grooms.  We  had  passed  the 
evening  at  home,  chatting  and  smoking,  and  we 
thought  it  would  refresh  us  to  go  out  incognito  and 
have  a  turn  in  the  moonlight.  It  was  not  cold  at 
all,  for  we  had  reached  the  most  beautiful  period  of 
spring.  Our  conversation  turned  neither  on  reli- 
gion nor  on  any  other  serious  subject;  on  the 
contrary,  we  had  been  joking,  Kourakin  making 
continual  remarks  of  a  facetious  character  on  the 
people  whom  we  met.  One  of  the  grooms  was  a 
few  paces  ahead  of  me,  the  other  was  behind 
Kourakin.  The  light  from  the  moon  was  so  bril- 
liant that  we  might  have  read  by  it ;  the  shadows 
were  proportionately  dark.  Suddenly,  at  a  turn  in 
the  street,  I  caught  sight  of  a  tall  figure  standing  in 


COUNT  AND  COUNTESS  DU  NORD    139 

the  gateway  of  a  house ;  it  was  that  of  an  exceed- 
ingly thin  man,  his  cloak  wrapped  round  him  in 
Spanish  style  ;  his  eyes  were  partly  hidden  by  a 
military  cap.  He  appeared  to  be  waiting  for  some 
one.  I  had  no  sooner  reached  the  gateway  than  he 
came  to  my  left  side,  and  began  walking  with  me, 
without  speaking  a  word.  I  was  still  unable  to 
distinguish  his  features. 

'*  It  struck  me  that  his  feet,  as  they  fell  on  the 
pavement,  made  a  curious  sound  ;  it  was  like  stones 
knocking  together.  I  was  very  much  astonished, 
and  my  surprise  turned  to  stupefaction  as  I  felt 
an  icy  coldness  creeping  towards  me  from  my 
unknown  companion.  I  shuddered,  and  said  to 
Kourakin ; — 

" '  We  have  chanced  upon  a  strange  com- 
panion.' 

*' '  To  whom  do  you  refer  ? '  asked  Kourakin. 

"  *  Why,  to  the  figure  walking  beside  me ;  the 
noise  he  makes  as  he  walks  along  must  surely  be 
sufficient  alone  to  make  any  one  aware  of  his  pres- 
ence.' Kourakin  stared  at  me,  and  assured  me 
that  there  was  no  one  near  me.  *  What  ?  Do  you 
mean  that  you  cannot  see  the  man  to  my  left,  walk- 
ing between  me  and  the  house  ? ' 

*• '  You  are  walking  so  close  to  the  wall  that 
it  would  be  physically  impossible  for  any  living 
person  to  squeeze  himself  into  the  space  between 
it  and  you.' 

"  I  put  out  my  arm  and  it  touched  the  wall. 
Nevertheless,  the  stranger  was  still  there,  keeping 
step  with  me,  while  the  noise  of  his  feet  on  the 
pavement  was  like  the  blows  of  a  hammer.  I 
looked  at  him  more  closely,  and,  all  at  once,  beneath 


I40    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

the  brim  of  his  cap,  I  saw  a  pair  of  glittering  eyes, 
unlike  any  I  had  ever  seen  before  or  have  seen 
since.  These  eyes  fixed  themselves  upon  me  and 
seemed  to  hold  me  in  a  spell. 

"  *  My  God!'  I  said  to  Kourakin ;  'I  cannot 
explain  to  you  how  I  feel ;  there  is  something  about 
it  I  cannot  understand.' 

'*  I  was  trembling  from  head  to  foot,  not  with 
fear,  but  with  cold,  which  seemed  to  penetrate  my 
every  limb,  and  my  blood  was  freezing  in  my  veins. 
Suddenly  I  heard  the  mysterious  figure,  in  a  low, 
sad  voice,  pronounce  the  word,  '  Paul ! ' 

"  Some  unseen  power  seemed  to  have  me  in  its 
grasp,  and  I  replied  mechanically,  *What  do  you 
want  ? * 

'*  *  Paul ! '  said  the  figure  again  ;  there  was  a 
note  of  sympathy  in  the  voice,  which,  if  possible, 
was  sadder  than  before. 

"  I  felt  incapable  of  speaking  a  word.  Again,  a 
third  time,  the  voice  called  me  ;  the  figure  stood 
still,  and  I  was  forced,  involuntarily,  to  do  the  same. 
'  Paul !  poor  Paul !  poor  Prince ! ' 

''  *  Do  you  hear  that  ? '  I  asked  Kourakin,  who 
had  also  stopped. 

'* '  I  hear  nothing,  absolutely  nothing.' " 

"  Again  I  thought  I  heard  the  voice.  Then  1 
made  a  desperate  effort,  and  asked  the  unknown 
figure  his  name  and  what  he  wanted. 

'*  *  Who  am  I,  poor  Paul  ?  I  am  one  who  takes 
a  lively  interest  in  your  fate,  and  who  is  anxious 
that  you  should  not  become  too  much  attached  to 
the  things  of  this  earth,  on  which  you  have  not 
long  to  remain.  Be  just  and  upright  and  your 
end  will  be  a  peaceful  one.     Fear  the  remorse  of 


k 

i 


COUNT  AND  COUNTESS  DU  NORD    141 

conscience;  there  is  no  worse  punishment  for  an 
upright  soul/  " 

"He  then  went  on  walking,  still  keeping  his 
piercing  eyes  fixed  on  me.  And,  as  some  unseen 
force  had  obliged  me  to  stand  still,  so  now  I  walked 
on  against  my  will.  He  spoke  no  more,  and  I  had 
no  desire  to  converse  with  him.  I  followed  him, 
feeling  that  he  was  guiding  my  footsteps.  This 
went  on  for  an  hour.  I  have  not  the  slightest  idea 
in  what  direction  we  were  walking. 

"  At  last  we  reached  a  square  between  the  Neva 
bridge  and  the  Senate  House.  He  went  straight 
to  a  spot  where  there  were  works  in  preparation 
for  the  erection  of  a  statue  to  Peter  the  Great. 
I,  of  course,  followed  him.  Suddenly  he  paused. 
•  Good  -  bye,  Paul,'  he  said  ;  *  you  will  see  me 
again  here,  and  elsewhere  as  well.' 

"  At  that  moment  his  cap  was  lifted,  as  if  of  its 
own  accord,  and  I  saw  the  eagle-like  glance,  the 
sun-burnt  forehead,  and  the  cold  smile  of  my  grand- 
father, Peter  the  Great. 

"  When  I  recovered  from  my  surprise  and  terror, 
the  vision  had  disappeared."  ^ 

While  in  Holland  the  Grand  Duke  and  Duchess 
visited  Saardam,  and  the  house  in  which  Peter  the 
Great  had  lived  as  a  simple  carpenter,  as  well  as 
the  University  of  Leyden.  Here  Paul  addressed 
the  assembled  professors,  and  assured  them  that 
many  young  Russians  owed  to  their  teaching  the 
ability  they  now  possessed  of  serving  their  country. 
They  proceeded  to  Spa  and  Frankfort,  where  they 
were  visited  by  several  Princes,  all  more  or  less 

*  M/moires  de  Madame   d^Oberkirch^  vol.  i,  pp.  356-362,  and 
Russian  Archives,  p-  5 1 7 .    1 869. 


■•V  ■- , 


142    THE  CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

closely  related  to  them.  Among  them  was  Prince 
Louis  of  Darmstadt,  who  had  formerly  been  engaged 
to  the  Grand  Duchess. 

''They  have  just  brought  me  your  last  letters," 
writes  Catherine  to  her  children,  "  enumerating  in 
detail  all  the  illustrious  and  agreeable  acquaintances 
which  you  have  made  in  Frankfort.  The  discreet 
way  in  which  you  both  suited  your  courtesies  to  the 
respective  ranks  of  the  Princes  leaves  me  in  no 
doubt  as  to  their  position.  Do  you  not  find  that  it 
would  be  difficult  to  remember  their  names  unless 
the  services  they  had  rendered  came  to  your  help 
in  recalling  them  ?  I  seem,  even  from  here,  to  see 
how  vexed  and  sorry  my  dear  daughter  is  about  not 
having  noticed  her  whilom  Jianc^J'  ^ 

The  Grand  Duchess,  however,  was  longing  in 
her  heart  to  get  to  Etupe,  which  she  did  not  reach 
before  August  ist.  Her  numerous  family  relations 
were  all  at  Montb^liard  to  greet  her. 

At  the  beginning  of  September  the  Grand  Duke 
and  Duchess  left  Etupe  for  Switzerland.  Soon 
after  they  had  started  Prince  Frederick  and  his 
wife,  Princess  Augusta,  set  out  for  St  Petersburg. 

The  Grand  Duke  and  Duchess  again  joined 
their  parents,  as  well  as  Prince  Ferdinand  and 
Princess  Elizabeth,  at  Strasburg,  and  together 
they  began  their  return  journey  to  Russia,  passing 
through  Baden,  where  they  made  the  acquaintance 
of  the  Margrave,  and  through  Stuttgart,  where 
Duke  Charles  received  them  with  open  arms,  and 
treated  them  to  such  sumptuous  entertainments  as 
suited  his  taste  for  luxury.  His  favourite,  Coun- 
tess of  Hohenstein,  did  the  honours  of  the  house. 

^  Sbomik,  voL  ix,  p.  174. 


COUNT  AND  COUNTESS  DU  NORD    143 

Besides  the  family,  many  Princes  had  repaired  to 
Stuttgart  in  order  to  be  present  at  the  festivities. 

The  Grand  Duke  and  Duchess,  tired  with  their 
prolonged  travels,  were  not  sorry  to  see  them  draw- 
ing to  a  close.  The  Duke  exerted  himself  to  the 
utmost  to  entertain  his  niece  in  as  magnificent  a 
style  as  possible,  but  she  was  too  much  affected  by 
the  thought  of  the  coming  parting  with  her  family 
to  enjoy  them. 

"In  the  midst  of  this  whirlwind  of  festivities," 
wrote  the  Grand  Duchess  to  the  Empress,  "my 
sister  and  I  cannot  but  be  sad,  troubled  as  we  are 
at  the  prospect  of  having  so  shortly  to  bid  fare- 
well to  each  other.  But,  again,  the  anticipation  of 
being  ere  long  at  your  feet,  I  venture  to  say  in 
your  arms,  makes  me  forget  my  sorrow,  and  I 
can  think  of  nothing  but  of  the  happiness  which 
is  nowhere  mine  but  in  Russia,  that  blessed  country 
into  which  you  were  willing  to  welcome  me  as  a 
daughter,  and  where  I  have  known  the  joys  of 
maternity.  I  am  counting  the  days  and  hours 
which  still  separate  me  from  you,  and  each  of  them 
sees  me  more  impatient  than  the  last.  May  the 
minutes  which  hold  me  back  from  that  happy 
moment  pass  like  the  wind.  I  no  longer  want  to 
write  to  you  about  anything  but  the  delight  of 
seeing  you  again.  You  will  see  that  day  what 
our  affection  is  for  you,  and  will  confess  to  your- 
self that  no  more  devoted  children  have  ever 
existed." 

On  her  side,  also,  the  Empress  frequently  made 
plain  her  great  wish  to  see  her  children  back  in 
Russia. 

The  Tsarevitsh  and  his  wife  returned  from  their 


J 


r 


144    THE   CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

travels  on  the  ist  December  1782.  Immediately 
upon  their  arrival  they  had  an  interview,  which 
only  lasted  a  few  minutes^  quite  alone  with  the 
Empress.  That  same  day  the  Empress  conferred 
on  her  son  the  Order  of  Saint  Vladimir,  which  she 
had  instituted  during  his  absence.  Their  Imperial 
Highnesses  took  up  their  residence  at  the  Kamenny- 
Ostrov  Palace,  and  the  following  day  held  a  re- 
ception. According  to  a  report  by  the  English 
Minister,  the  Grand  Duke  and  Duchess  were  as 
dissatisfied  with  the  reception  they  had  met  with 
as  the  Empress  was  little  pleased  at  their  return. 
This  mutual  discontent  was  likely  to  bring  about 
disagreeable  scenes. 

If  the  return  of  their  Highnesses  did  not  seem 
to  disperse  the  clouds  on  the  family  horizon,  it  was, 
however,  generally  thought  that  the  tour  through 
Europe  had  been  of  great  advantage  to  the  Grand 
Duke. 

Joseph  II,  when  sending  word  to  the  Empress 
of  the  departure  of  his  guests,  ended  his  letter  with 
the  following  words :  "  Their  travels  will,  I  am 
sure,  have  been  of  great  benefit  to  their  Imperial 
Highnesses ;  I  think  I  am  not  mistaken  in  promis- 
ing your  Majesty  that  they  will  return  much  more 
amiably  disposed,  and  will  have  got  rid  of  their 
mistrust,  of  their  everlasting  suspicions,  and  their 
pre-occupation  with  trifles — ^that  is  to  say,  as  far  as 
long-established  habit,  and,  above  all,  the  influence 
of  those  about  them,  leave  them  free  to  do  so,  for 
their  friends  alone  are  responsible  for  these  faults, 
which  are  not  natural  to  them.  It  seems  to  me  that 
a  better  choice  as  regards  their  immediate  associates 
and  the  removal  of  pernicious  acquaintances  is  an 


COUNT  AND  COUNTESS  DU  NORD    145 

absolute  necessity  in  order  to  secure  the  peace  and 
quiet  on  which  depends  the  happiness  of  three 
persons  who  are  dear  to  me."^ 

As  for  the  Grand  Duke  he  felt  that,  person- 
ally, he  had  derived  benefit  from  his  travels.  "It 
is  not  in  the  ordinary  routine  of  life, "  he  wrote 
to  Platon,  ''that  the  qualities  of  the  soul — more 
especially  our  valour  of  heart — ^can  make  themselves 
known,  but  in  those  hours  of  trial  when  they  are 
put  to  the  proof  and  one  is  enabled  to  appreciate 
what  they  are  worth.  If  my  travels  have  taught 
me  anything,  it  is  to  seek  for  comfort  in  patience, 
which  includes  all  those  essential  things  without 
which  the  soul  cannot  exist."* 

The  joy  of  the  Grand  Duchess  on  seeing  her 
children  again  was  indescribable.  "  I  found  my 
children  so  grown,"  she  said,  "that  I  should  cer- 
tainly not  have  known  them  again,  if  the  impulse  of 
my  heart  had  not  told  me  it  was  they.  You  can 
picture  my  happiness,  which  grows  greater  every 
day  as  I  see  what  progress  they  have  made,  thanks 
to  the  Empress,  who  has  cared  for  them  like  the 
tenderest  of  mothers."' 

The  Grand  Duke  was  no  sooner  back  in  St. 
Petersburg  than  he  was  forced  to  separate  from 
his  friend  Prince  Kourakin,  who  had  been  his 
companion  throughout  his  travels. 

The  latter  had,  while  away,  received  letters 
from  the  Empress's  aide-de-camp,  Bibikov,  giving 
him  the  latest  news  from  St.  Petersburg,  and  find- 
ing fault  with   the   conduct   of  Prince    Potemkin. 

^  Arneth,  ''Joseph  II  and  Katherina  II,"  p.  162. 
•  Russian  Archives,  1887,  vol.  ii,  p.  28. 
'  Sbomik,  vol.  xx. 

K 


^ 


146    THE   CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

One  of  these  letters  had  been  seized  and  submitted 
to  Her  Majesty,  who,  on  the  6th  May  1782,  wrote 
as  follows  to  her  son  and  daughter-in-law,  who  were 
still  abroad : — 

•'Within  the  last  few  days  I  have  given  orders 
for  the  arrest  of  my  aide-de-camp,  Bibikov,  on 
account  of  his  impertinences.  Such  intemperate 
language  as  he  uses  is  a  menace  to  any  kind  of 
discipline  or  loyalty.  You  can  learn  all  the  details 
of  this  affair  to  which  I  allude  if  you  read  the  letter 
he  wrote  to  Prince  Kourakin.  I  cannot  but  feel 
that  he  is  a  most  ungrateful  liar,  and,  what  is  more, 
a  man  entirely  ignorant  of  all  matters  connected 
with  military  regulations  and  discipline,  although 
these  are  the  real  foundations  of  the  army.  I  am 
sure  that  you  will  feel  as  much  contempt  for  his 
conduct  as  the  wretch  deserves ;  to  convince  your- 
self of  the  truth  of  what  I  say,  you  need  only  to 
read  his  letter,  which  is  full  of  calumnies  and 
written  in  terms  of  unparalleled  insolence."* 

In  a  later  letter  she  adds  :  "  I  ought  to  tell  you, 
referring  to  this  affair  of  Bibikov,  that  the  latter,  on 
whom  and  on  whose  family  I  have  showered  so 
many  favours,  has  proved  himself  an  ungrateful 
traitor ;  he  is  full  of  ill-feeling  towards  your  mother. 
Being  convicted  of  lying  and  ingratitude,  he  has 
done  the  only  thing  left  him  to  do — repented.  He 
has  begged  for  forgiveness,  and  throughout  the 
affair  has  shown  no  more  sense  or  strength  of 
character  than  a  child  who  has  deserved  whipping. 
I  have,  in  accordance  with  my  principles,  dragged 
this  young  man  up  by  the  roots  of  his  hair  from  the 
depths  into  which  he  had  fallen.     I  have  not  the 

^  Sbornik,  vol.  ix,  p.  145. 


COUNT  AND  COUNTESS  DU  NORD    147 

tragic  instinct  of  my  predecessors.  I  tell  you  all 
this,  my  dear  children,  that  you  may  profit  by  my 
words  and  be  guided  by  them  now  and  in  the 
future."^ 

Kourakin,  on  his  return  to  St  Petersburg,  was 
ordered  to  retire  to  his  estate  in  Saratov.  Later 
on,  Paul  obtained  permission  to  receive  him  once 
every  two  years  in  one  of  his  suburban  residences. 
Bibikov  was  tried  and  banished  to  Astrakhan. 
These  events  embittered  the  first  days  of  Paul's 
return  to  Russia. 

Another  ordinance  of  the  Empress  was  aimed 
more  directly  at  the  Grand  Duchess.  A  notice 
was  sent  round  to  all  the  ladies  of  the  Court  with 
orders  forbidding  the  use  of  embroidery  on  their 
dresses  and  regulating  the  breadth  of  other  trim- 
mings; head-dresses  were  not  to  be  above  a  cer- 
tain height,  and  only  on  festive  occasions  or  at 
official  receptions  was  permission  given  for  the 
wearing  of  silk,  with  embroidery  and  trimmings 
to  taste,  subject,  however,  to  the  regulation  men- 
tioned above.  The  wives  of  gentlemen  about  the 
Court  were  to  wear  dresses  of  the  same  colour. 
The  ukase  further  stated  that  these  orders  were 
given  in  view  of  preserving  the  fortunes  of  the 
nobility  and  of  leaving  their  money  free  to  be 
spent  for  better  purposes.*  The  real  aim  of  this 
prescription  was  to  annoy  the  Grand  Duchess. 
While  in  Paris  she  had  gone  to  the  famous  Court 
dressmaker  of  that  period.  Mademoiselle  Bertin, 
and  she  continued  to  employ  her  and  other  fashion- 
able Parisian  tradespeople.     She  had  also  brought 

*  Sbomik,  vol.  ix,  pp.  157-159. 

*  Harris,  /.r.,  vol.  ii,  p.  8. 


r 


.-p. 


148    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

back  with  her  two  hundred  boxes  filled  with  gauzes, 
ribbons,  and  other  knick-knacks  of  feminine  toil- 
ette, as  well  as  head-dresses  of  all  the  newest 
designs.^ 

The  Empress  could  have  found  no  more  pettily 
cruel  way  of  attacking  the  Grand  Duchess  than  by 
these  prohibitions  regarding  dress, 

^  Harris,  /.r.,  vol.  ii,  p.  9. 


CHAPTER  VII 

THE  SWEDISH  CAMPAIGN 

The  death  of  Panin — Paul  grows  sullen — Catherine's  oration  Qver  the  grave 
of  Panin— The  education  of  the  Princes  Alexander  and  Constantine — 
Laharpe — The  Grand  Duke's  desire  to  join  the  army — The  Empress 
makes  him  a  present  of  the  estate  of  Gatshina — Paul's  isolation — His 
amusements — Maria  F^odorovna  and  Mamonov,  Catherine's  fovourite — 
The  jealousy  of  an  old  woman — Catherine's  journey  to  Tauris — Paul's 
views  on  the  Russian  military  forces — His  departure  for  the  army — His 
pathetic  letter  to  his  wife. 

Since  their  return  from  abroad,  the  report  had 
been  persistently  and  universally  circulated  that 
the  Empress  intended  to  put  aside  the  Grand 
Duke  and  to  settle  the  succession  to  the  throne 
upon  her  eldest  grandson  ;  she  was  so  prejudiced 
against  her  children  that  nothing  they  did  could 
please  her,  though  their  conduct  was  in  every  way 
meritorious.  Her  son,  she  said,  had  grown  sullen 
and  irritable;  the  new  friends  they  had  made 
abroad  had  spoilt  him  and  the  Grand  Duchess,  and 
they  could  not  fall  back  into  their  right  places  again. 
"  In  short,"  writes  Sir  James  Harris,  "  the  Empress 
having  in  her  own  mind  previously  resolved  to  be 
displeased,  it  is  not  in  the  power  of  their  Highnesses 
to  please  her."  * 

The  Grand  Duke  found  his  position  the  more 
difficult  as  he  no  longer  had  Panin  to  advise  him. 
The  Count  had   been  in   bad   health  since  1782. 

*  Harris,  /.r.,  vol.  ii,  pp.  18-19. 

>49 


/ 
/ 


ISO    THE   CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

The  Grand  Duke  and  Duchess  called  upon  him 
the  day  after  their  return,  and  then  for  a  whole 
month  not  only  never  went  near  his  house,  but 
did  not  even  send  to  ask  after  him.  Panin  and 
his  whole  family  were  deeply  hurt  at  this  treatment. 
It  was  generally  reported  that  the  Grand  Duchess 
had,  while  with  her  mother,  frequently  spoken  of 
Panin,  and  that  the  Princess  of  Wurtemberg,  pro- 
bably with  a  view  to  pleasing  the  Empress,  had 
urged  her  son-in-law  to  detach  himself  from  Panin. 
Shortly  before  Panin  s  death  the  Grand  Duke  went 
again  to  see  his  old  tutor,  and  an  explanation  took 
place  between  them.  The  Count  died  on  April 
II,  1783.  The  Grand  Duke  writes  as  follows  on 
the  severe  loss  he  had  sustained  : — 

"  We  have  just  lost  Count  Panin.  You  will 
understand  all  that  I  am  feeling.  We  were  talking 
together  about  him  two  days  before  he  died,  and 
our  conversation  so  upset  us  that  we  made  up  our 
minds  to  go  and  see  him.  He  was  brighter  and 
livelier  than  I  have  known  him  for  the  last  three 
years.  I  hear  that  he  was  in  the  same  cheerful 
disposition  the  following  day,  and  that  he  did  not 
wish  to  go  to  sleep.  Feeling  very  lively  myself 
as  I  was  playing  cards  at  home,  I  remarked  to 
those  who  were  with  me  that  I  had  noticed  I 
always  felt  like  this  when  trouble  was  coming 
upon  me,  and  I  asked  them  to  remember  my 
words.  The  first  thing  I  heard  on  awaking  on 
Friday  morning  was  that  the  Count  was  worse. 
We  hurried  over  our  dressing,  but  he  was  already 
unconscious  when  we  reached  him.  When  going 
to  bed  at  four  o'clock  he  had  complained  of  nausea, 
and   almost  immediately  after  became   insensible. 


THE   SWEDISH   CAMPAIGN        151 

He  continued,  however,  to  breathe  for  another 
two  hours ;  no  remedy  was  of  any  avail  to  restore 
him.  He  is  followed  to  the  grave  with  the  regrets 
of  all  who  knew  him.  Even  his  enemies  are  silent, 
ashamed  to  stand  apart  in  the  midst  of  the  general 
mourning.  On  the  day  of  his  funeral,  at  which  I 
was  present,  I  met  people  whom  I  had  never  seen 
in  his  house  before  in  my  life."  ^ 

Two  weeks  after  Panin's  death  his  rival,  Prince 
Gregory  Orlov,  died  in  a  fit  of  apoplexy. 

Over  the  newly-made  crave  of  these,  her  two 
supporters  during  her  reign.  Catherine  pronounced 
the  following  singular  oration  : — 

"  Many  years  of  my  life  have  been  passed  with 
these  two  councillors  of  mine,  each  of  w^iom  had 
opinions  differing  from  those  of  his  colleague,  and 
yet  everything  went  on  very  well.  At  times  it 
was  necessary  to  act  as  Alexander  did  with  the 
Gordian  knot :  my  two  friends  became  immediately 
reconciled.  The  temerity  of  the  one  was  tempered 
by  the  extreme  prudence  of  the  other ;  I  placed 
myself  between  the  two  opposed  forces,  and  our 
three  temperaments  combined  succeeded  in  carry- 
ing through  matters  of  the  highest  importance 
with  wonderful  facility.  You  will  ask  me  what 
is  to  be  done  now  ?  And  I  shall  make  answer : 
We  must  manage  as  best  we  can.  There  is  no 
country  that  is  unable  to  furnish  the  men  necessary 
for  the  administration  of  its  affairs.  As  everything 
in  this  base  world  is  brought  about  by  the  efforts 
of  men,  I  have  no  doubt  that  ours  will  be  equal 
to  the  occasion  and  fitted  to  serve  our  ends."* 

^  Shilder,  LCy  p.  182,  quoted  from  P.  Svypyin. 

*  Sbomik,  vol.  xxiii,  p.  274.    Catherine's  letter  to  Grimm. 


i 


152     THE  CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

But  Paul  had  lost  more  than  a  guide  and 
adviser,  he  had  lost  a  man  whom  he  looked  upon 
as  his  most  faithful  and  devoted  friend 

The  two  first  children  of  Paul  and  the  Grand 
Duchess  were  their  sons,  Alexander  and  Constan- 
tine ;  three  daughters,  Alexandrina,  Helena,  and 
Marie,  were  bom  respectively  in  1783,  1784,  and 
1786. 

Alexander  and  Constantine  were  carried  to  the 
grandmother  the  instant  they  were  born,  the  Em- 
press undertaking  the  sole  care  of  their  upbringing. 
Their  parents  were  completely  separated  from  them. 
Madame  Sophie  de  Benckendorff  was  charged  with 
the  care  of  the  two  young  Princes,  under  the  im- 
mediate and  daily  supervision  of  their  grand- 
mother.^ When  Alexander  was  six  years  old  and 
Constantine  scarcely  four,  Madame  de  Benckendorff 
died,  and  the  Empress  chose  this  opportunity  for 
taking  the  children  away  from  female  governance. 
Their  education  was  now  entrusted  to  Soltykov. 
The  Grand  Duke  was  annoyed  at  having  the 
grand-master  of  his  household  taken  away,  and 
the  more  so  that  Moussin-Poushkin,  who  was 
appointed  to  fill  the  vacant  office,  had,  it  was  said, 
been  recommended  by  Potemkin,  and  was,  more- 
over, an  entire  stranger  to  Paul. 

*'  Happening  to  be  with  Her  Majesty  about  two 
days  previous  to  Panin's  death,"  wrote  Paul  to 
Soltykov,  "  she  began  praising  you  in  high  terms, 
and  confided  to  me  her  intention  of  transferring  you 
to  the  children's  household.  You  will  have  no  diffi- 
culty in  guessing  what  I  replied  to  this.  Then  she 
went  on  to  speak  of  who  was  to  take  your  place  with 

*  Archives  Prince  Voronzov,  vol.  xx,  p.  242. 


\ 


THE   SWEDISH   CAMPAIGN        153 

me.  No  words  can  express  my  surprise  when  she 
mentioned  Count  Valentin  :  I  was  certainly  unpre- 
pared for  that  Seeing  my  surprise,  she  asked  the 
reason  of  it ;  I  answered  that  I  had  no  acquaintance 
at  all  with  this  proposed  candidate,  but  that  I  had 
heard  him  spoken  of  as  an  upright  man.  I  confess 
that  it  is  a  great  trouble  to  me  to  have  to  part 
with  you.  I  am  told,  as  a  consolation,  that  it  is  not 
a  complete  separation,  as  you  will  still  remain  in 
regfular  correspondence  with  me.  This  does  not 
alter  the  fact,  however,  that  you  are  going  to  leave 
me.  Four  days  later,  Moussin-Poushkin  waited 
upon  me  with  a  note  from  the  Empress,  to  which 
I  replied  without  delay  that  I  accepted  everything 
at  her  hands,  knowing  that  she  only  desired  my 
welfare ;  but  I  added  that  I  hoped  she  would  not 
fail  to  make  you  acquainted  with  this  change, 
as  otherwise  you  would  have  good  reason  to  feel 
aggrieved.  I  was  reassured  on  this  point,  being  told 
that  a  letter  would  be  sent  you  and  that  Poushkin 
was  only  nominated  ad  interim.  He  has  undertaken 
the  direction  of  the  household  and  is  giving  us  satis- 
faction. God  alone  knows  what  is  reserved  for  us 
in  the  future.  My  friendship  for  you  obliges  me  to 
write  as  I  do,  and  let  me  tell  you  that  this  affair  has 
only  confirmed  my  affection  for  you.  These  last 
two  days  have  been  very  melancholy  ones  for  me, 
and,  shall  I  own  it,  have  not  passed  without  tears. 
I  am  sorry  for  myself." 

As  regards  the  personal  relationship  between 
Soltykov  and  the  Grand  Duke,  it  is  asserted  that 
the  former  served  as  an  intermediary  when  unplea- 
santness arose  between  the  Empress  and  her  son. 
He  was  admirably  suited  by  his  sober-mindedness 


I 

k 

I, 


154    THE  CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

and  coolness  of  temperament  for  the  carrying  out 
of  these  delicate  duties. 

Soltykov  was  seconded  in  the  education  of  the 
young  Princes  by  the  assistance  of  Protassov — a 
good-hearted,  narrow-minded  man  of  no  character 
— for  Alexander,  and  of  Sacken  for  Constantine. 
Laharpe,  however,  had  the  larger  share  in  their 
education.  He  arrived  in  Russia  in  1783,  having 
been  recommended  to  Catherine  by  her  corre- 
spondent Grimm.*  Further,  it  may  be  added, 
Catherine  herself  kept  daily  watch  over  the  studies 
and  behaviour  of  her  grandchildren.  In  one  of  her 
letters  to  Grimm  she  tells  him  of  the  progress  made 
by  the  elder  of  these,  and  adds :  "  He  will  grow 
up  a  person  of  very  exceptional  character,  provided 
that  his  parents  do  not  interfere  and  interrupt  its 
development." 

In  relieving  her  son  of  the  care  of  the  education 
of  his  own  children,  Catherine  had  no  wish  to  allow 
him  more  leisure  for  the  affairs  of  State.  He  had 
been  assiduously  kept  apart  from  these,  and  had  only 
been  allowed  to  attend  the  reading  of  despatches. 
Furthermore,  she  never  even  conversed  with 
him  on  matters  connected  with  the  Government 
On  May  23rd,  1783,  Catherine  happened  to  say 
something  to  him  about  the  occupation  of  the 
Crimea  and  of  Polish  affairs.  The  Grand  Dukes 
surprise  was  such  that  he  immediately  wrote  on  his 
tablets :  "  This  mark  of  confidence  is  the  more 
precious  to  me  that  it  is  the  first  of  the  kind  and  the 
most  surprising."  * 

Being,  therefore,  perfectly  at  liberty,  the  Grand 

*  Sbomik,  vol.  xxiii,  p.  32a 

*  Rousskaya  Starina^  i873)  ^^I*  ^^h  PP-  652-653. 


\ 

V 


THE   SWEDISH   CAMPAIGN        155 

Duke  Paul  decided  in  1783  to  join  the  army  in  the 
field.  Difficulties  in  connection  with  the  annexa- 
tion of  the  Crimea  had  arisen  with  Turkey,  and 
it  was  feared  that  hostilities  would  recommence. 
Affairs,  however,  were  amicably  settled,  and  the 
Grand  Duke  s  intention  was  therefore  frustrated. 
He  now  turned  the  whole  of  his  attention  to  the 
arrangement  of  his  private  affairs.  He  found  an 
intelligent  assistant  in  his  wife. 

In  1783,  on  the  occasion  of  the  birth  of  his 
daughter  Alexandrina,  Catherine  made  Paul  a  pre- 
sent of  the  estate  of  Gatshina,  which  she  had  bought 
from  Orlov's  heirs.  Paul  at  once  retired  to  this, 
his  new  estate,  and,  far  from  the  brilliant  Court  of 
his  mother,  devoted  his  time  and  energy  to  the  estab- 
lishment of  his  own  small  Court  and  to  a  Russia  of 
his  own  liking.  It  was  the  Russia  of  Gatshina  which, 
on  his  accession,  was  to  become  the  model  for  the 
vast  Empire.  The  gulf  between  the  Court  of  the 
Grand  Duke  at  Gatshina  and  that  of  his  mother  at 
St.  Petersburg  widened  more  and  more.  It  was  in 
Gatshina  that  Paul  passed  the  last  thirteen  years 
of  his  mother  s  reign,  years  which  had  an  immense 
influence  upon  his  character,  and  hence  proved  so 
momentous  for  the  future  of  the  Empire.  Here  he 
brooded  over  the  past,  the  present,  and  the  future, 
awaiting  in  feverish  expectation  the  moment  of  his 
accession,  and  trembling  lest  this  moment  should 
never  come.  It  was  here  that  he  began  to  develop 
his  passion  for  military  parade,  drilling  the  soldiers 
of  his  guards,  and  whilst  Potemkin  was  introducing 
changes  in  the  army  and  doing  away  with  Prussian 
uniforms,  Paul  was  endeavouring  to  make  his  regi- 
ments at  Gatshina  resemble  in  every  possible  way 


J 


156    THE   CURSE  OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

those  in  the  service  of  Frederick.  This  was  a 
genuine  stroke  of  policy.  Paul,  fearing — and  righdy 
so — that  his  mother  would  exclude  him  from  the 
succession,  had  decided  to  impress  Russia  with  the 
fact  that  he  was  the  legitimate  and  rightful  heir, 
being  the  son  of  Peter  III.  He  thus  ardendy 
adopted  the  policy  and  imitated  the  eccentricities 
and  favourite  pursuits  of  Peter  HI,  and  as  the 
latter  had  been  such  a  staunch  admirer  of  every- 
thing Prussian  and  of  the  Prussian  **King,  his 
master,"  and  had  passed  his  time — when  not  drink- 
ing— in  military  drill,  Paul  thought  it  wise  to 
manifest  similar  inclinations. 

During  the  first  years  of  their  residence  at 
Gatshina,  the  Grand  Duke  and  Duchess  gave  fre- 
quent entertainments,  and  the  guests  invited  often 
stayed  for  several  days  in  enjoyment  of  the  Grand 
Duke's  kindly  hospitality.  No  one  who  was  in- 
vited to  these  evenings  was  ever  allowed  to  feel  ill 
at  ease,  for  the  host  and  hostess  were  always 
thoughtful  and  agreeable.  Nevertheless,  many 
people  avoided  these  invitations. 

One  of  the  favourite  amusements  of  the  Russian 
aristocracy  of  the  eighteenth  century  was  the  theatre. 
Catherine  took  a  great  interest  in  her  theatre  at  the 
Hermitage,  for  which  she  wrote  some  pieces  herself. 
Theatrical  performances  were  also  frequently  given 
at  the  lesser  Court,  with  the  sole  difference  that  they 
were  mostly  given  by  amateurs,  which  made  them 
even  more  attractive,  and  gave  an  additional  liveli- 
ness to  the  gatherings  at  Gatshina.  The  chief 
organiser  of  these  last-named  performances  was 
Count  Gregory  Ivanovitsh  Tshernitshev. 

Besides  theatrical  entertainments  a  great  deal  of 


I 


THE   SWEDISH   CAMPAIGN        157 

reading  was  indulged  in  at  Gatshina.  The  literary 
correspondents  of  the  Grand  Duke  were  Laharpe, 
and,  later  on,  Blaise  de  Saint-Maure.  These  two 
writers  sent  him  all  the  new  books  which  were 
published  in  France.  Ere  long  literature  became 
one  of  the  chief  interests  at  the  youthful  Court, 
The  Empress,  speaking  of  her  daughter-in-law, 
remarked :  "  She  reads  a  great  deal ;  it  is  very 
possible  that  she  does  not  understand  all  that  she 
reads."  The  Grand  Duchess  had  a  well-developed 
taste  for  the  arts;  she  was  very  fond  of  music, 
drew  wonderfully  well,  made  engravings  on  pre- 
cious stones  under  the  direction  of  Leberecht, 
and  learnt  to  carve  and  turn  ivory.  Many  works 
of  art  executed  by  her  are  preserved  to  testify  to 
the  talent  which  she  unquestionably  possessed, 
and  her  name  is  not  the  last  to  be  mentioned  in 
enumerating  Russian  artists.  The  accomplish- 
ments, however,  of  the  Grand  Duchess  made 
Catherine  dislike  her.  The  great  Empress  was 
woman  enough — in  spite  of  her  masculine  mind — 
not  to  be  above  petty  jealousy. 

Maria  F^odorovna  had  often  to  suffer  from 
such  accesses  of  jealousy  on  the  part  of  the  aged 
Empress.  Thus,  after  the  dismissal  of  Yermolov, 
Mamonov  was  appointed  favourite.  This  gentle- 
man, who  afterwards  asked  his  sovereign's  per- 
mission to  discharge  him  from  his  duties  and 
to  allow  him  to  marry  Princess  Sherbatov,  was 
evidently  not  insensible  to  the  charms  of  Maria 
F6odorovna  and  he  preferred  her  conversation  to 
that  of  his  Imperial  mistress  of  sixty.  But  Cathe- 
rine not  only  loved  Mamonov,  she  also  hated  her 
daughter-in-law,  and  was  jealous. 


i 


158    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

Thus  it  happened  that»  towards  the  close  of 
the  year  1786,  Mamonov  offered  the  Empress  a 
pair  of  earrings,  for  which  he  had  given  thirty 
thousand  roubles ;  he  presented  them  to  her  as 
she  was  conversing  with  her  son  and  his  wife. 
The  Empress,  taking  the  earrings  from  Mamonov, 
showed  them  to  the  Grand  Duchess,  and  asked  her : 
"  How  do  you  like  them,  Madam  ?  " 

The  Grand  Duchess  expressing  her  admiration 
of  them,  the  Empress  immediately  made  them  a 
present  to  her.  The  Grand  Duchess  was  delighted 
and  thanked  Her  Majesty  effusively  for  them  ;  then, 
taking  out  the  earrings  she  was  wearing,  she 
put  in  the  new  ones.  This  was  on  a  Sunday 
before  dinner.  After  dinner  the  Grand  Duchess 
gave  orders  that  Mamonov  was  to  be  invited  for 
the  following  day.  The  latter  asked  Catherine 
for  permission  to  accept  this  invitation,  but  the 
Empress  was  exceedingly  displeased  at  this  and 
exclaimed : — 

*•  What,^(W  go  to  the  Grand  Duchess's  apart- 
ments, and  for  what  purpose  }  On  no  account  shall 
you  accept  I  do  not  know  how  the  Grand  Duchess 
dared  to  invite  you ! " 

Whereupon  the  Empress  sent  for  Count  Moussin- 
Poushkin,  and  ordered  him  to  go  at  once  to  the 
Grand  Duchess  and  ask  her  how  she  dared  invite 
Alexander  Matveyevitsh ;  and  then  she  went  on 
exclaiming :  "  Mamonov  invited  to  the  Grand 
Duchess's  apartments !  and  why  ?  for  what  purpose? 
See  that  this  never  happens  again  !  " 

The  Grand  Duchess  was  so  upset  by  this  fuss 
that  she  burst  into  tears  and  became  quite  ill.  The 
Grand  Duke  sent  Mamonov  a  very  beautiful  snuff- 


THE   SWEDISH   CAMPAIGN        159 

box,  inlaid  with  diamonds,  which  the  favourite 
showed  to  the  Empress.  Her  Majesty,  after  look- 
ing at  the  present,  told  Mamonov  that  he  might  go 
and  thank  the  Grand  Duke,  but  only  on  condition 
that  Count  Moussin-Poushkin  went  with  him ;  he 
was  on  no  account  to  go  alone.  The  Grand  Duke, 
however,  refused  to  receive  him. 

On  another  occasion,  on  the  Feast  of  St.  Cathe- 
rine, 1788,  the  Empress,  contrary  to  her  usual  cus- 
tom, appeared  in  bad  spirits  when  she  came  from 
her  apartments  to  greet  the  people  who  were  await- 
ing her;  it  appears  that  she  had  surprised  Count 
Mamonov  talking  with  her  daughter-in-law  in  her 
dressing-room.  Catherine's  face  was  quite  distorted 
with  jealousy  and  displeasure,  but,  happily,  this  in- 
cident passed  off  without  any  disastrous  results. 

Paul  and  Maria  F6odorovna  were  also  very 
much  troubled  in  December  of  1786,  at  the  con- 
jugal differences  between  Prince  Frederick  and  his 
wife.  From  this  date  until  New  Years  Day  1787 
they  did  not  leave  their  apartments,  and  no  one  was 
admitted  to  see  them  except  such  intimate  friends 
as  Count  Moussin-Poushkin  and  Madame  de 
Benckendorff. 

The  Empress,  meanwhile,  was  making  prepara- 
tions for  her  grand  and  famous  journey  to  the 
Tauris.  A  numerous  suite  was  to  accompany  her, 
and  Catherine  also  decided  to  take  her  two  grand- 
sons with  her.  Their  tutor,  Soltykov,  began  to  get 
everything  ready  for  their  departure,  and  these  pre- 
parations were  the  first  indications  that  Paul  and 
Maria  Ftodorovna  received  of  their  children's  in- 
tended journey.  Catherine  had  said  nothing  to  them 
on  the  matter. 


i 


i6o    THE  CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

Paul  Petrovitsh  and  his  wife  addressed  the 
Empress  by  letter,  begging  her  to  leave  the  chil- 
dren behind  They  besought  her  to  consider  the 
fatigue  for  them  of  such  a  long  journey  in  winter ; 
they  had  not  yet  got  over  all  their  childish  mala- 
dies, and  they  further  reminded  her  that  their 
studies  would  suffer  greatly  from  the  interruptions 
and  distractions  of  travelling*  But  the  Empress 
was  deaf  to  their  entreaties. 

Then  Paul  and  Maria  F^odorovna  asked  for 
permission  to  go  with  their  children,  even  if  only  as 
far  as  Kiev.  To  this  request  Catherine  not  only 
replied  by  an  ungracious  refusal,  but,  at  the  same 
time,  expressed  her  displeasure  with  them.  Only 
one  other  alternative  was  left  to  the  parents ;  pain- 
ful as  the  necessity  was  to  the  heir  to  the  throne, 
he  and  his  wife  felt  that  the  only  way  to  influence 
the  Empress  was  to  get  the  all-powerful  Prince 
Potemkin  to  intercede  for  them.  Their  parental 
love  overcame  all  other  feelings  and  they  did  not 
hesitate  to  employ  this  means  of  help.  Unfortu- 
nately their  letter,  dated  December  27,  was  delayed. 
Prince  Potemkin,  who  was  then  at  Simferopol, 
answered,  on  the  i8th  January  1787,  that  he  would 
do  his  best  when  they  got  to  Kiev  to  turn  the 
Empress  from  her  purpose,  but  that  he  must  pro- 
ceed with  caution,  so  as  not  to  bring  down  her 
resentment  on  the  Tsarevitsh. 

But  meanwhile  the  young  Grand  Dukes  fell  ill, 
and  Catherine  was  obliged  to  leave  them.  On  the 
17th  January  1787,  the  eve  of  her  departure,  Cathe- 
rine appeared  unusually  silent  and  thoughtful ;  she 

^  Rousskaya  Starina^  1873,  vol.  viii,  p.  666,  and  Shilder,  /.r.,  pp 
556-559. 


THE   SWEDISH   CAMPAIGN        i6i 

was  unhappy  at  not  being  able  to  take  her  grand- 
sons with  her. 

In  the  middle  of  April  the  Tsarevitsh  with  his 
wife,  accompanied  by  their  sons  and  their  two  eldest 
daughters,  removed  to  Tsarsko6,  Their  daughter 
Marie  was  left  for  a  while  at  St.  Petersburg  under 
the  care  of  the  governess  and  of  the  Court  phy- 
sician, so  as  to  keep  her  apart  from  her  sisters  who 
had  just  been  inoculated  with  small-pox.  For  this 
it  had  been  necessary  to  obtain  the  consent  of  the 
Empress,  who  was  not  favourably  inclined  towards 
this  precautionary  measure.  She  considered  that 
the  Grand  Duke  and  Duchess  had  acted  unwisely 
in  allowing  the  inoculation  of  their  children  to  take 
place  in  the  Grand  Marshals  house  at  Tsarsko6, 
seeing  that  it  had  only  been  built  the  previous  year, 
and  that  the  walls  could  not,  therefore,  be  yet 
thoroughly  dry,  and  she  further  thought  they  might 
just  as  well  have  lodged  the  younger  girl  outside 
the  town.  The  Empress  equally  disapproved  of 
receiving  letters  from  her  grand-daughters  which 
had  been  dictated  to  them  by  their  mother.  **  Full 
of  nothing  but  the  Grand  Duchess's  tittle-tattle," 
she  remarked,  concerning  them,  to  Khrapovitsky, 
her  Secretary  of  State ;  "  she  makes  them  write 
things  which  they  do  not  understand,  and  lately 
they  have  begun  to  complain  of  my  not  answering 
them.  What  have  I  got  to  talk  about  with  little 
children  of  that  age?" 

The  Empress,  however,  did  not  forget  the 
journey  she  proposed  for  her  grandsons.  They 
started  to  join  her  on  the  2nd  June,  and,  after  a 
month's  travel,  met  her  at  Kolomna,  and  they  then 
proceeded    together  to   Moscow.     Their    parents. 


/- 


i62     THE   CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

delighted  at  having  been  allowed  to  have  their  sons 
with  them  for  nearly  six  months,  made  no  demur  to 
this  separation. 

Catherine  H  returned  to  Tsarsko^  on  the  22nd 
July  1787.  Her  son  and  daughter-in-law  were 
awaiting  her  on  the  steps  of  the  castle,  the  high 
dignitaries  of  the  Court  being  also  assembled  for 
her  reception. 

On  her  return  from  travelling  through  the 
Tauris,  Catherine  set  herself  again  to  study  the 
question  concerning  the  succession  to  the  throne 

"  On  the  30th  August  i787,"writes  Khrapovitsky 
in  his  *'  Diary,"  **  in  presence  of  the  Empress,  1 
read  the  introduction  to  the  Maritime  Code.  It 
was  sought  to  prove  therefrom  the  inconvenience  of 
the  present  arrangement  regarding  the  succession, 
due  to  the  partition  of  the  inheritance  left  by 
Vladimir. 

**  On  the  31st  August  the  Empress  condescended 
to  read  me  a  passage  on  the  Right  of  the  Sovereign's 
Will,  in  which,  in  the  course  of  Catherine  Ts 
Manifesto,  it  is  stated  that  the  cause  of  the  un- 
happy fate  which  befell  Alexis  Petrovitsh  was  the 
erroneous  opinion  then  held  that  the  Crown  must 
descend  to  the  eldest  son. 

"On  the  6th  September  I  was  asked  to  produce 
the  ukases  on  the  nomination  of  the  different  heirs 
who  had  been  called  to  the  throne.  The  explana- 
tions to  which  these  gave  rise  have  occasioned  a 
certain  discontent  in  high  places."^ 

In  the  meantime  the  Tsarevitsh,  in  the  peaceful 
retirement  of  his  life  at  Gatshina  or  Pavlovsk,  was 
continually  thinking  over  the  condition  of  affairs  in 

'  Khrapovitsky,  "  Diary,  1 782-1 793,"  published  1874,  pp.  46,  47. 


THE   SWEDISH   CAMPAIGN        163 

Russia,  and  considering  what  measures  would  be 
best  suited  to  secure  its  prosperity.  Paul's  travels 
through  Europe  had  enlarged  the  scope  of  his  mind, 
and  his  relations  with  statesmen,  such  as  the  two 
Counts  Panin,  Counts  Tshernitshev  and  Roumyan- 
zev,  and  with  Prince  Repnin,  had  fitted  him  to 
profit  by  the  knowledge  and  experience  of  the  men 
of  various  types  whom  he  numbered  among  his 
acquaintances. 

The  relations  between  Russia  and  Turkey 
having  become  more  and  more  complicated,  the 
second  war  between  the  two  countries  finally  broke 
out  in  September  1787.  The  Grand  Duke  imme- 
diately asked  for  permission  to  join  the  forces  as  a 
volunteer,  but  the  Empress  brought  forward  many 
excuses  for  refusing  his  demand,  the  chief  being 
that,  as  the  autumn  was  already  so  far  advanced, 
the  campaign  could  not  last  very  long.  The  Grand 
Duke  repeated  his  request,  but  with  no  better 
success.  The  Empress  assured  every  one  that  the 
Grand  Duke  was  really  delighted  to  stay  at  home 
and  only  wished  to  make  a  show  of  patriotic  zeal, 
but  it  is  to  be  doubted  if  this  was  true.  On  the 
contrary,  the  refusal  to  his  request  seems  to  have 
painfully  affected  the  Grand  Duke.^  Yielding,  how- 
ever, at  last  to  the  Grand  Duke's  entreaties  and  to 
the  representations  of  Marshal  Potemkin  himself, 
the  Empress,  in  November  of  this  year,  gave  her 
son  permission  to  join  the  army  on  condition  that 
the  Grand  Duchess,  who  wished  to  accompany  her 
husband,  should  remain  at  St.  Petersburg. 

"  While  I  am  ready  to  do  justice  to  your  feelings," 
wrote  Catherine  to  her  daughter-in-law  on  December 

^  Rausskaya  Starina^  1873,  vol.  viii,  p.  860. 


/- 


i64    THE   CURSE   OF   THE    ROMANOVS 

lo,  1787,  "  I  feel  bound  to  add  that  no  duty,  no  obli- 
gation whatever,  compels  your  husband  to  join  the 
army ;  his  request  to  me  to  be  allowed  to  go  as  a 
volunteer  was  entirely  of  his  own  suggesting.  I, 
on  my  side,  consented  under  no  necessity  or  obliga- 
tion, simply  from  a  willingness  to  indulge  him ;  and 
if,  in  the  end,  he  does  not  go,  or  if  he  no  longer 
shows  any  desire  to  do  so,  he  will  only  be  acting 
like  thousands  of  other  persons  placed  by  birth  in 
the  same  circumstances  as  himself.  I  will  go  farther 
and  add  :  I  do  not  know  one  who  would  go  in  search 
of  a  friend,  when  it  was  a  question  of  facing  an 
enemy,  whether  the  latter  was  Turk  or  Tartar.  I 
have  already  advised  you  not  to  think  of  this 
journey ;  I  do  so  again  to-day.  I  can  only  add, 
that  if  you  find  it  so  difficult  to  part,  the  simplest 
course  to  take  is  for  you  both  to  remain  here ;  in 
this  way  you  will  at  once  satisfy  your  own  wishes 
and  mine,  as  well  as  those  of  the  whole  nation.  I, 
myself,  see  no  reason  for  my  son's  departure,  and  I 
believe  that  there  will  be  more  danger  than  ad- 
vantage in  his  sojourn  with  the  army.  As  whatever 
happens  the  blame  will  fall  on  me,  I  take  the  chance 
of  this  on  condition  of  being  permitted  to  say  that 
it  was  I  who  opposed  your  going."  * 

And  to  Grimm  she  wrote  :  '*  For  the  last  three 
days  the  Grand  Duke  and  Duchess  have  been 
particularly  insistent  in  their  attacks,  urging  me 
with  unheard-of  persistence  to  give  them  permission 
to  join  the  army.  I  have  given  him  the  required 
authorisation,  but  how  can  I  possibly  do  the  like 
for  her?  It  really  is  not  feasible.  The  truth  is, 
the  good  lady  is  one  who  refuses  to  be  guided  by 

^  Rousskaya  Starimh  1873,  vol.  viii,  pp.  861-864. 


.X 


THE   SWEDISH   CAMPAIGN        165 

the  dictates  of  common  sense,  and  this  is  extremely 
annoying.  All  this  fume  and  fuss  has  prevented 
me  giving  attention  to-day  to  the  long  despatch 
which  I  enclose.  However,  in  the  end  it  cannot  fail 
but  she  must  listen  to  reason."  ^ 

When  making  arrangements  for  entering  into 
active  service,  the  Grand  Duke  prepared  certain 
documents,  dated  January  1788,  as  a  precautionary 
measure  in  view  of  what  might  happen  during  his 
absence.  These  comprised  his  will,  three  letters  to 
his  wife,  one  to  his  children,  and  another  in  which 
he  set  forth  his  views  concerning  the  government 
of  the  country.  He  also,  with  the  full  acquiescence 
of  the  Grand  Duchess,  drew  up  an  act  regarding 
the  heredity  of  the  throne.  The  ideas  here  ex- 
pressed were  in  a  great  measure  put  into  execution 
by  him*  later  on,  which  shows  how  necessary  it  is 
to  study  the  history  of  Paul's  life  side  by  side  with 
that  of  the  legislative  enactments  which  were  put 
into  force  during  his  reign. 

In  the  course  of  this  Memorandum  he  wrote: 
"  The  Empire  should  never  be  left  without  an  heir, 
and  the  heir  should  be  nominated  by  law,  so  as  to 
avoid  any  uncertainty  in  the  matter;  the  right  of 
succession  should  continue  without  intermission  in 
the  direct  line,  no  interference  with  natural  rights 
being  at  any  time  allowed,  so  that  one  generation 
may  not  be  permitted  to  be  passed  over  in  favour 
of  another." 

This  act,  which  was  only  promulgated  on  the 
day  of  Paul's  coronation,  April  i6th,  1797,  was 
drawn  up  by  him  and  the  Grand  Duchess  on  the 
15th  of  January  1788. 

^  Sbornik,  vol.  xxiii,  p.  449. 


A 


i66    THE   CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

Meanwhile  the  Grand  Duke  began  to  make 
preparations  for  his  departure.  It  had  been  de- 
cided to  give  him  an  allowance  of  ten  thousand 
roubles  a  month  while  he  was  with  the  army.  He 
asked  permission  to  have  the  three  officers  Vad- 
kovsky,  De  Benckendorff,  and  Markov  with  him, 
as  well  as  Count  Moussin-Poushkin.  His  horses 
and  carriages  had  already  been  despatched,  when 
an  unforeseen  event  happened  to  delay  his  journey. 
The  Grand  Duchess  gave  signs  of  being  preg- 
nant, and  the  Empress  advised  the  Grand  Duke  to 
wait  to  join  the  army  until  after  his  wife's  confine- 
ment.^ The  Tsarevitsh  agreed  to  this,  but  when, 
in  January,  he  ascertained  that  the  Empress  had 
given  orders  for  his  carriages  to  be  brought  back, 
he  interpreted  her  commands  as  a  determined  move 
to  put  a  stop  to  his  departure. 

None  the  less,  however,  he  continued  per- 
sistently to  demand  the  Empress's  leave  to  start, 
begging  her  to  remember  that  the  whole  of  Europe 
had  been  aware  of  his  preparations.  Catherine 
answered:  "As  to  the  question  you  put  to  me— 
what  sort  of  a  figure  shall  I  cut  in  the  eyes  of 
Europe  ? — I  have  no  difficulty  in  answering  it.  You 
will  appear  to  them  like  a  man  who  bends  to  my 
will,  who  fulfils  my  wishes,  and  who  does  what  I 
ask  him  without  a  moment's  hesitation."  There 
was  nothing  left  to  do  but  to  obey.  Instead  of 
starting  to  join  the  army,  Paul  went  to  St.  Peters- 
burg in  January  1 788,  and  the  whole  matter  ended 
with  obedience  on  the  one  side  and  indulgence  on 
the  other. 

The  Grand   Duke  and   his  wife   moved   from 

^  Sbomik,  vol.  xxiii,  p.  429. 


THE   SWEDISH   CAMPAIGN        167 

Pavlovsk  to  Tsarsko^,  and  on  the  21st  of  May  the 
Grand  Duchess  gave  birth  to  a  daughter,  who  was 
named  Catherine.^  The  Empress  was  with  her 
daughter-in-law  at  the  time,  and  it  was  due  to  the 
energetic  measures  which  were  undertaken  under 
her  direction  that  the  Grand  Duchess  was  brought 
safely  through  her  confinement,  during  which  her 
life  was  in  danger. 

There  was  no  longer  any  obstacle  to  the  de- 
parture of  the  Grand  Duke,  and  he  at  last  obtained 
the  permission  for  which  he  had  waited  so  long. 
Meanwhile  Moussin-Poushkin  had  been  nominated 
commander-in-chief  of  the  forces  which  were  re- 
quired for  the  fresh  hostilities  which  had  broken 
out  with  Sweden,  and  the  Grand  Duke  was  de- 
sirous of  joining  the  army  which  was  being  organ- 
ised under  this  general.  But  again  Catherine 
begged  him  to  wait,  this  time  until  military  opera- 
tions had  really  begun.  It  was  but  a  short  delay, 
however.  The  capital  itself  was  being  menaced, 
and  it  was  settled  that  the  Grand  Duke  should 
start  at  once  with  Count  Moussin-Poushkin  for  the 
front.  As  the  Grand  Duke's  regiment  marched 
past  the  Winter  Palace  the  Grand  Duchess  was 
unable  to  restrain  her  tears,  and  even  the  Empress 
had  difficulty  in  hiding  her  emotion. 

On  the  nth  July  1788,  Catherine  signed  the 
ultimatum  declaring  war  against  Sweden,  and  that 
evening  bid  good-bye  to  her  son.  Before  starting 
the  Grand  Duke  made  his  will  and  left  a  letter  for 
his  wife.  The  terms  in  which  these  are  couched 
convey  the  impression  of  love  and  respect,  of 
gratitude  and  gentle  melancholy.     "You  are  well 

^  Sbornik,  vol.  xxiii,  p.  449. 


i68    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

aware  of  the  love  I  bear  you,  and  how  greatly  I 
am  attached  to  you.  Pure  in  soul  before  God  and 
man,  you  have  merited  not  only  the  affection  and 
devotion  I  have  given  you,  but  the  respect  of 
every  one  beside.  You  have  been  the  greatest  joy 
of  my  life  and  you  have  never  ceased  to  guide  me 
with  the  best  of  counsel.  By  this  avowal  the  whole 
world  may  be  certified  of  your  wisdom  and  good 
sense.  Your  affection  for  your  children  is  a  pledge 
of  the  love  you  have  had  for  me.  In  a  word,  I 
cannot  sufficiently  thank  you  for  all  that  you  have 
done  for  me,  and,  above  all,  for  the  patience  with 
which  you  have  borne  all  that  I  have  made  you 
suffer  in  the  midst  of  our  worries  and  anxieties,  for 
which  I  beg  you  on  my  knees  to  pardon  me." 
After  giving  his  wife  certain  advice  and  directions, 
he  ends  his  letter  with  the  following  words :  *'  May 
God  bless  you  to  your  life's  end.  Forgive  me, 
dear  friend ;  do  not  forget  me,  but  do  not  weep  for 
me.  Resign  yourself  to  the  will  of  Him,  by  whom 
all  things  are  ordered  for  the  best.  Accept  my 
gratitude."  ^ 

Paul  was  accompanied  by  his  friend  Count 
Vadkovsky.  Count  Moussin-Poushkin,  however, 
who  was  in  command  of  the  Russian  armies  in  the 
Swedish  campaign,  seems  to  have  offended  Paul's 
susceptibilities.  The  Grand  Duke  returned  home 
— before  the  war  was  over — highly  dissatisfied.^ 

*  Khrapovitsky,  "Diary,  1782-1793,"  published  1874,  p.  96. 

*  The  Eighteenth  Century^  vol.  iii,  p.  412.     Moscow,  1869. 


CHAPTER   VIII 

THE   HAMLET  OF  GATSHINA 

Count  de  S^gur  visits  the  Grand  Duke — Interesting  conversation — Change  in 
Paul's  character — His  tnarotte  milUaire — Rostoptshin's  letters — Paul  is 
working  out  his  programme — The  Grand  Duke's  pecuniary  troubles — 
The  affection  existing  between  Paul  and  his  iwife  is  lessened — Mile. 
N^lidov — The  French  Revolution— Impression  on  Paul — Catherine's 
plan  to  exclude  her  son  from  the  throne. 

On  his  return  from  the  Swedish  campaign,  dis- 
heartened and  disillusioned,  the  Grand  Duke  Paul 
again  retired  to  his  favourite  residence  at  Gatshina, 
where  he  lived  in  greater  self-absorption  and  isola- 
tion even  than  before.  He  was  extremely  pleased 
at  the  nomination,  in  1789,  of  his  friend  Vadkovsky 
to  the  office  of  Chamberlain  in  his  household,  but,  at 
the  same  time,  expressed  his  fear  that  his  friend's 
wife  would  grow  weary  of  the  monotonous  existence 
which  every  one  led  at  his  Court.  It  was  in  March 
1790  that  the  more  intimate  friends  of  the  Grand 
Duke  first  noticed  how  their  master  was  buried 
for  long  intervals  in  silent  thought.  He  also  began 
to  be  haunted  with  ideas  of  death. 

Count  de  Sdgur,  who  had  been  recently  ac- 
credited as  the  French  Minister  in  Russia,  arrived 
at  St.  Petersburg  in  1785  and  met  with  a  friendly 
reception  from  the  Grand  Duke  and  his  wife.  He 
mentions  the  admirable  qualities  displayed  by  both 
and  speaks  of  the  general  respect  which  they  inspired. 

Except  on  grand  occasions  they  and  their  Court 

169 


I70    THE  CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

circle,  which  was  by  no  means  a  small  one,  lived 
together  like  a  united  family,  especially  when  in 
residence  outside  the  capital.  Nothing  could  exceed 
the  courtesy,  simplicity  and  ease  with  which  they 
dispensed  their  hospitality.  But  Count  de  S6gur 
was  quick  to  perceive  in  the  Grand  Duke's  manner 
of  behaviour  and  in  the  remarks  he  made  concerning 
his  own  position  that  he  was  suspicious  and  irritable ; 
it  was  only  natural  that  he  should  be  so,  seeing  that 
he  was  deprived  of  a  share  not  only  in  the  affairs  of 
government,  but  even  in  the  education  of  his  chil- 
dren ;  while  his  suspiciousness  was  encouraged  by 
living  apart  from  the  Empress's  Court  in  his  resi- 
dences at  Gatshina  and  at  Pavlovsk.  On  his  second 
visit  to  St.  Petersburg  in  1789  the  Count  again 
visited  Paul,  and  has  left  a  minute  description  of  the 
state  of  the  Prince's  mind. 

"  With  much  wit  and  information,"  wrote  Count 
S6gur  in  his  ^'Memoirs,"  "the  Grand  Duke  is  pos- 
sessed of  the  most  restless  and  suspicious  temper, 
the  most  changeable  character ;  he  was  often  affable 
to  the  extreme  of  familiarity;  oftener  harsh,  des- 
potic, and  haughty ;  never,  perhaps,  did  there  exist 
a  man  more  uncertain,  timid,  or  capricious,  less 
calculated  for  imparting  happiness  to  others  or  to 
himself."^  Paul  in  his  conversation  with  Coimt 
S6gur  complained  of  his  mother  and  Prince 
Potemkin,  and  incessantly  inveighed  against  the 
Ministers  and  all  those  who  were  honoured  with  the 
confidence  of  the  Empress.  '*  Can  you  explain,  in 
short,"  asked  Paul  of  S6gur,  "  why,  in  the  European 
monarchies,  sovereigns  quietly  reign  and  succeed 
each  other,  whilst  the  throne  of  Russia  is  so  often 

^  Cf.  AfAnoires,  Comte  L.  Ph.  S^gur,  Paris,  1827,  vol.  Hi,  p.  532. 


THE   HAMLET   OF   GATSHINA     171 

stained  with  blood  ? "  S^gur  replied  that  whilst 
everywhere  the  peace  of  nations  was  secured  by  the 
inheritance  of  the  throne  in  the  male  line,  in  Russia, 
as  in  the  ancient  Asiatic,  Greek,  Roman  and  bar- 
barian monarchies,  there  was  nothing  fixed  on  the 
subject ;  as  the  sovereign  has  a  right  to  select  the 
successor  he  pleases,  this  prerogative  becomes  a  per- 
petual source  of  ambitious  hopes,  of  intrigues  and 
conspiracies.^  Acting  on  the  advice  received  from 
S6gur,  Paul,  immediately  after  ascending  the  throne, 
established  as  a  fundamental  law  the  hereditary 
succession  to  the  throne  in  the  male  line  and  in  the 
order  of  primogeniture. 

Altogether  a  noticeable  deterioration  took  place 
in  Paul's  character  during  the  last  years  of  Catherine's 
reign.  Suspicion  and  irritability  were  now  his  pre- 
vailing characteristics;  the  least  opposition  to  his 
wishes  threw  him  into  a  passion ;  there  were  fore- 
warnings  of  the  deeds  of  violence  and  folly  which 
marked  the  course  of  his  reign.  After  an  interview 
which  he  had  with  the  Grand  Duke,  the  renowned 
Commander-in-chief,  Souvarov,  spoke  of  him  as 
••an  adorable  Prince  and  an  implacable  despot." 
Rostoptshin,  who  was  one  of  Paul's  favourites,  writ- 
ing to  Voronzov  in  1793,  says:  ''The  Grand  Duke 
has  made  up  his  mind  to  a  system  of  despotism  ;  he 
intends  to  rule  with  a  rod  of  iron,  and  is  already 
putting  his  ideas  into  practice.  One  hears  daily 
of  acts  of  violence  and  of  pettiness  that  a  man 
in  private  life  would  blush  to  be  guilty  of,"  and 
Rostoptshin  further  laments  over  "the  pitiable 
way"  in  which  Paul  conducts  affairs. 

In  another  of  his  letters  in  1793  we  read,  **  It 

^  Cf.ibid.,^.  535. 


172    THE   CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

is  not  without  a  feeling  of  sorrow  and  disgust  that 
one  is  forced  to  look  on  at  the  Grand  Duke's  be- 
haviour ;  it  is  as  if  he  was  trying  all  he  could  to  make 
himself  hated.^  Every  day  he  attends  parade,  and 
is  present  at  all  the  executions.  At  the  least  word 
of  contradiction,  he  is  beside  himself  with  anger." 

Again  in  another  letter  he  writes:  "The 
Grand  Duke  acts  in  a  way  which  is  almost  past 
belief ;  he  is  walking  straight  to  his  own  ruin,  and 
makes  himself  more  detested  every  day."  Endless 
anecdotes  which  are  current  of  his  brutal  outbursts 
of  rage  towards  his  attendants  and  towards  the 
men  in  the  army,  are  sufficient  to  prove  the  truth  of 
this  verdict  upon  him  by  his  favourite.  At  one  of 
the  Court  balls,  given  shortly  before  his  accession,  he 
behaved  in  such  an  unheard-of  way  towards  the 
King  of  Sweden,  who  was  one  of  the  guests,  that 
"  everybody  felt  ready  to  fall  through  the  floor,"  as 
Catherine's  domestic  physician,  Rogerson,  wrote  to 
his  friend.  Count  Voronzov,  in  London.*  It  was 
during  that  period  that  the  future  autocrat  prepared 
his  plans  for  all  the  cruel  and  eccentric  deeds  which 
were  soon  to  astonish  the  world  and  lead  to  his 
assassination.  He  had  drawn  up  his  programme, 
and  was  impatiently  waiting  for  the  moment  when 
he  would  be  able  to  carry  it  out  He  was  burst- 
ing with  impatience,  said  Rostoptshin,  and  thinking 
of  nothing  but  ascending  the  throne.  It  was  while 
living  in  obscurity  at  Gatshina,  ignored  and 
slighted  as  he  was  by  his  mother  and  her  friends, 
that  he  began  to  imagine  everybody  despised 
him,  and  that  there  was  an  inclination,  even  on 
the  part  of  his  friends,  to  disobey  him ;  he  availed 

•  Cf,  Archives  Voronzov,  viii,  pp.  67,  76.  ■  /ftrV/.,  viii,  p.  145. 


THE   HAMLET   OF  GATSHINA     173 

himself  of  the  slightest  pretext  to  mete  out  punish- 
ments without  any  distinction.  He  never  admitted 
his  mistake,  but,  on  the  contrary,  continued  to  be 
angry  with  those  against  whom  he  had  acted  un- 
justly.^ That  Catherine  did  her  very  best  to  make 
her  son  uncomfortable,  and  thus  to  increase  his  ill- 
humour  and  make  him  unpopular,  is  unfortunately  a 
fact  which  can  scarcely  be  denied.  She,  otherwise 
so  generous  and  even  lavish,  refused  the  requests  of 
her  son  and  heir  for  necessary  sums  of  which  he 
and  his  wife  stood  in  need. 

The  keeping  up  of  these  royal  residences,  the 
entertainments  given  by  the  Grand  Duke  and 
Duchess  during  the  first  years  of  their  life  at 
Pavlovsk  and  Gatshina,  and  finally  the  maintenance 
of  the  contingent  of  the  household  troops,  small  in 
number  though  it  might  be,  necessitated  a  large  ex- 
penditure, and,  in  spite  of  the  order  and  economy 
practised  by  both  the  Grand  Duke  and  his  wife, 
their  resources  were  not  sufficient.  "  Kammt  Zeit^ 
kommt  Rath, "  the  Grand  Duke  would  say  at  times 
when  affairs  were  pressing,  but  unfortunately  the 
time  for  which  the  Tsarevitsh  hoped  never  came 
and  the  expenses  grew  greater.  The  Grand  Duke 
and  Duchess  naturally  applied  to  the  Empress  in 
their  pecuniary  difficulties,  but  Catherine  did  not 
see  her  way  to  meet  their  demands.  "You  will 
understand,  I  am  sure,"  she  wrote  to  them,  "that 
it  is  grievous  to  me  to  know  that  you  are  in 
want.  I  can  only  think  that  you  are  being  in- 
cessantly robbed,  for  otherwise  I  cannot  under- 
stand why  you  should  be  in  such  continual  need  of 
money,  when  by  rights  you  ought  to  have  enough 

*  C/C  Archives  Voronzov,  viii,  p.  76. 


/- 


174    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

for  everything.'*  Maria  F^odorovna  then  turned 
to  her  father  and  begged  him  for  a  loan,  and  her 
request  met  to  some  extent  with  success,  but  she 
did  not  obtain  sufficient  to  prevent  the  Grand  Duke 
being  forced  to  borrow  from  private  individuals. 
Vadkovsky  advanced  him  some  money;  Prince 
Kourakin  mortgaged  one  of  his  estates,  so  as  to 
enable  him  to  give  the  Grand  Duke  the  sum  he 
required,  and,  if  report  is  to  be  trusted,  Potemkin 
himself  paid  the  Grand  Duke's  debts. 

But  pecuniary  difficulties  did  not  constitute 
Pauls  only  trouble.  Catherine,  jealous  of  her 
daughter-in-law,  did  not  hesitate — she  was  sufficient 
woman  for  that — to  create  mischief  between  her  son 
and  his  wife. 

The  affection  which  the  Grand  Duke  and 
Duchess  bore  each  other  and  the  harmony  of 
their  domestic  relations,  won  for  them  the  love  of 
the  general  public  at  St.  Petersburg  but  were  the 
cause  of  a  certain  uneasy  jealousy  at  the  Empress's 
Court.  An  intrigue  was  set  on  foot  to  disturb  their 
conjugal  peace,  and  Sacken  was  instructed  to  wean 
the  Grand  Duke  from  his  dependence  on  his  wife's 
advice.  To  accomplish  this  Paul  was  led  to 
believe  that  his  wife  was  completely  under  the 
thumb  of  Mesdames  de  Benckendorff  and  Lafer- 
mi^re,  two  of  their  most  devoted  friends,  and,  as  it 
was  further  pointed  out  to  Paul,  he  indirectly  was 
equally  under  their  influence  and  unable  to  act  on 
his  own  initiative.  Rendered  sensitive  to  such  in- 
sinuations by  the  false  position  he  was  in,  the  Grand 
Duke  angrily  determined  to  show  his  wife  that  he 
was  not  in  any  way  guided  by  her  counsels,  the  re- 
sult of  these  evil  machinations  being  that  the  sacred 


THE    HAMLET   OF   GATSHINA     175 

ties  which  had  hitherto  bound  him  to  his  wife  were 
broken.  Mademoiselle  N6Udov,  one  of  the  Grand 
Duchess's  maids  of  honour,  was  singled  out  by  him 
as  the  recipient  of  his  particular  attentions,  his 
wife  was  subjected  to  indignities,  and  Mesdames 
de  Benckendorff  and  Lafermi^re  retired  from  his 
Court.  All  praise  is  due  to  the  manner  in  which 
Mademoiselle  N61idov  conducted  herself  at  this 
time,  apparently  doing  her  best  to  spare  the  Grand 
Duchess's  feelings.  The  latter,  deprived  of  the 
affection  and  support  of  her  husband,  was  forced  to 
alter  her  behaviour  and  to  be  more  careful  and 
reserved  in  her  intercourse  with  others.  To  her 
credit  be  it  said  that  no  woman  could  have  shown 
more  patience  and  indulgence,  and  the  persistent 
kindness  of  her  attitude  towards  her  husband  so  far 
triumphed  in  the  end  that  she  won  back,  if  not  his 
love,  at  least  his  affectionate  regard,  and  he  never 
ceased  to  treat  her  with  attention. 

The  change  which  had  come  over  Paul's  char- 
acter reached  a  crisis  with  the  marriage  of  his  son, 
Alexander.  He  isolated  himself  more  and  more, 
shunning  the  society  even  of  those  who  still  showed 
him  some  signs  of  affection,  and,  shut  up  in  his  re- 
sidences at  Pavlovsk  and  Gatshina,  he  grew  con- 
tinually more  morose,  suspicious  and  violent.  All 
kinds  of  wild  ideas  took  possession  of  him,  and  the 
least  contradiction  aroused  his  anger.  His  fancy 
detected  a  revolutionary  spirit  and  a  lack  of  respect 
in  everything  and  everybody  around  him.  Cathe- 
rine's designs  may,  to  a  great  extent,  have  been 
responsible  for  this  alteration  of  character,  but  it 
was  due  to  other  causes  besides. 

The  sanguinary  results  of  the  French  revolution. 


176    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

and,  more  especially,  the  terrible  fate  of  Louis  XVI. 
and  Marie  Antoinette,  who,  but  a  few  years  pre- 
viously, had  given  such  a  joyous  reception  to  him 
and  his  wife  at  Paris,  produced  an  ineradicable  im- 
pression on  the  Grand  Duke's  mind.  Numbers  of 
French  refugees  had  sought  shelter  in  Russia,  with 
loud  voice  lamenting  over  the  revolution  and  preach- 
ing the  reactionary  doctrine  of  absolutism.  Chief 
among  these  was  the  Count  Esterhazy,  who  arrived 
in  St  Petersburg  in  September  1791.  A  man  of 
shrewd  intelligence,  who  knew  how  to  secure  a  foot- 
ing in  the  Russian  capital,  he  unhesitatingly  advo- 
cated the  necessity  of  despotism  and  of  a  rule  of 
iron — views  which  the  Tsarevitsh  readily  adopted, 
and  according  to  which  he  at  once  began  to  regulate 
his  own  conduct. 

The  Grand  Duke  interpreted  all  he  came  across 
as  a  consequence  of  the  revolution ;  he  believed 
everybody  to  be  a  Jacobin,  and  even  had  four 
officers  of  his  battalion  arrested  for  wearing  the  pig- 
tails of  their  wigs  too  short — ^to  him  this  seemed  a 
sure  sign  of  a  revolutionary  spirit. 

Those  who  were  now  enjoying  the  Empress 
Catherine's  favour  allowed  themselves  to  treat  the 
heir  to  the  throne  with  less  respect  than  was  due 
to  him.  The  accounts  of  contemporaries  are  full  of 
anecdotes  of  the  continual  friction  going  on  between 
the  Grand  Duke  and  the  members  of  Catherines 
Court,  and  of  the  repeated  complaints  made  by  the 
Tsarevitsh  in  reference  to  this  matter. 

Catherine  herself  grew  more  and  more  dis- 
pleased with  Paul.  She  wrote  as  follows  to  Grimm 
on  the  20th  April  1795  :  "  What  are  they  saying  in 
Germany  about  Paul  Petrovitsh?     Here,  there  is 


THE   HAMLET   OF   GATSHINA     177 

still  a  considerable  amount  of  evil  speaking  con- 
cerning him,  and  the  fact  is  that  he  makes  a  great 
many  enemies." 

The  Grand  Duke's  position  was  the  more  diffi- 
cult that  he  had  no  one  near  him  to  give  him  good 
advice.  His  former  mentor  and  friend,  Count 
Panin,  as  also  the  latter's  brother.  Count  Peter 
Ivanovitsh,  had  both  long  been  dead.  Prince 
Repnin  was  at  Vilna,  where  he  was  acting  as 
Governor-General,  Count  Tshernitshev  was  ill  and 
undergoing  treatment  abroad,  and  Field- Marshal 
Count  Roumyanzev  was  spending  his  last  years  on 
his  estates  in  Little  Russia.  The  Grand  Duke 
occasionally  wrote  to  Count  Roumyanzev,  but  the 
precautions  necessitated  by  this  correspondence 
would  hardly  be  believed! 

The  life  which  the  Grand  Duke  led  was  the 
necessary  result  of  his  surrounding  circumstances. 
Prince  Galytzin  tells  us  that  when  he  and  other 
knights  of  the  Court  were  summoned  to  attend 
upon  their  Imperial  Highnesses  at  Pavlovsk, 
they  had  to  be  very  careful,  although  received 
with  every  show  of  kindness.  He  speaks  highly 
of  the  Grand  Duchess,  of  her  virtue  and  charity, 
and,  above  all,  of  her  exemplary  patience.  She 
was  never  idle,  each  hour  of  the  day  being  allotted 
to  an  appointed  task.  Her  favourite  amusement 
was  the  engraving  of  precious  stones,  in  which 
art  she  finally  attained  a  high  perfection.  The 
Grand  Duke  was  equally  exact  in  the  performance 
of  his  duties  and  exceptionally  punctual.  If  he 
gave  the  order  to  be  ready  to  accompany  him  on 
horseback  at  four  o'clock  in  the  morning,  he  would, 
without  fail,  appear  at  the  very  moment  the  clock 

M 


178    THE   CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

struck  the  hour.  The  Duke's  two  residences  were 
ornamented  and  furnished  with  the  most  perfect 
taste,  and  the  gardens  were  superb.  Court  life 
there  was,  in  many  ways,  very  agreeable.  The 
Grand.  Duchess  exerted  herself  to  the  utmost  to 
make  it  as  cheerful  as  possible.  She  herself  super- 
intended the  choice  of  pieces  for  the  stage  and 
the  preparations  for  their  performance;  these  she 
was  careful  not  to  allow  to  be  too  long,  choosing 
by  preference  short  operettas,  the  tableaux  vivants 
which  the  Duke  did  not  care  for  being  omitted. 
The  Grand  Duchess  remained  as  devoted  as 
ever  to  her  husband.  She  never  let  him  out 
of  her  sight.  Even  on  the  bitterest  days  of  mid- 
winter she  would  accompany  him  on  his  long  rides 
and  assisted  with  her  presence  at  his  military 
manoeuvres. 

On  January  i8,  1795,  she  gave  birth  to  another 
daughter,  whom  she  named  Anna,  and  on  the  6th 
July  1796  to  a  son,  who  was  called  Nicholas. 
She  was  not,  however,  spared  domestic  troubles, 
for  on  January  26th,  1795,  she  lost  her  little 
daughter  Olga  at  three  years  of  age.  Her  children 
were  often  away  from  her,  the  Empress  liking  to 
have  them  constandy  near  her,  for  Catherine  soujg^ht 
to  amuse  herself  and  rejuvenate  her  spirits  by 
joining  in  the  youthful  games  of  her  grandchildren, 
her  natural  gaiety  being  in  nowise  diminished  by 
her  increasing  age. 

"Think  how  old  I  am,"  wrote  Catherine  to 
Grimm,  '*and  yet  I  am  as  much  amused  as  a 
child  of  five  at  watching  the  children  playing  at 
blind-man's  buff  and  other  games.  The  young 
ones,   my   grandsons  and  granddaughters,   assure 


CATHERINE  It   IN  OLD 


THE    HAMLET  OF   GATSHINA     179 

me  that  when  I  am  present  they  doubly  enjoy 
their  games,  and  are  able  to  enter  into  them 
with  greater  spirit  and  with  less  restraint;  I  am 
looked  upon  consequently  as  quite  a  merry  com- 
panion." 

But  Paul  Petrovitsh  and  Maria  F6odorovna  took 
no  part  in  these  amusements  ;  they  were  the  "  heavy 
luggage,"  as  the  Empress  nicknamed  them.  "  I  am 
just  going  to  dress,"  she  wrote  to  Grimm,  on  the 
17th  of  April  1795,  "for  I  have  to  be  present  this 
evening  at  an  amateur  concert.  The  Grand  Duke 
Alexander  and  Count  Platon  Zoubov  are  to  play 
the  violin,  the  Grand  Duchesses  H^l^ne,  Elizabeth 
and  Alexandrina,  will  sing,  and  Marie,  who  is  only 
nine  years  old,  but  who  has  completed  her  study 
of  counterpoint  with  Professor  Sarti,  so  passion- 
ately fond  of  music  is  she,  is  to  accompany  them 
on  the  harpsichord.  Sarti  considers  her  quite  a 
phenomenon  in  the  way  of  music.  She  is  a  most 
intelligent  child  and  is  able  to  learn  anything ;  she 
will,  I  am  sure,  be  a  most  accomplished  girl.  She 
is  very  fond  of  reading ;  General  Lieven  tells  me 
that  she  spends  hours  over  her  books,  which  does 
not,  however,  prevent  her  being  full  of  good  spirits 
and  gaiety,  nor  from  dancing  like  an  angel.  Take 
them  altogether,  they  are,  on  the  whole,  a  pretty 
family.  The  'heavy  luggage'  went  back  three 
days  ago  to  Gatshina;  when  the  cats  are  away 
the  mice  dance  and  jump  over  the  tables,  they 
are  so  pleased  and  happy." 

It  seemed  that  Catherine  had  decided  to  get 
rid  of  the  "  heavy  luggage."  There  were  ominous 
rumours  abroad  in  the  capital  that  her  grandson 
Alexander  would,  on  January  12,  1797,  be  declared 


i8o    THE   CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

presumptive  heir  to  the  throne,  and  that  Paul  him- 
self would  be  shut  up  in  the  castle  at  Lode.  But 
fate  had  decided  otherwise.  The  hour  was  near 
when  the  wretched  Prince  of  Gatshina  was  to  be- 
come Autocrat  of  all  the  Russias. 


CHAPTER   IX 

L'IMPfeRATRICE  EST  MORTE,  VIVE  UEMPfeREUR 

The  death  of  Catherine — Paul's  feeling  of  joy — Hamlet  among  the  grave- 
diggers — ^The  funeral  of  Peter  III — The  son  reconciles  his  parents- 
Follies  and  wise  laws — La  guerre  au  ckapeau  rond — The  men  of  Gatshina. 

Catherine  is  dying !  Catherine  is  dead !  Catherine, 
the  great  Northern  ruler,  is  no  more ! 

A  great  event  had  taken  place  in  European 
history,  the  political  importance  of  which  could 
only  be  foreshadowed.  And  yet  Catherine's 
death,  which  came  as  a  sudden  blow  to  the  in- 
mates of  the  Winter  Palace,  took  place  almost 
imperceptibly.  The  shriek  of  agony  uttered  by 
the  aged  Empress  was  lost  in  the  midst  of  the 
battle-cries  with  which  Europe  was  re-echoing  at 
that  very  moment,  for  the  continent  of  the  old 
world  was  trembling  in  the  grip  of  the  Corsican 
giant,  who  had  put  his  foot  on  the  neck  of  Europe. 
Napoleon — who  was  soon  to  dictate  his  laws  to 
European  monarchs,  who  was  soon  to  crush  old 
kingdoms  and  create  new  ones — was  in  the  as- 
cendant, and  the  European  world  was  too  busy 
watching  him  to  devote  much  time  to  the  changes 
in  the  Winter  Palace  on  the  banks  of  the  Neva. 
But  the  death-cry  of  Catherine  was  the  announce- 
ment of  the  accession  of  her  son,  Paul,  and  of  a 
new  reign  in  Russia.  The  throne  of  Peter  the 
Great,  occupied  by  the  German  Princess  for  thirty- 
four  years,  was  now  vacant   again.     Paul's   hour 

i8i 


i82     THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

had  come  at  last  Had  Catherine  been  able  to 
speak  a  few  words  before  she  breathed  her  last, 
it  is  more  than  probable  that  Paul  would  never 
have  been  Tsar.  But  death  came  suddenly  upon 
the  aged  Empress.  She  had  supped  gaily  the  night 
before  and  had  risen  at  her  accustomed  hour  on 
the  following  morning.  She  talked  to  her  favourite, 
Platon  Zoubov,  transacted  business  for  a  short 
while  with  her  secretaries,  and  then  retired  for  a 
few  minutes  into  her  bedroom.  Here  she  was 
stricken  with  apoplexy  and  was  found  prostrate 
by  her  valet.  Courtiers  and  physicians  were  sum- 
moned, but  all  in  vain.  Platon  Zoubov,  her  last 
favourite,  whom  Catherine  had  treated  more  as  a 
child  than  as  a  lover,  bent  over  his  motherly  mis- 
tress, but  she  could  only  moan,  deprived  of  speech 
and  consciousness.  Confusion  reigned  in  the  Palace, 
and  a  febrile  tension  took  hold  of  the  courtiers  in 
the  expectancy  of  great  changes.  The  fact  of  the 
Empress's  illness  was  kept  secret  for  some  time,  and 
even  when  it  did  at  last  transpire  and  the  news 
spread  in  the  Palace,  it  was  mentioned  with  caution. 
Did  Paul  know  that  his  hour  had  come?  The 
hour  he  had  been  so  impatiently  awaiting  ?  He  was 
inspecting  a  mill  at  Gatshina  when  a  soldier  rushed 
up  to  inform  him  that  a  courier  had  arrived  from  St 
Petersburg.  Platon  Zoubov,  trembling  for  his  future 
and  anxious  to  gain  the  good  graces  of  the  new 
autocrat,  had  despatched  his  brother  to  inform  Paul 
of  what  had  occurred.  But  Paul,  who  had  secret 
misgivings  that  his  mother  wished  to  put  him  aside, 
imagined  that  he  was  going  to  be  arrested.  "  We 
are  lost,"  he  exclaimed  to  his  wife.  *     Great  was  his 

^  Rausskaya  Starinoy  1882,  torn,  xxxvi,  p.  469. 


L'lMP^RATRICE   EST   MORTE      183 

relief,  therefore,  when  he  heard  the  truth,  and  the 
sudden  transition  from  a  feeling  of  fear  to  that  of 
intense  satisfaction  so  unnerved  him  that  he  was 
unable  to  hide  his  feelings.  **  He  was  beside  him- 
self, but  whether  with  grief  or  joy  heaven  only 
knows,"  naively  remarked  his  valet,  Koutayssov. 

Paul,  accompanied  by  his  wife,  at  once  proceeded 
to  St  Petersburg.  On  his  way  he  met  his  friend, 
Rostoptshin.  "Ah,  Sir,  what  a  moment  for  you," 
exclaimed  the  latter.  "  Wait,  my  dear,  wait,"  replied 
Paul ;  "  I  have  lived  forty-two  years,  and  God  has 
lent  me  His  support ;  let  us  hope  that  He  will  give 
me  strength  and  power  for  the  present  state  for 
which  He  has  destined  me.  Let  us  have  faith  in 
His  goodness."  ^ 

On  his  way  from  Gatshina  to  the  capital  Paul 
was  met  by  about  twenty  more  couriers,  all  de- 
spatched to  inform  the  heir  of  the  great  event. 
Everybody  was  eager  to  show  his  attachment  for 
the  new  ruler.  Among  those  who  despatched 
couriers  were  not  only  the  Grand  Duke  Alexander 
and  Count  Soltykov,  but  also  a  cook  at  the  Court 
and  a  fish  merchant. 

Arrived  in  St.  Petersburg,  Paul,  accompanied  by 
his  family,  visited  the  chamber  where  his  mother  lay 
in  the  throes  of  death.  She  gave  no  sign  of  recog- 
nition. What  was  passing  in  Paul's  mind  ?  Whilst 
his  children  and  his  wife  burst  into  tears,  he  watched, 
sullen  and  with  dry  eye,  the  prostrate  form  of  his 
dying  mother.  His  grief  was  not — could  not  have 
been — overwhelming.  Hope  and  fear  strove  to- 
gether in  his  heart,  and  although  the  Empress  was 

^  Rostoptshin  in  Archives  of  Voronzov,  torn,  viii,  and  Sdg^r, 
Comte  de,  Vie  de  Rostopchine^  1873,  P*  37* 


i84    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

still  breathing  he  gave  directions  and  prepared  every- 
thing for  his  accession.  He  called  Besborodko, 
Catherine's  chief  secretary,  and  ordered  him  to  un- 
lock secret  drawers  as  he  wished  to  examine  his 
mother's  papers.  Besborodko  pointed  to  a  packet 
tied  with  a  black  ribbon,  and  bearing  the  instruction 
that  it  should  be  opened  in  the  Council  after  her 
death.  Paul  looked  at  Besborodko,  who  silently 
pointed  to  the  fire.  It  is  supposed  that  this  secret 
document  contained  the  nomination  of  Alexander 
as  heir  to  the  throne.  Paul  destroyed  the  packet, 
and  afterwards  expressed  his  great  gratitude  to 
Besborodko.^  In  the  meantime  the  officers  of 
Paul's  regiments  at  Gatshina,  dressed  in  Prussian 
uniform,  had  arrived  and  filled  the  Palace.  Paul 
felt  more  at  ease  among  his  faithful  friends  and 
servants  than  among  the  courtiers  of  his  mother. 
After  an  agony  which  lasted  thirty-seven  hours, 
Catherine  uttered  one  long  shriek,  and  died — ^to 
the  utter  grief  of  her.  friends  and  favourites  and 
to  the  intense  relief  of  her  son.  Paul  was  now 
autocrat  of  all  the  Russias.  Maria  Fdodorovna 
was  the  first  to  kneel  before  the  new  sovereign 
and  to  take  the  oath  of  allegiance.  The  other 
members  of  the  family  and  the  courtiers  followed 
her  example. 

"  You  are  now  our  Emperor,"  said  Maria  Fdodo- 
rovna,  ''and  our  happiness  lies  in  your  hands;  do 
not  deprive  us  of  your  kindness,  which  we  shall 
endeavour  to  deserve."  Paul  raised  his  wife  and 
kissed  her  tenderly,  assuring  her  and  his  children  of 
his  paternal  and  Imperial  benevolence  and  love. 
The  courtiers  present,  moved  to  tears,  followed  the 

^  Rousskaya  Starina^  1882,  torn,  xxxvii,  pp.  ^y  1-4,72, 


L'lMP^RATRICES  EST   MORTE      185 

example  of  the  Imperial  family  and  swore  the  oath 
of  allegiance.     So  did  the  officers  and  soldiers  that 
had  arrived  from  Gatshina,  and  so  also  did  the  guards 
and  the  heads  of  the  various  colleges  and  depart- 
ments.   The  next  day  Paul  was  proclaimed  Emperor, 
and  his  eldest  son,  Alexander,  Tsarevitsh  or  heir 
apparent     "The  first  steps,"  says  Masson,  "which 
Paul  took  seemed  to  contradict  the  reports  of  his  stern 
and  capricious  disposition.     He  had  long  suffered 
from  the  abuses  and  disorders  of  the  Court ;  bred  in 
the  school  of  misfortune — the  crucible  in  which  great 
minds  are  refined  and  little  ones  evaporate — a  dis- 
tant spectator  of  affairs,  scrutinising  the  plans  and 
conduct  of  his  mother,  he  had  had  thirty  years  leisure 
to  regulate  his  own.     Accordingly,  it  appeared  that 
he  had  in  his   pocket  a  multitude  of  regulations 
ready  drawn  up,  which  he  had  nothing  to  do  but 
to  unfold  and  put  in  execution  with   astonishing 
rapidity."*     Not  only  did  the  Tsar  allow  the  sun 
of  his  Imperial  favour  to  shine  upon   his  family, 
his  wife  and  his  children,  to   whom   he  assigned 
considerable  revenues,  but  he  also  treated  generously 
and  loaded  with  favours  the  Ministers  and  friends 
of  his  mother.     Platon  Zoubov,  who  had  mourned 
his  misfortune  and  was  ready  to  retire  into  obscurity, 
to  which  the  death  of  his  Imperial  mistress  seemed 
to  have  doomed  him,  was  confirmed  in  his  offices 
by  the  new  sovereign.     Handing  him  the  baton  of 
command  borne  by  the  general  aide-de  camp,  Paul 
said :  "  I  hope  you  will  serve  me  as  faithfully  as  you 
have  served  my  mother."     It  seemed  as  if  Paul  was 
determined  to  accomplish  in  a  few  days  that  for  which 
other  monarchs  require  a  lifetime.     Everybody  was 

^  Masson,  Mimoires  Secrets,  Paris,  1859,  p.  113. 


i86    THE   CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

surprised.  It  literally  hailed  ukases  and  regulations. 
There  was  scarcely  time  to  think  over  one  before 
another  appeared.  •'  Every  hour,  every  moment 
announced  some  wise  change,  some  punishment,  or 
some  merited  favour."  Many  who  had  been  expect- 
ing to  lose  their  employs  and  positions  saw  them- 
selves suddenly  promoted ;  many  who  had  been 
expecting  to  be  sent  to  Siberia  in  chains  were  the 
recipients  of  orders  and  decorations.  Paul  seemed 
to  be  acting  of  his  own  accord,  not  influenced  by 
any  of  his  advisers.  He  was  an  autocrat,  but  a 
benevolent  autocrat.  The  wise  and  beneficent  regu- 
lations of  his  mother  were  confirmed,  whilst  ukases 
which  caused  discontent  among  the  people  were 
annulled.  Politicians  in  Russia  and  abroad  who 
had  been  full  of  misgivings  had  to  admit  their  mis- 
take. They  '^  began  to  imagine  that  his  character 
had  been  mistaken,  and  that  his  long  and  melan- 
choly pupilage  had  not  entirely  depraved  it.  All 
the  world  saw  itself  happily  deceived  in  its  expec- 
tations, and  the  conduct  of  the  Grand  Duke  was 
forgotten  in  that  of  the  Emperor."^ 

Stedingk,  the  Swedish  Envoy  in  St.  Petersburg, 
was  full  of  praise,  and  informed  his  King  that  the 
"  Emperor  is  employing  every  moment  of  his  reign 
for  some  act  of  justice,  order  and  benevolence." 
*'  The  events  of  the  new  reign,"  wrote  the  same 
Ambassador,  ''  are  all  calculated  to  do  honour  to 
the  Emperor."*  The  communications  sent  to 
the  Russian  ambassadors  abroad,  such  as  Count 
Kotshoubey  in  Constantinople  and  Count  Voron- 
zov  in  London,  were  such  as  to  make  them  augur 

^  Masson, /.^.,  p.  114. 

*  Stockholm  Archives,  1797,  January  2. 


BOJKIEK)  MHAOCTIIO 

Mbl  UABEATi  nEPBHfl 

liMnepamopl)    a  CaMojepxteii'b 

BCEpOCClHCKlti, 

\_/StOIBAIICMl>     B&ltib     BtpHblMl     HAUIHM'b     noU>FniVHll  ,     IHTO     [TO    *0a£ 

BecBUUiHiira  HAlllA  AioflcjutAujaii  toQyfpbiun  ,  pojHmcAbHiiua ,  Hmiii- 
pampHiia  h  CiHojcpSHua  BcepocclHCKin  EKATEpiIHA  STOpAfl  no  mp>i«- 

KpallHc»y    np»CKopBiH>    HAlUE.vy     u    acero    MMnepATOpCKArO     Xanx 

nU  HUHfi  Ki  HAUJL  npapojHntCJikCKlA  iiac^tjcniBoiHbga  MMnF.pATOp. 
CKiri  BcepacciHCKfii  fTpecmoAb ,  H  noi»«BiJi  ttpHUMb  IIAlUKMl}  aot. 
/iHHwHb  yvniumk  HAMb  all  DtpiiocmH  flpMcary ,  Gori  BceMoryiuiro 
np-uaiBiCMb ,  It  flOHasemb  HAM'b  SAaroAanrlio  Ciocio  CBnmDw  ,  epenn 
t)aib  Hero  HI  HACb  BoiAoseHnoe  noibimH  Ma  no^tiy  HMIIEpiH,  h  ko 
6>irojeHcmBiio  BtpHOBsiiMHUib  HAUlHXb.  4iHb  gb  CaiiKinncmepayprft 
Hoaepii  6  mil   1796  ro,(9. 


noiAHKHM*    neinncaHli 
pATOpCKAfO      BEAHIE- 

tleiaraji*    A  Cat 
mepOypr*      np-     C 
HoflSpji  6  MS    179S 

n,lBE4S. 

)HHll*B.Tt  0  BUCIUKCTBIM  HI  nPtTTO-Tli  IlKflH'ATDl'A  TUEJA  nlMAm. 
MANIFESTO  OF  PAUL  I  ON  HIS  ACCESSION  TO  THE  THRONE, 


L'IMPl&RATRICE   EST   MORTE      187 

good  things  for  the  future  from  this  promising 
beginning.^ 

Catherine  had  decided  to  support  the  armed 
powers  attacking  France,  and  a  levy  of  recruits 
had  been  ordered.  Paul  broke  off  Catherine's  treaty 
against  France,  annulled  the  command  to  levy  re- 
cruits, sent  a  courier  to  finish  the  war  in  Persia  and 
announced  to  the  diplomatic  corps  in  St.  Petersburg 
that  he  "  had  not  inherited  his  mother's  quarrels." 
Paul  also,  very  soon  after  his  accession,  visited  the 
famous  Polish  hero,  Kosciuszko,  who  was  being 
detained  as  a  State  prisoner  in  St  Petersburg. 
Paul  in  a  fit  of  generosity  liberated  not  only 
Kosciuszko  but  all  the  other  imprisoned  Poles.  He 
handed  over  a  sum  of  money  to  the  gallant  Polish 
patriot  and  enabled  him  to  go  to  America.^  All 
these  measures  produced  a  very  favourable  impres- 
sion, and  great  hopes  were  centred  in  the  new  and 
coming  reign.  The  sun  of  a  reign  of  justice  seemed 
to  have  risen  on  the  horizon  of  Russia.  But  in 
spite  of  his  just  and  generous  measures,  which  suc- 
ceeded each  other  with  astonishing  rapidity,  in  spite 
of  the  favours  showered  upon  his  friends  and  his 
magnanimity  shown  to  those  who  expected  to  feel 
his  wrath,  it  was  easy  to  perceive  his  bitter  feeling 
towards  everything  that  concerned  the  late  Empress, 
his  mother. 

His  new  regulations  and  measures  were  inter- 
rupted by  the  funeral  of  his  mother.  To  the  aston- 
ishment of  the  capital,  to  the  dismay  of  the  Court, 
Paul  issued  an  ukase  ordering  the  removal  of  the 
ashes  of  Peter  III.     Husband  and  wife  were  to  be 

^  Archives  of  Prince  Voronzov,  xviii,  126  ;  xx,  351 ;  xxii,  490. 
'  Rousskaya  Starina^  1882,  vol.  xxxvi,  pp.  482-483. 


i88     THE   CURSE   OF  THE    ROMANOVS 

buried  together  and  the  funeral  honours  paid  to 
them  alike.  It  was  an  ingenious  stroke,  almost 
Machiavellian  in  its  conception,  on  the  part  of  Paul. 
That  this  measure  was  really  dictated  by  his  love 
and  affection  for  his  father  is  out  of  the  question. 
Paul  in  his  heart  of  hearts  never  considered  himself 
the  son  of  Peter  HI,  nor  did  he  have  occasion,  as 
we  have  pointed  out  above,  to  cherish  the  memory 
of  the  victim  of  Ropsha.  Hate  against  his  mother 
on  the  one  hand,  and  the  desire  thus  to  impress  the 
world  with  the  fact  that  he  was  a  real  Romanov  on 
the  other,  were  his  sole  motives.  Some  historians 
have  seen  in  this  act  of  Paul  a  touch  of  Hamlet 
wandering  among  the  grave-diggers.  We  doubt 
whether  Paul's  action  was  dictated  by  filial  love  and 
duty  for  him  whom  he  afterwards  called  a  drunkard 
and  an  imbecile,  but  the  idea  was  original.  Did 
ever  Catherine  imagine  that,  after  more  than  three 
decades,  her  assassinated  husband  would  return  to 
lie  by  her  side  in  the  last  sleep  ?  The  son  had  re- 
conciled the  parents  in  their  death.^ 

Thirty-five  years  before,  the  remains  of  Peter  III 
had  been  deposited  in  the  convent  of  Alexander 
Nevsky,  at  the  extremity  of  St.  Petersburg.  An 
old  monk  conducted  Paul  to  the  exact  spot  where 
Peter  had  been  buried.  The  grave  and  the  coffin 
were  opened,  and  Paul  was  in  the  presence  of 
a  handful  of  ashes,  a  few  buttons,  a  piece  of  stuff 
and  the  sole  of  a  boot.  It  was  all  that  remained 
of  the  unhappy  grandson  of  Peter  the  Great  The 
new  Tsar  kissed  the  glove  of  his  alleged  father 
and  shed  tears  in  abundance.  He  then  ordered 
the  coffin  to  be  placed  in  the  church,  and  thence  it 

1  Rousskaya  Starina^  1882,  vol.  xxxvi,  p.  482. 


UIMPl^RATRICE   EST   MORTE      189 

was  transferred  to  the  Winter  Palace  and  placed 
by  the  side  of  that  which  contained  the  remains 
of  the  Empress.  As  Peter  had  never  been  crowned, 
the  coffin  containing  the  remains  was  crowned  with 
due  solemnity.  It  seemed  as  if,  with  the  return 
of  the  remains  of  Peter  III,  an  atmosphere  of 
ancient  long-forgotten  times  had  been  wafted  into 
the  Winter  Palace  and  into  St.  Petersburg.  The 
dead  seemed  to  awaken  and  the  living  were  com- 
pelled to  make  room  for  them.  The  edifice,  con- 
structed during  the  long  reign  of  Catherine,  seemed 
suddenly  to  be  crumbling  down.  All  those  who 
had  faithfully  served  the  assassinated  Emperor,  and 
who  were  now  still  alive  but  unknown  and  in 
disgrace,  were  found  out  and  invited  to  appear  at 
Court  Among  them  were  Goudovitsh  and  Baron 
Ungem  Sternberg,  a  venerable  old  man.  Paul  sent 
for  him,  embraced  him,  and  made  him  generaWn- 
chief.  All  other  officers  who  had  been  attached 
to  Peter  III  were  loaded  with  honours.  The 
name  of  Catherine's  murdered  husband  was  now 
on  everybody's  lips,  the  ancient  uniforms  worn  in 
his  time  suddenly  reappeared,  and  his  portrait  was 
everywhere  to  be  seen.  Paul's  revenge,  too,  which 
he  took  on  the  murderers  of  his  father  was  subtly 
cruel  in  its  apparent  sublimity.  Passick,  Prince 
Bariatinsky  and  Alexis  Orlov,  who  had  been  the 
prominent  actors  in  the  drama  of  Ropsha,  were 
ordered  to  follow  the  remains  of  their  victim. 
Passick  disappeared,  but  Orlov  and  Bariatinsky 
were  compelled  to  undergo  the  ordeal.  When 
Orlov,  the  hero  of  Tsheshme,  aged  and  broken, 
ventured  to  say  that  he  wished  to  be  excused,  Paul, 
handing  him  the  heavy  golden  Imperial  crown,  said 


J 


I90    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

harshly :  **  Take  it  and  inarch  on."  During  the 
funeral  Paul  did  everything  to  humiliate  his  mother's 
ashes.  Madame  Vig6e  Lebrun,  who  saw  the 
funeral  procession  from  her  window,  "  as  one  sees 
a  play  from  a  box  in  the  theatre,"  relates  in  her 
Memoirs,  that  whilst  the  horseman  of  the  guard, 
riding  before  the  Emperors  coffin,  was  clad  in 
golden  armour,  the  one  in  front  of  that  of  Catherine 
wore  steel  armour.^ 

Immediately  after  the  funeral  Orlov  received 
the  order  to  travel  abroad,  whilst  Bariatinsky  was 
exiled.  There  was  still  another  person  alive  who 
had  played  a  prominent  part  in  the  events  of  1762. 
It  was  the  famous  Princess  Dashkov.  Catherine 
had  said  to  her  in  1793  :  'Mf  it  is  a  crime  to  occupy 
the  place  which  I  am  at  present  occupying,  then  you 
share  this  crime  with  me."  The  Princess  Dashkov 
was  ordered  by  Paul — in  remembrance  of  the  events 
of  1 762 — ^to  quit  Moscow  and  to  take  up  her  residence 
on  one  of  her  estates  in  the  province  of  Novgorod. 

But  soon  the  hopes  which  had  crept  into  the 
hearts  of  many  were  shattered.  The  benevolent 
measures  of  the  new  Tsar  were  soon  followed  by 
restrictions  and  punishments.  As  Paul  seemed  to 
fear  the  guards  who  had  dethroned  his  father,  he 
decided  to  make  them  less  dangerous.  He  con- 
sequently incorporated  them  with  his  own  bat- 
talions that  had  arrived  from  Gatshina,  putting  at 
the  head  of  each  company,  as  officers,  the  simple 
lieutenants  from  his  Gatshina  regiments. 

It  seems  that  Paul,  from  the  very  moment  of  his 
accession,  dreaded  a  Palace  revolution — ^the  constant 
curse  of  the  Romanovs.     He,  therefore,  surrounded 

1  Mme.  Vig^e  Lebran,  Souvenirs,  Paris,  1867,  vol.  ii,  p.  23. 


L'lMP^RATRICE   EST   MORTE      191 

himself  with  servants  on  whom  he  could  entirely 
rely.     Persons  incapable  of  performing  their  duties, 
insignificant  and  obscure,  were  raised  to  the  highest 
positions.     The  result  was  disastrous.     "  He  erred," 
writes  Prince  Adam  Czartorysky,  "  not  only  in  his 
selection  but  also  in  the  extent  of  the  means  which 
he  constantly  employed   to  save  his  life  and   his 
throne;   he  only  precipitated  his  deplorable  end." 
This    constant    fear    made    him    exaggerated    in 
everything  he  did ;  his  punishments,  as  well  as  his 
favours,  were  excessive  and  bore  the  mark  of  the 
same  extravagance  which  characterised  the  actions  of 
the  Roman  Caesars.    He  was  terrible  in  his  severity, 
while  his  liberality  knew  no  boMids  when  he  was 
once  stirred  to  generosity.     There  was  no  certainty 
in  any  of  his  actions.     His  endeavour  to  secure  the 
fidelity  of  his  Ministers  and  servants  by  loading  them 
with  presents  only  made  them  ungrateful.     More- 
over, they  never  relied  on  his  whims  of  favour.    "  A 
single  word  uttered  intentionally  or  accidentally,  the 
slightest  shadow  of  suspicion,  was  sufficient  reason 
to  make  him  persecute  those  whom  he  had  only  a 
short  while  ago  protected."  ^ 

Paul  had  not  been  on  the  throne  many  weeks 
when  those  who  had  been  ready  to  give  him  praise 
began  to  find  cause  of  complaint.  The  Swedish 
Ambassador,  Stedingk,  was  dumbfounded  at  the  arbi- 
trary manner  with  which  the  police  regulations  con- 
cerning dress  had  been  carried  out.  The  Sardinian 
Ambassador,  Rossi,  had  orders  to  leave  the  country 
before  twenty-four  hours  were  over,  on  account  of 
having  dared  to  pass  an  opinion  on  the  Emperor's 
conduct ;  it  was  thought  fortunate  for  Rossi  that  he 

*  Prince  A.  F.  Czartorysky,  Mimoires^  Paris,  1887,  vol.  i,  chap.  ix. 


^ 


192     THE   CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

went  off  quietly  without  appealing  to  the  diplomatic 
corps  for  its  intervention.     The  ridiculous  way  in 
which  large  properties  were  made  over  as  presents 
by  the  Emperor  also  struck  the  more  reasonably 
minded  with  surprise.    A  still  more  incomprehensible 
act  was  the  sudden  prohibition  of  the  entry  of  any 
foreigner  into  Russian  territory,  and  so  vigorously 
was  this  carried  out  that  Paul,  it  seemed,  wished 
entirely  to  isolate  Russia  from  the  rest  of  the  world 
There  was  dismay  among  the  higher  officials  at 
the  way  in  which  Paul  dealt,  according  to  the  whim 
of  the  moment,  with  questions  of  the  highest  impofc- 
tance  in  connection  with  foreign  politics.     We  have 
an  insight  into  the  kind  of  way  in  which  things  were 
carried  on  in  a  crazy  document  which  was  drawn  up 
by  Rostoptshin,  and  which  Paul  furnished  with  side- 
notes  that  betray  as  much  want  of  taste  as  they  do 
ignorance  and  uncontrolled  temper.     It  dealt  with 
nothing  of  less  importance  than  the  division  of 
Turkey,  the  occupation  of  Constantinople,  and  such 
like  matters.     The  Court  physician,  Rogerson,  had 
reason   for   his   assertion  that   the   Emperor  was 
capable  only  of  understanding  the  details  of  military 
services,  and  had  not  sufficient  intellect  to  enter  into 
other  affairs  of  higher  importance,  whether  political 
or  other.^     Kotshoubey  speaks  of  the  inconsiderate 
manner  in  which  Paul  discharged  his  most  serious 
political  duties,  upsetting  established  regulations,  in- 
sisting on  the  carrying  out  of  ill-digested  ideas,  and 
issuing  important  decrees,  which  he  had  prepared  by 
his  private  secretary,  without  any  previous  notice  to 
the  chief  government  authorities.* 

*  Archives  Prince  Voronzov,  vol.  xxx,  p.  97. 
'  Ih'd,^  vol.  xviii,  pp.  132,  142. 


CHAPTER   X 

A  MODERN   CALIGULA 

Campaign  against  round  hats  —  Paul's  marotte  militaire  —  Tourgenev's 
Memoirs — The  men  of  Gatshina — Changes  and  reforms — Ill-treatment 
of  courtiers  and  officers — Paul's  helpers — His  love  for  pomp  and  cere- 
mony— Coronation  solemnities — ^The  Tsar  mistrusts  his  wife  and  best 
friends — Mile.  N^lidov — Paul's  foreign  policy — Souvarov's  campaign  in 
Italy — Paul's  admiration  for  Napoleon. 

The  madness  once  characteristic  of  the  Roman 
Caesars  soon  became  manifest  in  the  Russian  Tsar. 
He  mistrusted  his  wife,  his  children,  and  his  best 
friends ;  he  brutalised  his  generals  and  officers. 
The  French  Revolution  had  been  a  great  shock 
to  Paul's  imperious  character.  Already,  as  Grand 
Duke,  he  had  seen  Jacobins  everywhere,  and  from 
that  period  must  be  dated  his  hatred  against  the 
round  hats  introduced  into  Russia  by  the  French. 

The  first  heroic  action  of  the  new  reign  was  a 
virulent  and  pitiless  attack  on  the  worst  enemies 
of  the  Russian  State — the  round  hat,  the  dress-coat, 
and  waistcoat  The  Emperor  was  no  sooner  on  the 
throne  than  two  hundred  police  and  dragoons  were 
scouring  the  streets,  with  special  orders  to  tear  the 
round  hat  from  the  head  of  anybody  who  happened 
to  be  wearing  it,  and  to  destroy  it  immediately ; 
frock-coats  had  thefr  collars  cut  away ;  the  fate  of 
waistcoats  was  left  to  the  discretion  of  the  corporal 
and  sub-officers.  The  campaign  was  not  prolonged. 
By  twelve  o'clock  not  a  single  round  hat  wa^ 
visible   in   the   streets,  dress-coats   and   waistcoats 

193  N 


M 


194    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

had  been  put  beyond  the  power  of  doing  harm, 
and  thousands  of  inhabitants  were  seen  hastening 
to  their  homes  with  uncovered  heads,  torn  clothes, 
and  in  a  state  of  semi-nakedness,  while  such  as 
had  sought  to  defend  themselves  bore  the  marks 
of  blows  from  fists  and  sticks.  Wailings  and 
prayers,  however,  were  unheeded;  there  was  no 
exception,  no  respect  of  persons.  The  executioners 
having  been  strictly  enjoined  to  carry  out  their 
work  with  as  little  consideration  as  possible,  and 
soldiers  who  showed  the  least  indulgence  threatened 
with  the  bastinado,  these  wretched  men  performed 
their  miserable  task  with  unexampled  zeal.^ 

During  one  of  the  earlier  days  of  his  reign,  Paul 
happened  to  ride  past  a  wooden  theatre  that  had 
been  erected  by  Catherine.  "  This  must  be  pulled 
down,"  cried  the  Tsar  to  a  general  who  was  among 
his  suite.  A  few  hours  later,  relates  Tourgenev, 
who  was  an  eye-witness,  not  a  vestige  of  the  huge 
building  remained.  Five  hundred  workmen,  who 
continued  their  work  by  lantern-light,  were  em- 
ployed to  clear  the  site.  "This  proceeding  gave 
me  the  opportunity  of  realising  how  far-reaching  is 
the  power  of  the  Russian  Government." 

A  young  Englishman  was  stopped  in  the  street 
and  his  round  hat  snatched  off.  Enraged  at  such 
a  liberty,  he  leaped  out  of  his  sledge,  knocked 
down  the  soldier,  and  called  for  the  police.  A 
police  officer  arrived,  and  the  impetuous  English- 
man was  bound  and  carried  off  to  prison.  Luckily 
he  met  on  his  way  the  coach  of  the  English 
Ambassador,  Sir  Charles  Whitworth,  and  claimed 

^  A.  M.  Tourgenev,  Memoirs,  in  Rousskaya  Starinoy  1885,  voL 
xlvii,p.  381. 


A   MODERN   CALIGULA  195 

his  protection.  The  British  Ambassador  com- 
plained to  the  Emperor,  who  replied  that  his 
order  had  been  misunderstood.  An  Imperial 
ukase  was  consequently  published  the  next  day, 
in  which  it  was  made  known  that  strangers  not 
in  the  Emperor's  service  were  not  subject  to  the 
prohibition.  A  man  wearing  a  round  hat  was 
in  future  to  be  taken  to  the  police  station,  where 
he  would  have  to  prove  that  he  was  not  a  Russian. 
Frenchmen,  however,  wearing  round  hats  were 
condemned  as  Jacobins.  The  Envoy  of  the  King 
of  Sardinia,  having  allowed  himself  to  laugh  at 
the  ridiculous  regulation,  was  ordered  to  quit  the 
Russian  capital  within  twenty-four  hours. 

Like  that  Imperial  madman,  Caligula,  Paul, 
the  first  days  of  whose  reign  seemed  to  be  so  full 
of  promise,  soon  astonished  Russia  and  Europe 
with  his  conduct  and  his  whims.  He  had  con- 
firmed the  old  servants  and  Ministers  of  his  mother 
in  their  employment,  but  their  happiness  was  short- 
lived. Paul  soon  took  the  reins  of  government 
into  his  own  hand.  He  did  everything  himself,  and 
brooked  no  contradiction.  The  Russian  people  and 
especially  the  peasants  who,  like  the  Romans  under 
Caligula,  had  applauded  the  Emperor's  decision 
to  restrict  the  power  of  the  masters  over  their 
slaves,  were  soon  undeceived,  for  the  chains  of  the 
unhappy  peasants  became  even  more  closely  riveted. 

The  regulations  upon  which  Paul  spent  most 
of  his  energy,  and  in  which  he  chiefly  displayed 
his  eccentricities,  were  connected  with  his  mili- 
tary mania.  To  these  he  devoted  all  his 
attention,  introducing  the  most  ridiculous  and 
frivolous   changes  into  the  dress  of  the   soldiers, 


196    THE  CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

and  attaching  the  highest  importance  to  trifles. 
On  his  accession  to  the  throne  he  was  able  fully 
to  satisfy  the  tastes  which  he  had  developed  in 
Gatshina.  The  regulations  which  he  had  laid 
down  as  Grand  Duke  were  applied  to  the  whole 
Empire.  "The  men  of  Gatshina,"  mostly  people 
of  low  origin,  who  had  enjoyed  his  confidence 
when  Grand  Duke,  were  to  serve  as  models  for 
the  entire  Russian  army.  Paul  had  long  been  an 
admirer  of  everything  Prussian — in  this,  as  in  many 
other  eccentricities,  imitating  Peter  HI.  The  Prus- 
sian uniforms,  so  much  admired  by  the  late  Emperor 
but  abolished  by  Catherine  and  her  favourite, 
Potemkin,  had  been  introduced  for  his  regiments 
at  Gatshina,  and  were  now  made  obligatory,  to 
the  general  discontent  of  the  entire  army.  To 
play  with  soldiers  became  a  passion  with  Paul, 
and  in  this  he  again  resembled  Caligula  and 
another  Emperor  of  modern  times.  Paul,  who  had 
started  the  play  at  Gatshina,  continued  it  as 
Emperor  with  increased  zeal  and  ardour.  In  1793 
— when  he  was  still  Grand  Duke — Rostoptshin 
wrote  of  him:  "He  has  1600  soldiers  and  horse- 
men, and  he  imagines  himself  to  be  the  late  King 
of  Prussia." '  With  the  whole  Russian  army  at 
his  disposal,  he  was  now  able  to  indulge  in  parades 
and  manoeuvres  to  his  heart's  content. 

The  Wackt  parade  became  his  daily  occupa- 
tion. Every  day,  no  matter  how  cold,  braving 
temperatures  of  fifteen  or  twenty  degrees  Rdaumur 
without  furs,  clad  in  a  plain,  deep-green  uniform 
and  a  large  hat,  he  manoeuvred  his  soldiers  for 
three  or  four  houra     None  of  the  officers  dared 

*  Archives  Voronzov,  viii,  p.  76. 


A  MODERN   CALIGULA  197 

to  appear  in  pelisses,  and  Paul  had  no  pity  for  the 
old  generals  tormented  with  gout,  rheumatism,  and 
coughs.  His  officers  and  generals  were  treated 
with  abominable  cruelty.  The  most  trifling  mis- 
takes were  severely  punished.  An  entire  regiment, 
having  on  one  occasion  misunderstood  his  word 
of  command,  was  ordered  off  to  Siberia.  Only  a 
couple  of  days  later  a  countermand  recalled  the 
exiles  to  the  capital. 

"  The  course  of  a  few  hours,"  writes  Tourgenev, 
"  put  the  whole  machinery  of  State  and  jurisdiction 
out  of  gear ;  the  springs  that  worked  it  were 
wrenched  away  or  pushed  out  of  place ;  everything 
was  topsy-turvy,  what  was  under  was  now  upper- 
most, and  so  matters  remained  for  a  good  four 
years.  The  highest  posts  were  conferred  on  men 
who  could  hardly  read,  or  on  such  as,  though  not 
wholly  uneducated,  had  enjoyed  no  sort  of  oppor- 
tunity of  knowing  what  the  general  well-being 
of  the  nation  demanded.  They  were  acquainted 
with  nothing  beyond  Gatshina  and  its  barracks,  had 
never  done  anything  beyond  exercising  themselves 
on  the  parade  ground,  or  ever  heard  anything  but 
the  drum  and  fife  call.  Kleinmichel,  one  of  General 
Apraxin's  lackeys,  was  set  to  teach  field-marshals 
the  art  of  war.  Six  or  seven  field-marshals,  who 
were  at  that  time  in  St.  Petersburg,  sat  to  be  in- 
structed by  this  former  lackey,  who,  in  bad  Russian, 
attempted  to  impart  to  men  who  had  grown  grey 
in  command  and  had  seen  many  campaigns  what 
he  was  pleased  to  call  tactics!  His  knowledge 
consisted  merely  in  the  duties  of  a  sentinel,  in 
sword-hilts,  and  such  like  trifles."  ^ 

^  Tourgenev,  Rousskaya  Starina^  p.  380. 


198    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

In  the  importance  that  he  attached  to  all  these 
minutiae  of  parade,  in  the  almost  exclusive  attention 
which  was  paid  by  him  to  external  observances  of 
the  army,  the  incredible  narrowness  of  the  sove- 
reign's mental  horizon  was  only  too  apparent 
Tourgenev's  Memoirs  call  attention  to  this  feature 
in  the  Emperor's  character,  and  he  had  every 
opportunity  of  forming  a  correct  judgment  on  the 
point  Having  served  much  with  the  Emperor  as 
a  young  officer,  he  had  then  become  aware  of  Paul's 
one-sided  and  perverted  leaning  to  military  life. 
The  regiment  of  Cuirassiers,  to  which  Tourgenev 
belonged,  was  the  peculiar  object  of  the  Emperor's 
persecution  and  cruelty.  On  some  festive  occasion, 
when  General  Prince  Volkonsky,  the  commander  of 
the  regiment,  and  his  adjutant  Tourgenev,  appeared 
in  uniform  which  was  not  exactly  according  to  re- 
gulation, Paul  ordered  his  chamberlain  to  remove 
the  **two  blockheads."  Several  officers  of  the 
regiment  were  cashiered  in  the  most  arbitrary  and 
unjust  manner,  their  orders  being  wrested  from 
them,  and  they  themselves  driven  from  the  capital. 
All  the  officers  of  the  regiment  were  greatly  offended 
in  that  they  were  not  allowed  to  take  part  in 
the  processions  and  other  ceremonies  which  took 
place  on  the  occasion  of  the  coronation.  On 
another  festive  occasion  two  hundred  and  thirty- 
one  officers  of  this  regiment  were  shut  up  in  a 
tower  of  the  Kremlin  during  the  entire  two  hours 
of  the  ceremony.  Not  a  single  parade  passed,  at 
which  the  Emperor  was  present,  without  the  arrest 
and  punishment  of  some  of  the  officers  of  this 
regiment. 

The  ill-will  of  the  Emperor  towards  this  par- 


A  MODERN   CALIGULA  199 

ticular  body  of  troops  is  explained  by  Tourgenev 
in  the  following  manner: — 

"One  day  all  the  staff  officers  and   adjutants 
received  orders  to  assemble  in  the  saloon  next  to 
the  Emperor's  study,  and  duly  obeyed  the  com- 
mand.    Paul  walked  into  the  room,  and  called  out 
in  a  loud,  hoarse  voice :   '  Let  the  adjutant  of  the 
Yekaterinoslav   Regiment   stand   forth.'      I,    being 
the  one  named,  stepped  out  in  front  of  the  Emperor. 
He  came  right  up  to  me  and  began  pinching  me. 
To  the  right  was  the  Grand  Duke  Alexander,  who 
had  turned  pale,  and  to  the  left  Araktsheev.     The 
pinching  continued  until  the  pain  brought  tears  to 
my  eyes.     Paul  Petrovitsh's  eyes  were  all  the  while 
gleaming  with  anger.     At  last  he  spoke  :  *  Go  and 
tell    your   regiment,    and   then   it   will   be   further 
known,  that  I  intend  to  exterminate  the  spirit  of 
Potemkin  in  every  one  of  you,  and  to  send  you  all 
where  the  ravens  would  not  otherwise  have  carried 
your  bones.'     Again  and  again  he  pinched  me,  five 
or  six  times,  repeating  the  same  words,  and  then 
ordered  me  to  be  gone."^     The  cause  of  this  ex- 
traordinary behaviour  was  that  the  Yekaterinoslav 
Regiment  had  formerly  been  known  as  the  Potemkin ! 
The   Emperor's  mania  for   parades   and   man- 
oeuvres and   for   useless   mobilisations  was  an  ex- 
pense both  for  army  and  nation.     Senseless  orders 
were  issued  which  caused   the  most  frightful  con- 
fusion.    Thus  the  so-called  Regiment  of  Siberian 
Dragoons,  which  had  just  returned  from  the  Persian 
campaign  and  was  at  that  time  stationed  at  Derbent, 
was  ordered  to  move  on  to  Tobolsk.     The  march 
thither — a  distance  of  four  thousand  kilometres — 

^  Tourgenev,  idid,y  vol.  xlviii,  pp.  70-71. 


200    THE   CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

lasted  two  years,  cost  the  loss  of  all  the  horses,  and 
involved  the  troops  in  unspeakable  suffering.  The 
manceuvres,  to  which  endless  human  lives  fell  a 
sacrifice,  were,  according  to  Tourgenev's  descrip- 
tion, meaningless  spectacles,  as  ''miserable  as  a 
display  of  strategy  and  tactics  as  they  were  use- 
less for  practical  purposes."  This  crazy  adminis- 
tration of  military  affairs  is  not  to  be  explained 
entirely  on  the  score  of  Paul's  mental  incapacity, 
but  was,  in  a  measure,  due  to  the  influence  of  the 
"  men  of  Gatshina,"  whom  Count  Panin  described 
as  the  offscouring  of  the  populace,  upstarts  belong- 
ing to  the  lower  classes.  The  Swedish  Ambassador, 
Stedingk,  who  at  first  praised  the  stricter  discipline 
introduced  by  Paul,  describes  the  demoralising  effect 
of  the  brutal  way  in  which  the  army  was  treated, 
and,  writing  to  King  Gustavus  IV.,  says:  "Paul 
is  in  the  habit  of  dismissing  his  officers  as  if  they 
were  so  many  lackeys.  The  last  remnant  of  esprit 
de  corps  is  fast  dying  out  under  such  treatment 
No  one  who  retains  any  feeling  of  self-respect  will 
stay  at  Court  or  in  the  army.  The  present  uni- 
versal tension  must  some  day  have  results  of 
which  Paul's  unfortunate  successors  will  know  the 
full  meaning."  ^ 

Sablukov  relates  that  Paul's  petulance  of  dis- 
position, added  to  his  extravagant  strictness  and 
severity  towards  officers,  rendered  the  Service  very 
unpleasant.  For  trifling  faults  and  ridiculous  mis- 
takes officers  were  sent  off  from  the  parade-ground 
to  other  regiments  at  a  great  distance,  and  this 
was  such  a  frequent  occurrence  that  officers,  when 
mounting  guard,  used  to  put  a  few  hundred  roubles, 

^  Stockholm  Archiv. 


A   MODERN   CALIGULA  201 

in  bank-notes,  into  their  pockets  so  as  not  to  be 
penniless  when  thus  suddenly  banished.  On  three 
occasions,  says  Sablukov,  did  he  lend  money  to 
brother  officers  who  had  neglected  this  precaution.^ 

Paul  even  forgot  himself  so  far  as  to  strike 
three  officers  on  parade  with  his  cane.*  There- 
upon a  great  many  officers  left  the  Service  and 
retired  to  their  estates. 

The  following  instance  will  show  how  every- 
thing was  at  the  mercy  of  Paul's  temper  of  the 
moment.  On  the  occasion  of  some  manoeuvres 
at  Moscow  he  had  given  the  minutest  orders 
concerning  the  movements  of  the  troops.  Every- 
thing proceeded  exactly  as  he  wished,  and  he  could 
not  detect  the  smallest  deviation  from  his  orders. 
When,  however,  the  Tsar  was  some  172  versts 
from  Moscow  on  his  return  to  St.  Petersburg,  pos- 
sessed by  a  passing  paroxysm  of  anger,  he  cashiered 
thirty-two  staff"  and  chief  officers  as  a  punishment 
for  having  fallen  ill  during  the  manoeuvres,  and 
consequently  failed  to  take  part  in  them  during 
the  last  two  days.  "  What  can  one  say  to  such 
behaviour  as  this?"  asks  Tourgenev,  who  relates 
the  anecdote.  We  can  only  answer  with  a  question 
as  to  the  extent  of  the  Emperor's  responsibility 
for  his  actions. 

As  we  learn  further  from  Tourgenev,  the  men 
in  the  army  were  those  who  stood  in  most  danger 
of  being  banished  to  Siberia  or  of  being  lost  sight 
of  for  the  remainder  of  their  lives,  hidden  away 
somewhere  in  prison.  The  slightest  oversight 
during  drill  was  likely  to  entail  the  most  frightful 
consequences.     "They  all,  from  general  down  to 

*  Freuer^s  Magazine^  1865,  p.  237.  •  IHd,y  p.  306. 


202    THE  CURSE  OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

ensign,"  writes  Tourgenev,  '*  march  out  every  day 
to  the  parade  ground  as  if  on  their  way  to  the 
scaffold.  Not  one  of  them  knows  what  fate  is 
going  to  overtake  him."  Tourgenev  estimates 
the  number  of  military  and  civil  officers  sacrificed 
to  this  severity  of  discipline  at  12,000  persons, 
all  of  whom  were  sent  to  Siberia ;  as  soon  as  Alex- 
ander I  came  to  the  throne  they  were  allowed 
to  return.  Tourgenev  adds :  "  The  number  of 
victims  was,  therefore,  calculated  at  3000  every 
year,  or  250  a  month,  and  eight  per  day.  Nine 
hundred  prisoners  were  in  the  fortress  of  Peter 
and  Paul  alone ;  these,  also,  were  released  as  soon 
as  Alexander  replaced  Paul  on  the  throne."  It 
was  not  without  good  cause  that  Tourgenev's  chief, 
Field-Marshal  Soltykov,  usually  a  man  of  few 
words,  remarked  that  ''  Such  a  hideous  state  of 
things  cannot  last  long."  A  few  weeks  before 
the  final  catastrophe,  the  Field-Marshal  received 
a  paper  written  in  the  Emperor^s  own  hand,  which 
ran :  **  Field-Marshal  General ;  I  send  you  notice 
of  the  last  proscription."  Few  and  meaning  words. 
Ominous  indeed  was  the  designation  of  this  pro- 
scription as  the  **last."^ 

Paul's  changes,  reforms,  and  laws  affected  the  civil 
as  well  as  the  military  population.  St.  Petersburg, 
which — with  the  exception  of  Paris  and  London 
— had,  during  the  reign  of  Catherine  II,  become 
the  most  fashionable  city  in  Europe,  soon  ceased 
to  look  like  a  modern  town,  ''but  like  a  German 
town  of  two  or  three  centuries  back."  A  com- 
plete metamorphosis  had  taken  place.  Equipages, 
coats,   hats,  boots,   and   the  style  of  wearing  the 

^  Tourgenev,  Rousskaya  Stanna,  vol.  xlviii,  pp.  265-266,  268. 


A   MODERN   CALIGULA  203 

hair  were  altered.  Pressure  and  despotism  fell  on 
the  most  trifling  circumstances,  and  made  life  un- 
bearable. No  officer  was  allowed  to  drive  in  a 
close  carriage,  but  was  forced  either  to  ride  on 
horseback  or  in  a  sledge.  Carriages  and  foot- 
passengers  were  ordered  to  stop  in  the  streets 
when  they  met  the  Imperial  family,  and  those 
seated  inside  the  carriages  must  step  out  and 
stand  to  make  their  bow.^  Madame  Vigte  Lebrun 
relates  in  her  Memoirs  that  this  queer  ordinance 
was  one  of  those  obedience  to  which  was  very 
troublesome.  Paul  was  frequently  to  be  met  in 
the  streets,  either  on  horseback  or  in  a  sledge,  and 
as  he  had  no  escort,  recognition  was  not  always  easy. 
But  woe  to  those  who  met  him,  men  or  women, 
who  did  not  jump  out  immediately  into  the  snow 
and  stand  and  bow.^  His  Imperial  will,  no  matter 
whether  his  decisions  were  the  result  of  reflection 
or  impulse,  had  to  be  obeyed,  and  his  commands 
executed.  Women,  with  their  children  trembling 
with  fright,  had  often  to  alight  in  the  snow  or  in 
the  mud  to  salute  their  sovereign.  Naturally,  there- 
fore, when  going  out  on  foot  or  driving  in  carriages, 
people  tried  to  avoid  meeting  the  Tsar.  No  one  was 
spared.  Courtiers  and  officers  were  treated  with 
equal  severity.  Being  always  under  the  impression 
that  people  wished  to  slight  him,  as  they  had  been 
used  to  do  when  he  was  Grand  Duke,  Paul  was 
particular  as  to  the  manner  in  which  courtiers 
approached  him.  Like  recruits,  the  great  ones  of 
the  realm  were  drilled  by  the  Grand  Master  of 
the  Ceremonies,  who  taught  them  the  number  and 

^  Fraset's  Magazine^  pp.  228, 230. 

'  Madame  Vig^e  Lebrun,  Souvenirs,  Paris,  vol  ii,  p.  27. 


204    THE   CURSE   OF   THE  ROMANOVS 

kind  of  salutations  to  be  made  when  in  the  presence 
of  His  Majesty,  The  Russian  Autocrat  had  to 
be  approached  on  the  knees  and  "  a  sounding  kiss  " 
applied  to  his  hand.  On  one  occasion  a  foreign 
Ambassador,  having  arrived  too  late  at  Court, 
excused  himself  on  the  ground  that  the  arrival  in 
St  Petersburg  of  a  distinguished  visitor  from  his 
own  country  had  caused  his  delay.  Paul  replied: 
"  You  must  know,  sir,  that  no  one  is  distinguished 
in  Russia  except  the  person  to  whom  I  am  talking, 
and  he  only  during  the  interval  of  our  conver- 
sation."^ The  highest  dignitaries  of  the  Empire 
were  treated  like  schoolboys ;  they  had  to  submit 
to  the  worst  humiliations  without  appearing  to  be 
offended  or  sensitive  in  any  way.*  Count  Panin, 
the  Vice-Chancellor,  having  once  granted  a  pass- 
port to  a  courier  of  the  Austrian  Ambassador 
without  previously  asking  the  permission  of  the 
Emperor,  the  latter  sent  his  aide-de-camp  to  the 
Vice-Chancellor  to  inform  him  that  **he  was  nothing 
more  nor  less  than  a  fool."*  Such  episodes  were  of 
daily  occurrence. 

Letters  were  opened  and  read,  and  woe  unto 
the  writer  if  his  expressions  were  such  as  to  raise 
suspicion  and  to  be  communicated  to  the  Tsar  of  all 
the  Russias.  The  culprits  were  severely  punished — 
sent  to  Siberia  if  they  were  Russian  subjects,  to  the 
frontier  in  the  case  of  foreigners.  The  hereditary 
Prince  of  Hessen-Rheinfels  was  thus  expelled 
from  St  Petersburg,  his  father  having  expressed 
dissatisfaction  at  the  cold  reception  with  which  his 

^  Golovkin,  p.  133,  according  to  whom  these  words  were  addressed 
to  Prince  Repnin. 

*  Les  Razounurvsky^  ii,  p.  314. 
'  Archives  Voronzov,  xxx,  p.  16. 


A  MODERN   CALIGULA  205 

son  had  met  in  the  Russian  capital.^  Sir  Charles 
Whitworth,  the  English  Ambassador,  was  ordered 
to  leave  St.  Petersburg  because  the  English  Envoy 
in  Stockholm  had  omitted,  before  his  departure,  to 
pay  a  visit  to  the  Russian  Envoy,  Budberg,  and  had 
thus  offended  His  Russian  Majesty  in  the  person 
of  his  representative.*  Not  only  were  Russian 
subjects  forbidden  to  go  abroad,  but  the  Russian 
Ambassador  in  London,  Voronzov,  received  the 
order  to  grant  no  passports  to  foreigners  wishing 
to  visit  Russia.*  The  importation  of  books  in  any 
language  and  on  any  subject,  as  well  as  musical 
compositions,  with  or  without  words,  was  prohibited.* 
It  must,  however,  be  pointed  out,  by  way  of 
excuse — if  excuse  it  is — and  in  justice  to  Paul,  that 
he  easily  found  helpers  who  aided  and  abetted  him 
in  his  mad  pranks,  his  whims,  and  eccentricities. 
It  is  one  of  the  unfortunate  facts  in  history  that 
whenever  a  ruler  is  inclined  to  be  unjust  and  even 
cruel,  there  are  always  men  in  the  immediate 
vicinity  of  the  throne  ready,  not  only  to  excuse 
the  actions  of  the  sovereign,  to  prove  the  necessity 
and  even  wisdom  of  his  commands,  but  even  to  help 
him  in  his  pursuits.  Thus  the  responsibility  for 
their  cruelties  falls  not  only  upon  the  Caesars  and 
the  Tsars,  but  also  upon  their  advisers  and  helpers. 
Such  was  the  case  of  Nero,  of  Ivan  Grozny,  and 
of  Paul  I.,  as,  in  fact,  of  all  the  mighty  monarchs 
of  whom  we  read  in  the  blood-stained  pages  of  their 
history.     The  brutal  and  insane  commands  of  the 

*  Stedingk,  Stockholm  Arckiv,  March  1829. 

'  Panin  Papers,  ed.  A.  Brueckner,  1888-92,  v,  p.  160 

•  Archives  Voronzov,  x,  p.  56. 
^  Ibid,f  xxxii,  p.  273. 


2o6    THE   CURSE   OF   THE  ROMANOVS 

Russian  Tsar  found  ready  executioners  in  men  who 
delighted  in  the  performance  of  savage  acts.  In 
this  respect  circumstances  in  Russia  have  not 
changed  in  the  course  of  a  century.  And,  just 
as  in  the  times  of  Paul,  so  in  those  of  his  great 
grandson,  Nicholas — Caesar  II,  those  appointed  to 
carry  out  the  Imperial  ukases  do  their  best  or  their 
worst  to  out-herod  Herod  in  cruelty  and  brutality. 

Persons  like  Rostoptshin,  Araktsheev,  and 
Koutayssov  had  much  to  answer  for  as  regards 
the  crazy  acts  of  violence  which  took  place 
during  this  reign.  "  Rostoptshin,"  wrote  Count 
N.  P.  Panin,  **  had  simply  lent  himself  to  the  mitier 
de  bourreau.*'^  There  were  several  officers  who 
had  been  for  many  years  among  Paul's  associates, 
and  these  now  constituted  themselves  as  keepers 
to  the  insane  tyrant,  and  share  with  him  the 
responsibility  of  many  of  his  acts.  The  gruesome 
deeds  of  Ivan  IV  in  the  sixteenth  century  cannot 
be  accounted  as  individual  crimes  committed  by  a 
single  person,  but  must  be  looked  upon  as  resulting 
from  the  degraded  tone  of  the  society  with  which 
he  was  surrounded.  That  he  was  able  to  find  so 
many  ready  to  execute  his  commands  is  in  itself 
an  extenuating  circumstance  in  his  favour.  In  like 
manner  many  of  the  horrors  which  occurred  during 
the  reign  which  immediately  followed  that  of 
Catherine  must  be  reckoned  as  the  combined  deeds 
of  many  among  Paul's  subjects,  who  were  as 
despotic,  narrow-minded,  violent-tempered,  and,  per- 
haps, as  irresponsible  as  the  Emperor  himself.* 

Paul's  love  for  pomp  and  ceremony  was  exces- 

^  Panin  Papers,  vol.  vii,  p.  i8o. 
■  Tourgenev  ihid. 


A   MODERN   CALIGULA  207 

sive.  This  is  and  has  been  a  trait  noticeable  in 
many  sovereigns,  from  the  Roman  emperors  down 
to  modern  monarchs — crowned  and  uncrowned. 
Caligula  displayed  this  mania  in  a  very  marked 
degree,  on  the  occasion  of  his  feasts  and  banquets, 
in  his  dress,  and  in  his  apartments.  His  palaces, 
villas,  and  yachts,  the  famous  bridge  of  Caligula 
on  the  Palatine,  all  bore  testimony  to  his  excessive 
delight  in  show  and  pompous  extravagance.  Paul 
in  this  respect  greatly  resembled  the  Roman 
Caesar.  Inflated  with  his  own  dignity,  desirous  of 
making  himself  conspicuous,  of  inspiring  the  world 
with  his  greatness  and  of  attracting  attention  to 
himself  and  to  everything  around  him,  he  not  only 
attached  importance  to  every  minute  detail  of  Court 
ceremonies  but  ordered  that  these  should  be  carried 
out  with  all  the  gorgeous  splendour  imaginable. 
His  coronation,  which  took  place  in  Moscow  in 
^797>  gave  him  ample  opportunity  to  display  his 
love  of  magnificence.  His  entry  into  the  ancient 
capital  was  very  impressive.  The  ceremony  of 
coronation,  which  lasted  several  days,  was  preceded 
by  dress  rehearsals,  so  that  it  should  pass  off 
without  a  hitch.  ''The  Emperor,"  writes  Count 
Fedor  Golovkin,  "took  part  in  all  the  rehearsals 
and  comported  himself  like  a  child,  showing  a 
childish  delight  at  all  the  pleasure  prepared  for 
him."*  During  one  afternoon  a  second  rehearsal, 
for  the  instruction  of  the  Empress,  took  place  in 
the  throne-room.  Maria  Fdodorovna — whether  in 
ignorance  or  modesty — ascended  the  lateral  steps 
leading  to  the  throne,  but  Paul  rudely  called  her 
back.     "That  is  not  the  way  to  mount  a  throne, 

^  Golovkin,  La  Cour  de  Paul  /,  p.  144. 


2o8     THE   CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

madame/'  he  exclaimed ;  *'  please  to  come  down  and 
ascend  the  front  steps."  He  was  so  fond  of  cere- 
monies that  he  took  pleasure  in  inventing  new  ones» 
in  which  endeavour  he  was  supported  by  the  Master 
of  the  Ceremonies,  to  the  great  discontent  of  the 
courtiers,  who  were  exhausted  with  fatigue,  Paul 
himself  was  ''  as  active  as  a  stage  manager  in  look- 
ing after  all  the  details  of  decoration  and  costume."  * 
Paul  was  very  short,  but  tried  to  appear  tall  and 
majestic,  and  the  effort  was  not  an  easy  one.  The 
coronation  took  place  in  the  ancient  palace  of  the 
Tsars,  the  Kremlin,  where  Bonaparte,  the  Corsican 
corporal,  was  soon  to  dictate  his  decrees.  The  fol- 
lowing incident,  which  occurred  during  the  corona- 
tion, is  interesting,  as  evidencing  Paul's  pettiness 
in  the  exaction  of  ceremonial  observances.  Soon 
after  his  accession,  the  son  of  Catherine  had  in- 
vited Stanislaus  Poniatovsky,  the  dethroned  King 
of  Poland  and  former  lover  of  his  mother,  who 
was  living  as  a  prisoner  in  Grodno,  to  come  to 
St.  Petersburg.  Paul  not  only  took  a  great  liking 
to  the  dethroned  monarch,  but  grew  very  intimate 
with  him.  The  intimacy  went  so  far  as  to  become 
embarrassing  for  Stanislaus.  One  day,  with  tears 
in  his  eyes,  the  Tsar  implored  him  to  inform 
him  whether  he  really  was  his  father,  and  when  the 
Polish  king  endeavoured  to  prove  that  he  could 
not  claim  this  honour,  Paul  was  very  disappointed.' 
The  King  of  Poland  was  ordered  to  follow  the 
Emperor  to  Moscow  and  to  be  present  at  the 
coronation.  Now,  during  one  of  the  numerous 
ceremonies,  the  King,  either  tired  out  or  forgetful, 

*  Prince  Czartorysky,  Mhnotres,  Paris,  1887,  vol.  i,  p.  147. 
'  Golovkin,  /.r.,  p.  138,  and  above,  p.  29. 


A   MODERN   CALIGULA  209 

sat  down  in  the  tribune  assigned  to  him  behind  the 
estrade  where  Paul  was  being  crowned.  The  Tsar 
remarked  this,  and  at  once  sent  a  messenger  to  tell 
him  to  stand  up  as  long  as  the  ceremony  lasted.^ 

The  coronation  was  followed  by  banquets,  feasts, 
parades,  and  a  distribution  of  gifts.  Decorations, 
titles,  diamonds,  estates  and  peasants,  were  given 
to  favourites  and  courtiers.  Count  Besborodko 
and  Prince  Kourakin  received  gifts  amounting  to 
millions  of  roubles.  The  gorgeous  ritual  of  the 
Byzantine  Church  so  appealed  to  Paul's  taste  that 
he  one  day  took  it  into  his  head  to  olfHciate  himself. 
"  I  am  the  head  of  the  clergy,  why  should  I  not 
be  permitted  to  do  everything  that  they  do  ?  "  It 
was  the  same  desire  for  display  which  also  mani- 
fested itself  in  his  mania  for  building.  Immediately 
after  his  return  to  St.  Petersburg  he  ordered  the 
erection  of  St.  Michael's  Palace,  which  was  built 
at  an  immense  cost.  As  he  was  already  troubled 
with  the  idea  of  falling  a  victim  to  the  fate  of  the 
Romanovs  and  of  being  dethroned  or  assassinated, 
this  Palace  was  in  part  intended  to  afford  the 
Autocrat  a  safe  habitation. 

The  mistrust  which  Paul  felt  towards  every  one 
around  him,  however  worthy  of  his  confidence, 
ended  by  inducing  him  to  banish  his  trusty  friends, 
Rostoptshin  and  Araktsheev,  who  would  have 
been  a  protection  to  him  against  Pahlen's  attacks. 
Utterly  without  reason  also  he  fancied  that  his 
wife  was  plotting  against  his  life,  and  caused  bolts 
to  be  put  upon  those  very  doors  of  her  apartments 
through  which  he  might,  in  his  last  hours,  have 
found  a  means  of  escape. 

^  Czartorysky,  M^moires,  p.  147,  and  Golovkin,  p.  145. 

O 


2IO    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

And  through  all  the  strange  mingling  of  these 
contradictory  characteristics,  there  still  shone  forth 
in  the  eccentric  sovereign  a  natural  harmlessness  of 
disposition  as  well  as  an  inclination  to  fun  and  a 
readiness  of  wit.  Sablukov  relates  many  instances 
of  these.  On  one  occasion,  having  been  told  that 
the  latter,  who  was  a  good  draughtsman,  had 
drawn  a  portrait  of  him,  he  asked  for  the  drawing, 
and  then,  looking  at  himself  in  the  mirror,  said, 
laughing,  **  Not  a  bad-looking  phiz,"  and,  giving 
the  amateur  artist  a  friendly  slap  on  the  back,  left 
the  room.^  Sablukov  also  speaks  of  the  Emperor 
as  having  a  very  strong  feeling  for  justice,  and, 
according  to  this  writer,  he  exerted  himself  to  put 
things  right  when  any  injustice  had  taken  place; 
others,  on  the  contrary,  report  of  Paul  that  he  never 
felt  any  compunction  about  his  wrong-doing.*  As 
already  recorded,  his  mistrust  extended  from  his 
friends  to  his  wife  and  children.  Paul  had  lived 
happily  with  his  wife  for  ten  years,  but  towards  the 
end  of  Catherine's  reign  he  had  already  begun 
to  neglect  her.  Because  Boukh,  the  gardener  at 
Tsarsko6-SiIo,  had  presented  Maria  Feodorovna 
with  fruit,  he  was  caned.  Paul  did  everything  to 
annoy  his  wife,  who  was  devotedly  attached  to 
him.  Lafermiere,  the  librarian,  was  dismissed 
because  he  was  a  friend  of  Maria  Fdodorovna.' 
Count  N.  P.  Panin,  having  once  refused  to  show 
respect  for  Pauls  mistress,  Mademoiselle  N^lidov, 
and  contempt  for  Maria  Feodorovna,  was  threat- 
ened in  the  following  words :  "The  path  you  have 

1  Eraser^ s  Magazine^  pp.  304,  305. 
•  Archives  Voronzov,  voL  viii,  p.  76. 
'  Ibid,^  vol.  XV,  p.  83. 


A   MODERN   CALIGULA  211 

chosen  will  lead  you  either  to  the  door  or  to  the 
window."^  But  if  Maria  F6odorovnas  influence 
had  already  diminished  during  the  last  years  at 
Gatshina — since  1783,  when  her  friends  and  ad- 
herents were  punished  on  the  slightest  occasion — 
her  lot  became  almost  unbearable  after  Paul's 
accession.*  She  suffered  greatly,  but  resigned 
herself  and  found  consolation  in  her  children. 
On  one  occasion,  being  furious  at  something  the 
Empress  had  said  or  done,  he  exclaimed :  "  Madame, 
you  are  perhaps  preparing  to  play  the  part  of 
Catherine,  but  be  warned  that  in  me  you  will  not 
find  a  Peter  IIL"  He  at  once  ordered  Rostoptshin 
to  prepare  an  ukase  by  which  Maria  F^odorovna 
was  to  be  detained  in  the  convent  of  Solovetsk, 
and  the  two  Princes  Nicholas  and  Michael  de- 
clared illegitimate.  Only  with  much  difficulty  was 
Rostoptshin  able  to  persuade  the  enraged  Auto- 
crat to  abandon  his  idea.  Rostoptshin's  influence, 
however,  was  on  the  wane. 

Thus  the  Swedish  Envoy,  Stedingk,  writing 
between  the  20th  and  31st  of  August  1798,  says: 
"The  disgrace  which  fell  upon  so  many  who  held 
posts  about  the  Court,  or  were  otherwise  in  high 
positions,  most  of  whom  were  attached  to  the  Em- 
press or  had  in  some  way  been  patronised  by  her,  is 
being  shared  by  many  of  those  who  were  believed 
to  be  in  the  highest  favour  of  the  Emperor,  but 
whom  he  is  now  sending  away  or  depriving  of  office. 
The  Empress  is  the  more  unhappy  at  this  seeing 
that  it  is  partly  attributed  to  her  jealousy  of  a 
young  girl,  the  daughter  of  the  Attorney  to  the 

I  Panin  Papers,  vol.  i,  p.  io6. 

•  Archives  Voronzov,  vol.  viii,  p.  67  ;  vol.  xxiv,  p.  257. 


i 


212     THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

Crown,  to  whom  the  Emperor  has  shown  atten- 
tion."^ In  another  despatch  of  the  i-i2th  October 
1798,  he  writes  further:  **  As  long  as  the  Empress 
held  any  power  over  the  mind  of  the  Emperor,  or 
any  influence  in  affairs,  she  did  all  she  could  to 
avert  danger  from  her  family  and  from  the  State, 
The  statesmen  and  officials  chosen  from  among 
her  friends  or  proUgis  participated  in  her  senti- 
ments, and  their  conduct  was  regulated  by  the 
consideration  of  their  own  peace  and  their  own 
fortune,  neither  of  which  was  it  possible  to  maintain 
amid  the  expense  and  anxiety  involved  in  the 
management  of  the  larger  affairs  of  State*  But 
those  times  are  past.  Every  day  now  gives  birth 
to  some  fresh  disgrace  which  falls  on  the  head  of 
those  who  are  known  to  be  the  Empress's  friends 
or  to  have  obtained  their  posts  through  her  inter- 
vention. The  Emperor  is  embittered  against  her 
and  against  everything  in  any  way  associated  with 
her.  Among  those  who  have  suffered  are  mutual 
friends  of  both  the  Emperor  and  Empress ;  Made- 
moiselle N61idov,  the  Kourakins,  Nicholas  Rou- 
myanzev.  Prince  Repnin  are  among  many  who  have 
been  exiled  or  banished  from  Court  Fresh  actors 
on  the  stage  have  brought  about  a  change  of  scene, 
and  the  good  understanding  in  the  department  of 
the  Ministry  being  thus  interrupted,  the  Emperor 
seeks  means  of  diversion  and  has  become  more 
open  to  foreign  influence.  What  the  result  of  these 
changes  will  be  it  is  not  easy  to  predict;  but  as 
sentiments  of  virtue  and  religion  have  been  deeply 
implanted  in  the  hearts  of  the  Emperor  and  his 
family,  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  there  will  be  a  return 

^  Stedingk,  August  20,  1798. 


A   MODERN   CALIGULA  213 

to  better  things,  and  with  it  a  relief  from  the  anxiety 
into  which  society  in  general  has  been  plunged  by 
so  many  unforeseen  losses  of  favour  and  the  fear  as 
to  his  individual  fate  in  which  every  one  is  living." 

Paul's  mistrust,  as  mentioned  above,  went  so  far 
as  to  make  him  issue  an  order  to  the  architect 
Brenna,  who  had  constructed  the  St.  Michaels 
Palace,  to  build  up  the  door  leading  from  the 
Emperor  s  apartments  into  those  of  his  wife.^  As  a 
natural  consequence  of  his  conduct  to  them — his 
rough  and  often  cruel  behaviour — his  children,  who 
had  been  spoiled  by  the  kind  treatment  of  their 
grandmother,  did  not  feel  an  overwhelming  love 
for  their  father.  If  we  are  to  believe  contempo- 
raries, they  even  hated  him.  "  The  Grand  Duke 
Alexander,"  wrote  Rostoptshin,  "hates  his  father, 
the  Grand  Duke  Constantine  fears  him,  whilst  the 
daughter,  under  the  influence  of  her  mother,  dis- 
likes him.  They  all  meet  him  with  smiling  faces, 
but,  in  reality,  they  would  like  to  see  him  turned  into 
dust."*  The  dislike  was  mutual.  Paul  suddenly 
developed  a  great  and  passionate  love  for  Prince 
Eugene  of  WUrtemberg,  whom  he  intended  to 
declare  heir  to  the  throne.  **  Very  shortly,"  he  once 
said,  "  I  shall  be  compelled  to  cut  down  heads  that 
were  once  dear  to  me." '  And  it  seems  that  he  in- 
tended to  send  his  wife  to  Kholmogory,  not  far  from 
Archangel,  where  the  family  of  the  former  Emperor, 
Ivan  of  Brunswick,  had  been  detained.  Alexander 
was  to  be  imprisoned  in  the  fortress  of  Schlusselburg, 
and  Constantine  in  the  citadel  at  St.  Petersburg.^ 

.   *  Fraser^s  Magazine^  p.  318. 
*  Archives  Voronzov,  vol.  xxiv,  p.  274. 

'  Historische  Zeitschrift^  Munich,  1859,  &c.,  vol.  iii,  pp.  152-153. 
^  y^V/.,  p.  152. 


i 


214    THE   CURSE   OF   THE    ROMANOVS 

But  if  the  Empress  had  lost  her  former  influence 
over  her  husband,  it  was,  perhaps,  not  so  much 
on  account  of  Paul's  violence  of  temper,  as  in  con- 
sequence of  the  Emperor  having  become  attached 
to  Mademoiselle  N^lidov.  Although  Paul — ^as  was 
to  be  expected  from  a  man  of  his  temperament- 
was  furious  when  informed  of  a  gossips'  rumour 
that  his  wife  and  Mademoiselle  N^lidov  governed 
the  Empire  in  his  name,  he  was  nevertheless  for  a 
period  deeply  under  the  influence  of  the  latter. 

The  eighteenth  century  in  Russia  was  pre- 
eminently a  century  of  women.  Russia's  destinies 
were  ruled,  with  the  exception  of  a  short  inter- 
val (Peter  II,  Peter  III),  by  Catherine  I,  Anna 
Ivanovna,  Anna  Leopoldovna,  Elizabeth  Petrovna, 
and  Catherine  II.  Paul  was  the  first  male  sovereign 
after  a  long  line  of  female  rulers.  But,  even  under 
him,  the  influence  of  the  women  had  not  diminished, 
and  whilst  he  reigned  Mademoiselle  N61idov  ruled. 
For  a  considerable  time,  at  least,  she  exercised  a 
great  influence  over  Paul,  who  looked  upon  her 
as  his  guardian  angel.  This  somewhat  remarkable 
woman  was  born  on  the  12th  of  December  1756, 
and  was  chosen  as  a  Maid  of  Honour  to  the  Grand 
Duchess  in  1777.  According  to  general  report 
she  was  not  pretty,  but  she  was  slender  and  grace- 
ful, could  dance  delightfully  as  well  as  sing,  and, 
moreover,  her  conversation  was  charming  and  ex- 
tremely witty.  Being  daily  in  her  company  the 
Grand  Duke  had  grown  accustomed  to  her 
society,  and  evil  tongues  soon  began  to  put  a 
false  interpretation  on  their  intimacy.  The  Grand 
Duke  had  at  first  taken  a  dislike  to  her,  on  account 
of  what  he  thought  her  malicious  tongue,  but  she 


A\ 


A   MODERN   CALIGULA  215 

had  insensibly  won  him  over,  and  she  knew  how 
to  divert  his  mind  and  to  humour  his  capricious 
temper.  The  Empress  at  last  began  to  notice 
the  friendly  relations  between  them,  and  they  were 
the  subject  of  several  articles  in  the  Moniteur 
Franfais,  under  the  heading  of  "  News  from 
St   Petersburg." 

Mademoiselle  N61idov,  however,  was  clever 
enough  to  see  her  way  to  put  an  end  to  this 
gossip  about  herself.  According  to  her  bio- 
grapher her  relations  with  Paul  were  of  a  platonic 
nature,  and  she  has,  therefore,  been  unjustly  com- 
pared to  Mademoiselle  La  Valli^re,  Madame  de 
Pompadour,  and  Madame  Dubarry.  Paul  affirmed 
the  purity  of  his  relationship  with  her  in  a  letter 
addressed  to  his  mother.  On  his  return  from  Fin- 
land in  1790,  when  very  ill  and  seriously  thinking 
that  he  might  die,  he  wrote  to  Catherine,  conjuring 
her  not  to  abandon  his  friend  for  whose  fate  he 
entertained  serious  misgivings.  "In  this  solemn 
moment  of  my  life,"  he  wrote,  "  I  have  to  fulfil 
a  duty  towards  my  God  and  my  conscience — I 
must  justify  an  innocent  person  against  accusations 
which  have  been  levelled  at  her  on  my  account. 
I  have  noticed  how  much  human  malevolence  has 
been  busy  misinterpreting  the  spiritual  bond  which 
unites  me  to  Mademoiselle  N61idov.  I  swear 
before  the  divine  tribunal,  from  which  none  of  us 
can  escape,  that  both  of  us  can  appear  before  it 
without  any  reproach.  Why  could  not  I  seal  my 
oath  with  my  blood?  But,  in  bidding  good-bye 
to  life,  I  solemnly  declare  that  our  connection 
has  been  pure,  holy,  and  without  blemish."  The 
feeling   which    he    experienced    for    Mademoiselle 


2i6    THE  CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

N^lidov  cannot  be  described  as  passion ;  it  amused 
him  to  make  court  to  her,  but,  according  to 
Golytzin,  on  the  evenings  when  she  happened  to 
be  absent  from  the  Palace  the  Grand  Duke  was 
in  even  better  spirits  than  usual.  Mademoiselle 
Moukhanov,  another  Maid  of  Honour,  asserts  that 
the  good  understanding  between  the  Grand  Duke 
and  his  wife  was  never  interrupted  during  the 
whole  time  that  he  was  paying  court  to  Made- 
^  moiselle  N^lidov.  Maria  F^odorovna  herself 
■  seems  to  have  been  convinced  of  the  platonic 
nature  of  her  husband's  friendship  for  her  Maid 
of  Honour.  Yet,  in  a  moment  of  depression,  the 
Grand  Duchess  once  complained  to  Catherine  of 
her  trouble.  For  all  reply  the  latter  is  reported 
to  have  led  her  up  to  a  mirror,  and  to  have  said : 
"  See  how  beautiful  you  are ;  your  rival  is  an  ugly 
little  thing ;  leave  off  fretting  and  rest  assured  of 
your  charms."^  Judging,  however,  from  Cathe- 
rine's attitude  towards  her  daughter-in-law  it  is 
permissible  to  doubt  this  episode.  Maria  F^o- 
dorovna  continued  to  be  jealous,  and  in  one  of 
her  letters  (1792)  to  Sergius  Plestsheev,  a  friend 
of  Paul,  who  was  attached  to  her,  she  accused 
Mademoiselle  N^lidov  of  wishing  to  play  the  part 
of  Madame  de  Maintenon  as  soon  as  she,  the 
Grand  Duchess,  was  dead,  and  she  always  feared 
that  her  death  might  occur  while  giving  birth  to 
a  child.  In  1792,  however.  Mademoiselle  N^lidov 
retired  to  the  convent  of  Smolna,  as  she  was  publicly 
accused  of  being  Paul's  mistress  and  of  causing 
the  quarrel  between  the  Grand  Duke  and  his  wife. 
Paul  had  begged  her  to  remain  and   she   had  at 

^  Russian  Archives,  1878,  vol.  i,  p.  308. 


A  MODERN   CALIGULA  217 

first  given  way  to  him.  A  little  later,  however,  she 
carried  out  her  decision,  but  again  returned  in  1 794 
to  Pavlovsk.  It  was  then  that  Maria  F^odorovna 
sought  the  friendship  of  Mademoiselle  N61idov, 
and  the  two  women  for  some  time  acted  in  common 
to  save  Paul  from  his  new  friends  and  from  his 
own  eccentricities.  Both  were  attached  to  him, 
each  in  her  way,  but  Maria  F6odorovna  was  less 
unselfish  than  her  rival  in  her  love  for  Paul. 

It  was  at  this  period  that  Paul's  character 
underwent  a  change  for  the  worse  and  that  he 
became  more  and  more  suspicious  and  irritable  on 
the  slightest  occasion.  Excited  by  the  events 
which  had  occurred  in  France  since  1789,  he  saw 
revolution  and  Jacobins  everywhere.  He  kept 
away  from  his  mother  and  scarcely  ever  went  to 
St-  Petersburg.  Maria  F^odorovna  was  rightly 
afraid  that  Catherine  would  declare  Alexander  her 
heir  and  exclude  Paul  from  the  succession.  She 
was  intelligent  enough  to  avail  herself  of  Made- 
moiselle N61idov*s  influence  over  Paul  to  save  her 
husband  and  herself  from  such  a  catastrophe* 
"  For,"  she  wrote  to  one  of  her  friends,  "  if  such 
a  calamity  should  happen  he  would  not  be  the 
only  one  to  suffer,  I  should  suffer  too."^  But 
the  efforts  of  Mademoiselle  Ndidov  to  reconcile 
Paul  with  his  mother  irritated  him  against  her, 
and  a  breach  was  the  result.  Maria  F^odorovna, 
who  had  not  considered  it  beneath  her  dignity  to 
gain  the  friendship  of  the  favourite  for  her  own 
purposes,  was  not  slow  in  abetting  the  rupture  be- 
tween Paul  and  his  friend.  Mademoiselle  N6H- 
dov  left  the  Court  and  again  retired  to  the  convent 

*  Cf.  Shoumigorsky,  La  Favorite  (Pun  Tsar^  p.  96. 


2i8    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

of  Smolna.  She  accused  Paul,  in  a  letter  addressed 
to  Kourakin,  of  baseness  and  treachery.  Paul 
asked  her  to  return  in  October  1796,  but  "his 
protestations,"  she  wrote  to  Kourakin,  **only  dis- 
gusted her "  ;  she  could  only  feel  sympathy  for  a 
noble  heart,  and  even  his  remorse  could  not  excuse 
the  baseness  of  which  he  was  capable.^  After 
he  became  Emperor,  however,  N^lidov,  with  whom 
the  Empress  Maria  F^odorovna  had  concluded  a 
pact,  which  this  time  lasted  all  their  lives,  and  is 
attested  by  the  correspondence  exchanged  between 
them,*  regained  her  influence  over  Paul  until  her 
place  was  taken  by  the  Princess  Gagarina.  This 
lady,  who  was  exceedingly  beautiful,  was  introduced 
to  the  Tsar  by  the  enemies  of  her  predecessor 
in  favour,  whose  power  over  Paul  they  feared. 
The  Princess  Gagarina  was  a  Mademoiselle  La- 
poukhin,  daughter  of  Lapoukhin,  Director  of  Police 
at  Moscow.  She  became  Paul's  mistress,  and  her 
father  was  created  a  prince  in  return  for  his  com- 
plaisance. All  her  friends  came  into  power  and 
were  appointed  to  high  and  influential  posts.  It 
is  interesting  to  notice  that,  even  in  the  case  of 
this  pretty  woman,  it  was  maintained  that  her 
relation  to  Paul  was  purely  platonic.  Stedingk, 
the  Swedish  Envoy,  wrote  in  his  despatches  that 
*•  he  was  sure,  as  Paul  was  very  religious,  there 
was  nothing  of  a  sensual  character  in  his  liaison 
with  Mademoiselle  Lapoukhin."  Sablukov's '  tale, 
however,    is    very    diff*erent ;     in    his    eyes,    she 

*     LCy   p.     120. 

'  Correspondance  de  Marie  F^odarovna  avec  AfademaiselU  Nilidcv^ 
Paris,  1896. 

•  Fraser^s  Magaziney  p.  308. 


A   MODERN   CALIGULA  219 

was  the  maitresse  en  titre.  Married  to  Prince 
Gagarin,  she  left  her  husband  in  order  to  belong 
entirely  to  the  Emperor.  Three  houses  were 
bought  on  the  quay  of  the  Neva  and  united  into 
one  palace  for  the  Prince  Gagarin,  "  the  indulgent 
husband  of  the  favoured  brunette."  Koutayssov, 
Pauls  former  barber,  now  Count  and  Grand  Master 
of  the  Horse,  hired  a  house  near  the  palace  of 
Prince  Gagarin,  where  he  established  his  own 
mistress,  Madame  Chevalier,  a  French  actress. 
**I  have  frequently,"  says  Sablukov,  "seen  the 
Emperor  leave  him  there  and  fetch  him  away 
again  on  his  return  from  his  own  mistress." 
Voronzov,  when  referring  to  the  Princess  and  her 
father,  wrote:  "We  have  seen  a  father  infamous 
enough  to  prostitute  his  own  daughter."^  The 
Princess  Gagarina  was  so  influential  that  even  Count 
Panin  sought  her  protection.  It  is  worthy  of  note 
that  the  St.  Michael's  Palace  was  painted  in  rose, 
after  the  colour  of  the  Princess's  gloves.  The 
palace  thus  received  the  name  of  the  Archangel, 
and  the  colours  of  the  Imperial  mistress. 

The  impetuosity  and  hastiness  characteristic 
of  all  Pauls  actions  equally  manifested  themselves  in 
his  foreign  policy.  The  most  important  affairs  of 
State  were  treated  in  a  capricious,  passionate,  and 
haphazard  fashion  on  the  impulse  of  the  moment. 
Edicts  and  decrees  were  issued  in  an  autocratic 
manner  without  the  knowledge  of  the  Government.* 
Although  he  was  appointed  Minister  for  Foreign 
Affairs,  Rostoptshin  complained  that  he  could  have 
no  system  of  policy  as  the  Tsar  wished  to  do  every- 

*  Panin  Papers,  vi,  pp.  476-477. 
■  Archives  Voronzov,  xxx,  p.  97. 


A 
i 


220    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

thing  himself,  suffered  no  delay,  and  brooked  no 
contradiction.^  Foreign  affairs  were  decided  by  the 
passing  whim  of  the  Emperor,  who  had  a  decided, 
almost  furious  will,  which  "all  the  wheels  of  the 
Government  machine  must  at  once  obey."  *  Paul's 
favourites  and  aides-de-camp  exercised  more  in- 
fluence than  the  Vice-Chancellor  and  the  oldest 
members  of  the  Government 

That  Catherine  had  made  frequent  wars  was 
sufficient  reason  for  Paul  to  be  peacefully  inclined. 
Paul's  early  policy  had,  therefore,  been  one  of 
peace.  He  withdrew  his  forces  from  Persia,  and, 
leaving  Georgia  to  her  own  levies,  discontinued 
the  recruiting  ordained  by  his  mother  s  regulations 
— ^that  is,  three  men  to  every  five  hundred  souls. 
In  a  circular  dictated  to  Ostermann  for  communi- 
cation to  the  foreign  Powers,  the  Tsar  declared 
that  humanity  did  not  allow  him  to  refuse  his 
beloved  subjects  the  peace  for  which  they  sighed, 
and  which  was  a  necessity  for  the  country  after 
the  constant  warfare  which  had  lasted  forty  years. 
But,  even  if  the  Russian  armies  took  no  part  in 
the  war  with  France,  the  Emperor,  so  the  circular 
declared,  would  nevertheless  remain  as  closely 
united  with  his  allies  as  before,  and  would 
endeavour  strenuously  to  oppose  the  progress  of 
the  mad  French  Republic.  Paul  was,  however, 
gradually  drawn  into  a  war  with  France.  Indeed, 
considering  his  hasty  temperament,  uncontrollable 
temper,  and  hatred  for  France,  the  Tsar  s  peaceful 
policy  was  bound  to  be  of  Very  short  duration. 

The  crimes  of  the  Reign  of  Terror  and  the 

*  Archives  Voronzov,  p.  276. 

*  Czartorysky,  ibid.^  also  Panin  Papers,  v,  p.  170. 


A   MODERN   CALIGULA  221 

misfortunes  of  the  Bourbons  had  increased  the 
Tsar's  abhorrence  of  the  Revolution  and  his 
hatred  of  France.  He  offered  hospitality  to 
Louis  XVIII  in  Mitau,  and  resolved  to  join  the 
coalition  against  revolutionary  France.  The  French 
having  taken  possession  of  Malta,  a  few  knights  of 
the  Maltese  Order  conceived  the  idea  of  offering 
the  Grand  Mastership  of  the  Order  to  the  Emperor ; 
Paul,  fond  of  ceremonies  and  wishing  to  pose  as 
a  hero  of  chivalry  before  the  Princess  Gagarina, 
accepted  with  joy  this  title  so  famous  in  history. 
"  This  title — the  Grand  Master  of  so  many  knights- 
errant,"  says  Sablukov,  "  at  the  very  moment  when 
a  romantic  love  for  the  Princess  Gagarina  was  in- 
flaming his  tender  heart,  set  the  poor  man  quite 
beside  himself."  It  was  somewhat  strange  to  see 
the  Russian  Emperor,  the  head  and  defender  of  the 
Greek  Orthodox  Church,  thus  recognising,  as  Grand 
Master  of  a  Roman  Catholic  Order,  the  Pope  as  his 
Chief.  Count  Litta  arranged  a  solemn  ceremony,  in 
accordance  with  the  ancient  rites  of  the  Order,  when 
Paul  entered  upon  his  new  dignity. 

The  idea  of  conquering  Malta,  his  jealousy  of 
Bonaparte's  successes  in  the  East,  were  so  many 
factors  instrumental  in  making  Paul  abandon  his 
peaceful  policy  and  join  Turkey,  England,  Austria, 
and  Naples  in  a  coalition  against  Bonaparte.  The 
Emperor  of  Austria  availed  himself  of  this  change  in 
Paul's  sentiments  and  asked  for  Russia's  assistance 
against  the  French  armies  in  Italy.  To  flatter 
Paul's  vanity  the  Austrian  Emperor  offered  the  chief 
command  of  the  armies  of  the  Coalition  to  a  Russian 
General.  Paul  acquiesced  and  at  once  appointed 
the  famous  general,  Souvarov,  to  this  post. 


222     THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

Souvarov  at  that  moment  lived  in  retirement  on 
his  estates,  having  incurred  the  Emperor  s  disfavour 
by  an  epigram  and  by  some  unseemly  jokes  on  the 
new  organisation  and  uniforms  of  the  army.  But 
as  soon  as  Paul  wanted  this  veteran  soldier  he  loaded 
him  with  honours  and  compliments.  Souvarov  took 
the  command  of  the  army  and  achieved  victories  on 
the  banks  of  the  river  Adda,  the  river  Trebbia,  and 
at  Novi.  He  crossed  the  Alps  by  the  St.  Gothard 
and  entered  Switzerland,  but  here  the  second  Rus- 
sian general,  Korsakov,  had  been  defeated  by  the 
French,  under  Massena,  at  Zurich,  and  Souvarov 
was  compelled  to  retreat  into  the  Glarus,  and  to  lead 
the  remains  of  his  army  back  to  Russia. 

On  his  return  to  St  Petersburg,  the  Em- 
peror refused  to  see  Souvarov,  and  the  latter 
retired  in  disgrace  to  his  estates,  where  he  shortly 
afterwards  died  in  1800.  The  capricious  Tsar 
was  disgusted  with  the  treatment  which  he  had 
received  from  Austria  and  England.  Paul,  as 
Souvarov  himself  had  done,  accused  Austria  of 
treason  in  the  Italian  campaign.  Bonaparte,  there- 
fore, whose  despotic  principles  now  reassured  the 
autocratic  Tsar,  and  whose  glory  dazzled  him, 
availed  himself  of  Paul's  indignation  against 
Austria  and  managed  to  win  him  over  to  his 
cause.  Taking  advantage  of  the  change  in  Paul's 
attitude  and  sentiments.  Napoleon  began  by 
sending  back  to  Paul  all  the  Russian  prisoners 
clothed  in  new  uniforms  and  well  provisioned.  This 
clever  move  on  the  part  of  the  First  Consul  at  once 
gained  him  the  Tsar  s  heart,  and  Paul  was  the  more 
touched  by  his  action  since  Austria  and  England 
had  refused  to  exchange  the  Russian  soldiers  for  the 


COUNT  GENERAL  ALEXANDKR  VASSILIEVITSH  SOUVAKOV. 


A   MODERN   CALIGULA  223 

French  prisoners.  Paul,  with  his  usual  impetuosity, 
was  now  seized  with  an  increasing  passion  for 
Bonaparte.  He  spoke  of  the  First  Consul's  noble 
conduct,  he  surrounded  himself  with  his  portraits, 
he  drank  his  health  in  public,  and  ordered  Louis 
XVIII  to  quit  Mitau.  Napoleon,  said  Paul,  had 
suppressed  anarchy  and  revolution,  and  there  was 
no  reason  why  Russia  should  not  come  to  an  under- 
standing with  him.  Annoyed  at,  and  disturbed  by 
the  maritime  tyranny  of  Great  Britain,  which  had 
declared  the  ports  of  France  and  her  allies  in  a  state 
of  siege,  Paul  renewed  the  famous  act  of  armed 
neutrality,  and  sought  the  support  of  Prussia, 
Sweden,  and  Denmark.  The  First  Consul  hastened 
to  declare  his  assent  to  the  Russian  principles.  The 
Tsar  of  Russia  and  the  First  Consul  then  entered 
into  an  alliance.  A  plan  was  formed  to  invade 
India  and  to  overthrow  the  English  rule,  and  the 
vanguard  of  a  great  Cossack  army  had  already, 
amid  great  difficulties,  reached  the  left  bank  of  the 
Volga  in  March  1801,  when  the  Chief  of  the 
Cossacks  suddenly  received  the  news  of  Paul's  death, 
and  with  it  the  order  to  return.  The  Tsar's  sudden 
death  broke  up  the  coalition,  to  the  great  satisfaction 
of  the  British  Government,  to  whom  the  League 
of  Neutrality  had  caused  a  considerable  amount 
of  uneasiness. 


CHAPTER   XI 

L'EMPfeREUR  EST   FOU.     THE  DEED  IS   DONE 

Period  of  terrorism — Paul  is  mad — Opinions  of  Russian  statesmen — The  mad 
captain — Conspiracy  to  depose  Paul — Panin  and  Pahlen — Alexander's 
consent — Paul's  suspicion — Whitworth  accused  of  conspiring  against 
Paul — Maria  F^odorovna  is  aware  of  the  conspiracy— Paul's  last  days— 
The  night  of  the  assassination — 11  est  ofA^z^— Paul's  character. 

Things  now  grew  perceptibly  worse  and  worse. 
More  particularly  during  the  year  1799,  the  records 
of  official  violence,  of  brutal  sentences  and  repressive 
punishments  increased  beyond  reckoning.  Notice 
to  leave  the  capital  within  twenty-four  hours  was 
scattered  broadcast ;  and  even  women  were  treated 
in  this  summary  fashion.  One  young  woman  of 
position,  who  ventured  to  marry  against  the  wish  of 
the  Emperor,  was  banished,  together  with  her  whole 
family.  The  Princess  Dashkov  relates  in  her 
Memoirs  that,  as  the  result  of  a  mere  passing  fit  of 
temper  on  the  part  of  the  Emperor,  she  had  to 
remain  exiled  on  one  of  her  poorest  estates  during 
the  greater  part  of  his  reign.  Again,  Kotzebue  tells 
us  that  as  he  was  on  his  way  to  pay  a  visit  to  his 
wife's  relations  in  Esthonia,  he  was  seized  in  the 
most  barbarous  manner  at  Mitau  and  packed  off  to 
Siberia.  The  only  reason  for  this — ^so  he  learnt 
from  Koutayssov  after  his  "  pardon  " — ^was  the  fact 
that  he  was  an  author.  Madame  Sagrjashski,  having 
failed  in  some  act  of  politeness  toward  the  Princess 
Lapoukhin,   mother    of   the    Emperors    mistress, 

aa4 


L'EMP^REUR   EST   FOU  225 

straightway  received  the  usual  orders  to  leave  St. 
Petersburg.  She,  however,  was  able  to  secure 
some  degree  of  clemency,  and  was  graciously  con- 
ceded a  few  months  in  which  to  set  her  affairs  in 
order.*  Noblemen  were  deprived  of  their  estates 
for  the  smallest  breach  of  discipline,  and  even  put  in 
chains  and  condemned  to  hard  labour.  An  almost 
grimly  comic  episode  was  the  banishment  from  St. 
Petersburg  of  all  cab-drivers,  because  one  of  them 
was  found  with  a  pair  of  pistols  and  a  dagger  upon 
him  during  parade. 

During  this  whole  period  the  administration  of 
justice  naturally  remained  the  most  uncertain  factor 
in  the  situation.  There  was  absolutely  nothing  to 
check  the  police  or  the  officers  of  the  custom-house ; 
they  were  free  to  make  whatever  arbitrary  exac- 
tions they  chose.'  As  correspondence  was  usually 
opened,  most  people  had  recourse  to  chemical  inks, 
and  many  letters  of  the  period  concluded  with  the 
request  of  the  writer  that  his  missive  should  at  once 
be  burned.'  The  first  dignitaries  of  the  Empire  had 
to  listen  silently  to  the  most  insulting  language  on 
the  part  of  the  Tsar,  and  Rostoptshin,  Panin,  and 
the  famous  general  Souvarov  were  no  exceptions 
in  this  respect.  Besborodko  died  in  consequence  of 
the  annoyance  caused  to  him  by  Pauls  uncourteous 
behaviour. 

Even  Rostoptshin,  who  had  hoped  for  good 
things  during  Paul's  government,  wrote  to  Vor- 
onzov  in  March  1800:  "Know  once  for  all  that 
the  Emperor  talks  with  no  one,  either  about  himself 

^  Les  Razoumovsky^  iii,  pp.  1 19,  120. 

•  Archives  Voronzov,  xxxii,  pp.  255  and  f. 

'  Les  Raxoumovsky^  ii,  p.  389. 

P 


226     THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

or  about  affairs ;  he  suffers  no  one  to  speak  to  him ; 
he  gives  orders,  and  insists  on  their  execution  with- 
out suffering  a  word  of  question.  He  can  hardly 
conceal  from  himself  that  he  is  far  from  being 
beloved.  He  calls  me  a  Minister ;  I  am  in  reality 
nothing  but  a  secretary."  ^  When  even  such  men  as 
Rostoptshin,  Goudovitsh,  Nicolai,  and  others,  who 
enjoyed  Paul's  confidence  and  were  in  close  relations 
with  the  Court,  for  no  apparent  reason  suddenly 
found  themselves  treated  with  coldness  and  sus- 
picion by  the  Emperor,  and  in  danger  of  disgrace 
or  banishment,  it  is  easy  to  understand  that  Vor- 
onzov,  the  Russian  Ambassador  in  London,  unhesi- 
tatingly refused  to  return  to  Russia  when  Paul 
offered  him  the  post  of  Chancellor,  and  that  others, 
such  as  Arkadij  Morkov  and  Alexander  Voronzov, 
thought  themselves  fortunate  to  be  enjoying  the 
peace  of  private  life,  far  from  the  royal  residence 
and  the  arbitrary  decrees  of  the  central  power.* 

The  Russian  statesmen  were  now  all  convinced 
that  the  Tsar  of  all  the  Russias  was  a  raging  mad- 
man, not  only  unfit  to  reign  but  dangerous  to  his 
family,  to  his  surroundings,  and  to  the  Empire ;  the 
more  dangerous  in  view  of  the  unlimited  power  of 
his  despotic  sway. 

The  physician  Rogerson  wrote  to  Voronzov: 
"  I  cannot  help  pitying  our  master  for  the  evil  he  is 
causing ;  there  is  an  evolution  of  the  tout  ensemble 
in  him  ;  born  with  the  passion  of  doing  good,  he  is 
unable  to  distinguish  between  good  and  evil,  but 
allows  himself  to  be  swayed  by  his  weaknesses  or 
the  violence  of  false  ideas." '    Voronzov  replied  that 

*  Archives  Voronzov,  viii,  p.  276. 
'  IbiiL^  xiv,  p.  266.  *  Ibid,<,  xxx,  p.  116. 


UEMP^REUR   EST    FOU  227 

Paul  was  mad,  and  had  taken  the  Emperors  of 
Morocco  and  the  Shahs  of  Persia  as  his  prototypes.^ 
Under  his  detestable  government  men  of  honour 
and  dignity  retired  from  military  service.  Insults, 
humiliation  and  exile  were  the  order  of  the  day,  and 
State  officers  were  always  prepared  to  be  dismissed 
or  to  take  to  flight.*  His  actions  and  conduct 
towards  foreign  countries  could  only  be  explained 
by  utter  mental  aberration.*  He  was  as  irrespon- 
sible as  a  child  that  wounds  itself  and  others  with 
a  razor,  because  it  has  never  seen  that  instrument 
before.* 

In  February  1801,  only  a  few  days  before 
Paul's  death,  Count  S.  R.  Voronzov,  who  was  at 
Southampton,  wrote  sympathisingly  as  follows  to 
Novosylzov,  who  was  also  just  then  in  England : 
"You  say  that  we  ought  not  to  judge  a  certain 
person,  in  whom  you  and  I  are  greatly  interested, 
too  harshly,  since  the  strain  under  which  he  has 
been  forced  to  live  has  spoilt  his  character ;  you 
mean,  one  must  not  lose  hope  because  the  said 
person  is  steeling  us  to  the  endurance  of  misery. 
There  might  be  a  certain  truth  in  this  if  one  could 
fix  a  time  at  which  the  change  was  to  take  place  ; 
such  change,  you  say,  is  inevitable  and  natural. 
But  if,  in  spite  of  its  necessity  and  feasibility,  the 
change  still  does  not  take  place,  there  must  then 
be  some  radical  evil  which  prevents  it.  As  regards 
the  strain  upon  him  which  has  spoilt  his  character, 
let  me  say,  dear  friend,  that  the  strength  or  weak- 
ness of  the  soul  may  be  compared  to  that  of  the 

1  Panin  Papers,  vi,  p.  434. 

*  Archives  Voronzov,  xvii,  pp.  29,  69,  106. 

3  Ibid^  XX,  108  ;  xxii,  p.  532.  ^  Ibid,^  x,  pp.  1 10,  280. 


228     THE  CURSE   OF   THE    ROMANOVS 

physical  body.  There  are  soft  bodies  without 
elasticity,  such  as  paper,  wax,  lead,  tin,  &c.,  which 
remain  in  the  form  into  which  they  have  been 
squeezed ;  ivory  and  steel  either  break  under 
pressure,  or,  when  released,  fly  back  into  their 
former  position.  The  elastic  power  of  the  air  and 
of  steam,  as  you  know  better  than  I  do,  causes 
them  both  to  deal  destruction  to  whatsoever  exer- 
cises too  great  a  pressure  upon  them.  This  is 
unfortunately  the  case  in  this  instance.  We  have 
had  opportunity  of  seeing  what  wax  and  tin  are 
like.  All  is  lost  therefore.  Try  all  I  can,  I  am 
unable  to  find  any  comfort  in  the  thought  of  the 
future.  It  is  as  if  you  and  I  were  on  a  vessel  of 
which  the  crew  spoke  a  language  that  was  un- 
intelligible to  us.  I  am  sea-sick  and  cannot  rise 
from  my  berth.  You  tell  me  that  a  storm  has 
risen  and  that  there  is  no  hope  for  the  ship,  and 
that  the  Captain  has  gone  mad,  and  is  showering 
blows  on  the  crew.  The  crew,  numbering  over 
thirty  men,  are  afraid  to  offer  any  opposition,  be- 
cause the  Captain  has  already  thrown  one  sailor 
overboard  and  killed  a  second.  And  so  the  only 
thing  is  to  wait  for  the  ship  to  go  down.  You  say, 
however,  that  there  is  still  some  hope  of  deliver- 
ance, for  the  second  officer  is  a  more  reasonable, 
younger,  and  milder-tempered  man,  and  enjoys  the 
confidence  of  the  crew.  And  so  I  beg  you  to 
return  to  the  upper  deck,  and  to  represent  to  the 
young  man  and  the  crew,  that  they  ought  to  save 
the  ship,  which,  together  with  the  cargo,  in  part 
belongs  to  the  former;  they  are  thirty  men  to 
one,  and  it  is  absurd  to  be  afraid  of  being  killed 
by  the  mad  Captain ;  while,  otherwise,  in  a  short 


L'EMP^REUR   EST   FOU  229 

time  all  the  sailors,  and  the  young  man,  will  have 
been  drowned  by  him.  Then  you  tell  me,  that 
you  do  not  understand  their  speech  and  so  cannot 
speak  to  the  crew,  but  that  you  will  go  up  and  see 
what  is  going  on.  You  come  back  to  inform  me 
that  the  danger  is  growing  greater,  and  that  the 
madman  remains  at  the  helm ;  you  still,  however, 
do  not  give  up  hope.  Farewell,  dear  friend!  you 
are  in  a  happier  condition  of  mind  than  I  am ;  I 
have  lost  all  hope."^ 

And  even  Pauls  friend  Rostoptshin  admitted, 
like  Rogerson,  not  without  a  pang  of  pity,  that  the 
Autocrat  was  mad :  "  Heaven  only  knows  to  what 
all  this  will  lead." « 

But  although  all  dignitaries  of  the  State,  and 
even  members  of  the  Imperial  family,  were  con- 
vinced that  Paul  was  mad,  to  breathe  such  a  state- 
ment was  dangerous.  Who  could  dare  to  do  it  ? 
The  Tsar  is  infallible,  and  he  who  dared  to  doubt 
the  soundness  of  his  mind  deserved  to  die.  There 
was  only  one  way  to  save  the  Empire  from  the 
extravagances  of  this  modern  Caligula  —  a  con- 
spiracy, and  swift  and  sure  assassination.  Aux 
grands  maux  Us  grands  remides.  And  so  it  hap- 
pened. At  first  a  plan  was  devised  to  dethrone 
the  Emperor  and  to  proclaim  his  son  Alexander. 
Count  N.  P.  Panin  played  the  principal  part  in  this 
plan.  It  had  been  suggested  by  two  analogous 
cases  in  the  history  of  European  monarchs,  that  of 
George  III  and  of  King  Christian  VII.  Panin 
thought  that  just  as  in  England  and  in  Denmark, 
so  in  Russia,  the  heir-apparent  could  be  invested 

*  Archives  Voronzov,  xi,  pp.  380-381. 
«  Ibid.f  xi,  pp.  328-381. 


230     THE   CURSE   OF   THE    ROMANOVS 

with  the  supreme  power  without  being  compelled 
to  employ  extreme  measures.  But  the  temperament 
of  the  Russian  ruler,  the  host  of  spies  that  were 
watching  everywhere,  made  secrecy  and  conspiracy 
a  necessity.  The  above-mentioned  Count  Panin, 
the  nephew  of  the  Count  Panin  who  had  been  the 
tutor  of  Paul,  had  the  reputation  of  being  a  man 
not  only  of  talent  and  energy,  but  also  of  honesty  of 
purpose,  and  he  decided  to  initiate  Alexander  into 
his  plans.  "It  would  not  have  been  wise,"  writes 
Czartorysky,^  "to  attempt  to  do  anything  without 
first  being  assured  of  the  consent  of  the  heir- 
apparent."  Czartorysky,  in  spite  of  his  many  dis- 
illusions concerning  the  Emperor,  who  had  failed 
to  fulfil  the  promises  he  had  made  as  Grand  Duke 
to  Poland,  had  remained  devotedly  attached  to 
Alexander,  and  greatly  regretted  the  fact  that  the 
Grand  Duke  was  implicated  in  the  dethronement 
of  his  father.  Panin  himself  wrote,  later  on,  to  the 
Empress  Maria  Fdodorovna,  who  always  considered 
him  as  the  chief  party  responsible  for  Paul's  death, 
that  he  was  in  possession  of  a  note  which  proved 
beyond  any  possible  doubt  that  Alexander  had 
sanctioned  all  his  plans,  and  had  been  a  party 
to  the  conspiracy  with  a  view  to  dethrone  his 
father,*  and  that  he  had  had  interviews  with  him- 
self and  Pahlen. 

"  The  truth  is,"  writes  Bernhardi,  "  that  the  plot 
was  first  set  on  foot  by  a  man  of  distinction — ^namely, 
the  Vice-Chancellor,  Count  Panin.  His  first  con- 
federate was  Admiral  Ribas.     Panin,  from  the  time 

>  Mhnoires^  p.  234. 

•  Panin's  letter  was  published  by  Schiemann  in  Die  Emtordung 
Paui'Sy  1902,  p.  55. 


I 


L'EMP^REUR   EST   FOU  231 

he  was  a  youth,  had  been  brought  into  close  touch 
with  the  Emperor.  Indeed,  it  was  only  a  man  who 
had  been  for  a  long  time  on  an  intimate  footing 
with  the  Imperial  family  that  could  have  projected 
such  a  plan ;  for  it  was  indispensable  to  its  success 
that  the  Grand  Duke  Alexander  should  be  won 
over,  and  who  else  could  have  ventured  to  make 
such  open  confession  to  the  young  Prince  ?  Pan  in 
certainly  made  it  one  of  his  first  considerations  to 
seek  means  of  revealing  the  matter  to  the  Grand 
Duke,  and,  as  it  appears,  he  did  it  himself  before  he 
had  entered  into  any  compact  or  understanding  with 
Pahlen.  He  sought  to  win  over  the  Grand  Duke 
by  representing  to  him  that  the  welfare  of  the  State 
and  nation  demanded  that  he  should  be  made 
co-regent  with  his  father,  that  it  was  the  entire 
wish  of  the  nation  to  see  him  in  that  position,  and 
that  the  Senate  and  he  himself  would  force  the 
Emperor,  without  any  assistance  from  the  Grand 
Duke,  to  acknowledge  him  as  co-regent  The 
Grand  Duke,  who  met  with  daily  ill-treatment  from 
his  father  and  was  hardly  less  than  any  of  his 
subjects  in  a  continual  state  of  fear  and  suspense, 
would  not  at  first  hear  anything  of  the  matter ;  but 
though  he  put  aside  the  question  he  did  not  do 
so  in  a  way  which  forbade  a  recurrence  to  the 
subject,  and  after  repeated  conversations  he  came 
round  to  the  view  that  a  change  was  required, 
and  his  final  co-operation  was  now  to  be  depended 
upon."  ^ 

And  in  his  later  historical  work,  Bernhardi  ex- 
presses himself  to  the  following  effect  with  regard 
to  the  share  that   Panin  and  Pahlen   had   in  the 

*  Historische  ZHtschrift^  Munich,  1859,  &c.,  iii,  pp.  146-147. 


r 


232     THE   CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

plot.  He  writes :  **  When  with  Alexander,  Panin 
naturally  could  speak  of  nothing  but  of  depriving 
the  mad  Emperor  of  his  control  over  the  govern- 
ment, and  of  forcing  him  to  give  up  the  crown,  or 
else  to  nominate  the  Prince  as  co-regent,  and  in  this 
way  abdicate  his  power.  As  the  body  of  conspira- 
tors— for  such  they  must  now  soon  be  called — grew 
in  numbers,  Alexander  insisted  on  their  repeated 
promise  that  no  harm  should  be  done  to  his  father. 
,  .  .  Count  Panin  had  rightly  judged  that,  before 
any  effort  was  made  to  induce  other  confederates  to 
join  the  plot,  it  was  above  all  things  necessary  to 
gain  Count  Pahlen,  the  Minister  of  the  Police  and 
General  Governor  of  St  Petersburg,  over  to  the 
cause.  .  .  .  Under  his  protection  the  conspirators 
would  be  in  comparative  safety  and  might  prepare 
for  action.  That  Panin  believed  that  Pahlen  might 
be  safely  reckoned  upon  is  especially  indicative  of 
the  condition  of  things  in  Russia  at  that  epoch.  For 
Pahlen  had  been  given  his  title  by  Paul  and  had 
been  enriched  with  many  earthly  blessings,  and  at 
that  time  was  being  treated  with  the  highest  favour 
and  confidence  by  the  Emperor.  But  for  that  very 
reason  he  felt  his  situation  was  subject  to  daily 
perils,  for  he  was  directly  at  the  mercy  of  the 
Emperor  s  caprices.  He  has  been  frequently  looked 
upon  as  the  original  instigator  of  the  plot  against 
Paul ;  but  this  was  not  so  ;  nor  would  it  have  been 
possible  for  him  to  undertake  such  a  rSle,  seeing 
that  he  was  not  in  the  intimate  relations  with  the 
Grand  Duke  Alexander,  which,,  as  already  stated, 
alone  would  have  made  it  feasible  for  him. 

"  Panin,  however,  had  not  been  mistaken  about 
him.     Pahlen  without  delay  joined  in  the  projected 


L'EMP^REUR   EST   FOU  233 

undertaking,  and  as  he  far  outran  the  other  conspira- 
tors in  energy  and  intellect,  and  as,  moreover,  in  the 
position  he  held,  the  success  of  the  affair  or  the  ruin 
of  the  conspirators  depended  upon  him,  he  even- 
tually slid  into  taking  the  lead  in  the  whole 
business.  Even  Panin  had  to  retire  into  the  back- 
ground, while  the  others  of  the  party  were  merely, 
it  seemed,  tools  in  his  hands."  ^ 

Pahlen,  who  was  Governor  of  St.  Petersburg 
and  thus  had  easy  access  to  the  Palace  and  to 
the  Grand  Duke,  arranged  the  first  interview  be- 
tween Alexander  and  Panin.  The  latter  repre- 
sented to  the  heir-apparent  of  Russia  that  it  was 
his  sacred  duty  to  save  his  country.  If  Paul  con- 
tinued to  reign,  millions  of  people  were  exposed 
to  the  follies  and  eccentricities  of  a  single  indi- 
vidual of  unsound  intellect ;  the  liberty  and  even 
the  life  of  his  mother  and  of  the  Imperial  family 
were  threatened  at  any  moment. 

The  fate  of  Russia  was  in  Alexander's  hand. 
If  he  consented  to  depose  his  father,  he  would 
prevent  the  latter  from  inflicting  greater  calamities 
on  Russia  "  Although,"  says  Czartorysky,  "  Russia 
really  suffered  much  under  the  maniacal  govern- 
ment of  Paul,  and  there  were  no  means  in  that 
country  of  restraining  or  confining  a  mad  sover- 
eign, it  was  a  thousand  pities  that  a  Prince  so 
anxious  and  so  well  qualified  to  be  a  benefactor 
to  his  country  did  not  hold  entirely  aloof  from  a 
conspiracy  which  resulted  almost  inevitably  in  his 
father's  assassination.  All  his  life  Alexander  felt 
in  his  own  mind  the  sombre  reflection  of  the  crime 
against  the   person   of  his  father   which  had   re- 

^  Bemhardi,  Geschichte  RusslatuTs^  ii,  2,  pp.  424-425. 


234     THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

bounded  on  himself,  and  the  thought  of  which  he 
could  never  annihilate."  * 

The  following  account,  given  by  Pahlen  in  con- 
versation with  Langeron  (1804),  also  throws  a 
side-light  on  the  kind  of  secret  relations  which 
Panin  had  with  the  Grand  Duke  Alexander : — 

•*  Some  one  had  awakened  the  Emperor's  sus- 
picion concerning  my  intimacy  with  the  Grand 
Duke  Alexander.  We  both  grew  aware  of  this, 
and  I  did  not  dare  allow  myself  be  seen  in  com- 
pany with  the  young  Prince,  nor  did  we  venture 
to  speak  to  each  other  for  any  length  of  time, 
although  our  official  duties  gfave  us  the  oppor- 
tunity of  doing  so.  We  were  forced,  therefore, 
to  communicate  to  each  other  our  ideas  concerning 
necessary  regulations  in  writing.  It  was,  I  con- 
fess, an  imprudent  and  dangerous  way  of  going 
to  work,  but  the  only  one  possible.  Count  Panin 
undertook  to  carry  the  notes  from  one  to  the  other; 
we  (Pahlen  and  Panin)  read  the  Grand  Dukes 
when  they  were  brought,  answered  them,  and  then 
burnt  them  on  the  spot.  One  day,  while  I  was 
waiting  in  the  Emperor's  ante-room,  Panin  thrust 
a  note  into  my  hand ;  I  was  on  the  point  of  enter- 
ing the  Emperor's  room.  I  thought  I  had  time 
to  read  the  note,  to  answer  and  burn  it,  but  Paul 
suddenly  and  unexpectedly  came  out  of  his  bed- 
room, and  seeing  me,  he  called  me  to  follow 
him  into  his  boudoir,  the  door  of  which  he  closed 
behind  us.  I  had  scarcely  time  to  hide  the  note 
in  my  right-hand  coat-pocket.  The  Emperor  spoke 
of  indifferent  things  ;  he  was  in  a  good  temper  that 
morning.     Quite  in  a  joking  way,  he  suddenly  tried 

*  Czartorysky,  MhnoireSy  p.  236. 


UEMP^REUR   EST   FOU  235 

to  thrust  his  hands  into  my  pockets,  saying :  '  I 
am  going  to  see  what  you  have  there,  perhaps  a 
billet  dotix!  'Well,  dear  Langeron,*  continued 
Pahlen,  as  he  went  on  with  his  tale,  *you  know 
me,  and  are  aware  that  I  am  not  timid,  nor  easily 
put  out  of  countenance ;  but  I  confess,  that  if  at 
that  moment  any  one  had  opened  my  veins,  they 
would  not  have  found  a  drop  of  blood  in  them/ 

"  *  How  did  you  manage  to  save  yourself? '  asked 
Langeron,  who  was  eagerly  listening. 

" '  Quite  easily/  replied  Pahlen,  *  I  said  to  the 
Emperor,  "Sire,  what  are  you  doing!  leave  my 
pockets  alone!  You  hate  snufF,  and  I  am  a  great 
snuff-taker;  my  handkerchief  is  full  of  it.  You 
will  soil  your  hands,  and  make  them  smell  in  a 
way  you  do  not  like."  He  took  his  hands  away, 
and  exclaimed,  '  Phew !  how  disgusting !  You  are 
right ! ' 

'*  And  so  I  got  out  of  the  fix  I  was  in."  ^ 

Alexander  at  last  gave  his  consent.  It  is  not 
without  interest  to  notice  that,  soon  after  the  assas- 
sination of  Paul,  rumours  were  current  that  the 
English  Ambassador,  Whitworth,  instigated  by 
his  Government,  had  first  conceived  the  idea  of 
the  conspiracy.  "  I  know,"  wrote  Count  A.  N. 
Welyaminov  Sernov,  "  that  the  idea  of  assassinating 
Paul  first  emanated  from  Whitworth  and  Olga 
Alexandrovna  Gerebzov,  a  sister  of  the  Zoubovs, 
with  whom  the  English  Ambassador  maintained  an 
intimate  relationship."^  Napoleon,  too,  plainly  ac- 
cused the  English  Government  of  having  been  a 
party  to  the  death  of  Paul.    But  Prince  Adam  Czar- 

*  Revue  Briiannique^  July  1895,  PP*  62-63. 
■  Schiemann,  Z>/V  Ermordung  PauVs^^,  16. 


236     THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

torysky  repudiates  this  accusation.  '*  I  utterly  dis- 
believe the  story  that  English  money  contributed 
to  this  event.  For  even  supposing— and  I  am 
sincerely  convinced  there  is  no  foundation  for  such 
a  belief — that  the  English  Government  of  that  day 
was  devoid  of  all  feelings  of  morality,  such  an 
expenditure  would  have  been  totally  unnecessary."  ^ 
It  must  also  be  borne  in  mind  that  Whitworth 
received  the  intimation  to  leave  St  Petersburg 
on  the  27th  of  May,  1800.  Panin,  too,  was  exiled 
from  St  Petersburg  on  the  15th  of  December  of 
the  same  year.  It  is  more  than  probable  that 
had  Panin  remained  in  the  capital  Paul  might 
have  been  spared,  but  Panin  was  exiled  from  St 
Petersburg,  and  other  men  had  to  be  entrusted 
with  the  execution  of  the  plan« 

The  chief  part  naturally  now  fell  to  Pahlen, 
Chief  of  the  Police,  and  the  adoption  of  the  violent 
measures  which  led  to  the  assassination  was  decided 
upon.  Paul,  to  his  own  detriment,  also  exiled 
his  best  friend,  Rostoptshin.  Pahlen  was  appointed 
Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs,  and  from  his  own 
relation  of  the  events  which  led  to  the  death  of 
Paul  it  is  evident  that  he  took  the  initiative  in 
the  last  phase  of  the  conspiracy.  In  an  account 
which  he  gave  in  1804  to  Count  Langeron  he 
makes  this  fact  clear.  His  account  runs  as  follows: 
**  Having  been  exalted  to  very  high  and  responsible 
posts,  I  was  one  of  those  who  were  most  exposed 
to  the  threatening  outbursts  of  disfavour;  I  had, 
therefore,  to  be  on  my  guard,  not  only  to  avert 
this  danger  from  myself,  but  to  save  Russia — it 
might  be  Europe — from  the  horror  of  a  destruc- 

^  A.  Czartorysky,  MimoireSy  p.  238. 


L'EMPl^REUR   EST   FOU  237 

tive  and  unavoidable  conflagration.  For  six  whole 
months  I  had  been  considering  the  necessity  of 
deposing  Paul  from  the  throne ;  at  the  same  time 
it  seemed,  and  indeed  was,  impossible  to  attain 
this  end  without  the  consent,  or  rather  without 
the  co-operation  of  the  Grand  Duke  Alexander. 
At  least,  it  would  be  necessary  to  inform  him  of 
the  design.  I  took  an  opportunity  of  sounding 
him  on  the  matter,  at  first  approaching  it  casually 
and  in  vague  terms,  merely  making  passing  remarks 
about  his  father's  character.  Alexander  listened, 
sighed,  and  said  nothing.  This  was  not,  however, 
what  I  wanted.  So  I  determined  to  break  the 
ice,  and  told  him  in  plain  terms  what  I  considered 
had  now  become  an  unavoidable  necessity.  At  first 
he  seemed  indignant  at  my  proposition,  and  said, 
he  was  not  blind  to  the  danger  which  threatened 
both  himself  and  the  realm,  but  that  he  had  deter- 
mined to  bear  everything,  and  not  to  take  any 
action  against  his  father.  I  did  not  allow  myself, 
however,  to  be  frightened  out  of  my  intentions, 
and  I  continued,  at  intervals,  urgently  to  represent 
to  him  the  absolute  need  of  a  change.  Each  day 
some  fresh  act  of  madness  made  the  necessity  more 
evident.  I  endeavoured  to  work  on  Alexanders 
love  for  his  own  person,  by  showing  him  that,  if 
he  refused  the  crown,  the  alternative  was  either 
imprisonment,  or  even  death.  And  so  at  last  I 
succeeded  in  overcoming  his  filial  piety,  and  in 
inducing  him  to  talk  over  with  us  the  best  way  of 
bringing  about  this  change,  the  pressing  necessity 
for  which  he  could  not  hide  from  himself."^ 

Maria  F^odorovna,  too,  knew  what  was  being 

^  Revue  BriUmmgue,  July,  1895,  pp.  63-64. 


238     THE   CURSE   OF   THE    ROMANOVS 

plotted,  and  had  her  own  little  party  of  intriguers, 
who,  however,  were  powerless  to  accomplish  much 
against  the  larger  schemes  of  the  main  conspiracy. 
The  Kourakin  family,  who  were  close  allies  of  the 
Empress,  played  the  chief  part  in  this  side-plot; 
they  flattered  their  noble  patroness  by  holding 
before  her  the  vision  of  the  Imperial  Power,  of  the 
unique  Autocracy  of  Russia.  She  saw  herself 
playing  the  part  of  Catherine  over  again.  They 
put  it  to  her  that  the  Grand  Duke  Alexander  was 
obviously  too  young,  inexperienced,  weak  and  easily 
led — he  would,  himself,  shrink  from  accepting  the 
burden  of  the  crown :  whereas  the  brilliant  reign  of 
the  Empress  Catherine  was  still  fresh  in  the  minds 
of  the  people ;  older  people  could  also  recall  the 
reign  of  the  Empress  Elizabeth  as  a  period  of 
happiness  and  prosperity ;  in  short,  Russia  was 
accustomed  to  female  rule,  and  had  always  found 
itself  best  off  when  under  it — ^and  the  nation  was 
longing  for  the  return  of  the  milder  sway  of  an 
Empress.  And,  furthermore,  they  argued,  she  her- 
self was  beyond  measure  beloved  ;  and  the  love  of 
the  nation,  combined  with  all  these  delightful  re- 
membrances, was,  in  itself,  sufficient  to  place  her 
on  that  exalted  pinnacle. 

It  was  natural  that  the  Empress  should  lend  a 
willing  ear  to  such  words ;  she  was  the  more  easily 
convinced  of  their  truth  because  she  knew  herself 
to  be  greatly  beloved — indeed,  her  entire  previous 
and  after  life  had  for  motive  an  almost  feverish 
hankering  after  popularity.  She  had  placed  herself 
at  the  head  of  many  benevolent  institutions  and 
had  undertaken  their  direction,  with  little  expe- 
rience, it  is  true,  of  what  was  required,  but  with 


L'EMP^REUR   EST   FOU  239 

unmitigated  zeal  and  not  a  little  ostentation.  She 
never  took  a  walk  without  thinking  of  how  she 
might  bring  about  some  slight  incident  which 
should  give  rise  to  an  anecdote,  showing  her  forth 
to  the  people  as  full  of  kindness  of  heart  and  of 
dignified  condescension.  She  never  forgot  the  part 
she  wished  to  play  before  them,  and  consequently, 
in  later  life,  her  whole  manner  had  about  it  some- 
thing decidedly  theatrical  and  artificial.^ 

In  the  meantime  Paul's  tyrannical  cruelties  had 
made  his  deposition  inevitable.  The  Emperor 
had  left  the  old  palace  and  was  now  residing  at 
that  of  St.  Michael,  which  was  built  like  a  fortress, 
surrounded  with  canals  and  drawbridges,  full  of 
secret  staircases  and  underground  passages.*  Prin- 
cess Gagarina  was  also  lodged  in  the  Palace  under 
the  Emperor's  cabinet,  a  private  staircase  leading 
to  her  apartment.  Rumours  of  the  conspiracy 
gradually  spread  through  all  circles  of  St.  Peters- 
burg society.  The  Zoubovs,  who  had  been  banished 
to  their  estates,  had  returned  to  St.  Petersburg, 
and  among  them  the  Madame  Gerebzov  who  had 
had  a  liaison  with  Whitworth.  The  word  went 
about  that  several  generals,  Talysin  and  others, 
were  frequently  holding  secret  parties,  ''des  petits 
soupers finSy'  which  lasted  far  into  the  night,  and 
to  which  great  significance  attached. 

Considerable  agitation  also  prevailed  at  this 
moment  in  the  diplomatic  circles.  Paul  had  broken 
off  from  the  coalition,  and  had  declared  war  against 
England.  "  The  whole  appearance  of  society," 
says   Sablukov,    "  showed   clearly    that   something 

*  Bernhardi,  Historische  Zeitschri/t,  iii,  p.  149. 

*  Fraser's  Magctzine^  p.  311. 


240     THE   CURSE   OF   THE    ROMANOVS 

extraordinary  was  going  on ;  the  freedom  with 
which  the  Emperor  was  blamed,  his  extravagances 
ridiculed,  and  his  severities  recorded,  were  evident 
proofs  that  some  plot  was  hatching  against  him."^ 
Everybody  knew  that  something  was  in  the  wind, 
and  yet  the  conspirators  still  hesitated.  The 
rumour  of  the  conspiracy  at  last  came  to  Paul's 
ears.  One  morning  he  called  Pahlen  into  his 
room  and  abruptly  asked  him:  **Do  you  know 
what  happened  in  '62  ? " 

"  Yes,  your  Majesty,  I  know  it,"  replied  Pahlen. 

"  Do  you  know  that  there  is  a  conspiracy,  and 
that  they  wish  to  renew  '62  ?  " 

Pahlen  trembled,  but  coolly  replied  :  *'  Yes,  your 
Majesty,  I  am  aware  of  it ;  I  am  one  of  the  con- 
spirators myself." 

"  What !  you  dare  to  tell  me  that  ?  " 

**  How  else  could  I  manage  to  know  what  is 
going  on,  and  take  the  necessary  steps  in  my  capa- 
city as  Military  Governor  of  St.  Petersburg  ?  But 
you  need  not  be  alarmed.  Sire,"  added  Pahlen. 

"  Arrest  them  all,  put  them  in  chains,  send  them 
to  fortresses  and  to  casemates,  to  Siberia  and  to 
the  mines,"  cried  Paul  in  great  excitement. 

**This  is  impossible,"  replied  Pahlen;  "here  is 
a  list  of  the  conspirators.  Your  Majesty  will  see 
that  the  Empress  and  the  two  Grand  Dukes  arc 
among  them.  I  cannot  arrest  these  august  per- 
sonages without  a  special  ukase." 

Paul  signed  an  ukase,  ordering  the  arrest  of  the 
Imperial  family.  The  Empress  and  the  Grand 
Duchesses  were  to  be  sent  to  a  convent ;  Alexander 
and  Constantine  were  to  be  detained  in  a  fortress  ; 

^  I  bid,  J  p.  312. 


L'EMPJ^REUR   EST   FOU  241 

the  other  conspirators  were  to  be  heavily  punished.^ 
Pahlen  made  it,  however,  a  condition  that  he  should 
be  allowed  to  abide  his  time,  and  to  proceed  only 
when  he  judged  the  moment  propitious.  Paul 
seemed  reassured.  His  suspicions,  however,  had 
been  aroused,  and  he  secretly  recalled  from  exile 
his  two  former  favourites,  Araktsheev  and  Ros- 
toptshin.  They  arrived  too  late.*  Pahlen  in  the 
meantime  went  with  Pauls  ukase  to  Alexander, 
thus  proving  to  him  that  the  lives  of  all  the  mem- 
bers of  the  Imperial  family  were  in  danger,  and 
obtained  the  Tsarevitsh's  permission  to  depose 
his  father.  Alexander,  however,  insisted  that  his 
father's  life  should  be  spared.  This  promise  was 
naturally  given,  **but  the  Grand  Duke  ought  to 
have  known,"  says  Welyaminov  Sernov,'  **that  it 
would  be  impossible  to  keep  this  promise." 

The  night  of  the  i  ith  of  March  was  fixed  as  the 
date  on  which  the  deed  should  be  done.  It  is  said 
that,  during  the  last  weeks  and  days  of  his  life,  Paul 
was  in  constant  fear  of  being  either  strangled  or 
poisoned.  Four  or  five  days  before  his  death  Paul 
was  riding  in  one  of  the  alleys  of  the  Palace  when 
he  suddenly  stopped  his  horse,  and,  turning  to  the 
Grand  Master  of  the  Horse,  Moukhanov,  said  in  a 
tone  of  great  alarm  :  "  I  feel  quite  suffocated  ;  I  feel 
as  if  I  was  going  to  die !    Will  they  strangle  me  ?  " 

General  Koutousov  relates,  however,  that  on  the 
night  of  the  catastrophe  he  dined  with  the  Emperor, 
and  found  the  latter  very  well  disposed  and  joking 

^  Welyaminov  Sernov,  Schiemann,  /.r.,  pp.  23-24,  and  Revue 
Britanfuque^  1895,  J"ly>  PP*  62-69. 

'  Revue  Britanmque^  ibid.^  and  S^gur,  A.  de,  Vie  du  Comte 
Rostopckine,  187 1,  p.  86. 

'  Revue  Britannique^  p.  24.  '  Sablukov,  /.^.,  pp.  312-313. 

Q 


242     THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

pleasantly  with  Koutousov's  eldest  daughter,  who 
was  also  present.  After  dinner  Paul  was  con- 
versing with  the  General,  when  he  suddenly  turned 
to  a  looking-glass  which  had  a  flaw,  and  observed 
laughingly :  **  What  a  strange  mirror !  my  neck  looks 
as  if  it  were  twisted."  ^ 

The  conspirators,  having  now  decided  that  delay 
or  vacillation  was  dangerous,  acted  swiftly.  The 
blow  was  to  be  struck  on  the  nth  of  March. 
Platon  Zoubov  gave  a  supper  on  that  evening,  and 
all  the  generals  and  officers  who  were  in  the  con- 
spiracy were  invited.  Champagne  was  drunk  freely, 
and  great  excitement  prevailed.  At  11.30  Pahlen 
returned  and  asked  whether  everything  was  ready. 
Yes,  was  the  reply.  At  midnight  the  conspirators, 
divided  into  two  groups,  marched  towards  the 
Palace.  The  first  band  was  headed  by  the  two 
Zoubovs  and  General  Bennigsen,  whilst  the  other 
was  under  the  command  of  Pahlen.  Arrived  at 
the  Palace  the  first  band  marched  towards  the 
Emperor's  dressing-room,  adjoining  his  bedroom, 
whilst  Pahlen  went  to  the  apartments  of  the 
Empress,  and  rousing  the  lady-in-waiting,  told 
her  what  was  in  progress,  and  arranged  with  her 
how  best  to  inform  Maria  Feodorovna.  Mean- 
while, the  conspirators  were  confronted  at  the 
Emperors  room  by  a  young  hussar,  who  wished 
to  bar  their  entry.  A  struggle  ensued,  and  the 
hussar  was  wounded  and  put  out  of  the  way.  The 
noise,  however,  awoke  the  Emperor.  He  jumped 
out  of  bed  and  made  for  a  secret  door  which  com- 
municated with  the  Empress's  apartments.  But 
he  himself  had   previously   ordered   this  door  to 

'  Reuue  Britanniquey  pp.  77-78. 


L'EMP^REUR   EST   FOU  243 

be  locked,  and  whether  it  was  that  the  key  was 
not  in  the  lock,  or  that  he  could  not  find  it  in 
his  excitement,  he  was  caught  like  a  mouse  in  a 
trap.  The  Emperor  of  all  the  Russias  who,  only 
a  few  hours  before,  had  terrorised  a  vast  Empire 
and  held  millions  in  trembling  sway,  crept  into 
the  chimney  to  hide  himself  Entering  the  room 
and  finding  the  bed  empty  the  conspirators  thought 
that  the  Emperor  had  escaped.  Some,  like  Zoubov, 
lost  courage  and  wished  to  retire,  but  General 
Bennigsen  checked  him,  and,  searching  the  room, 
discovered  Paul  in  the  chimney.  They  dragged 
him  down  by  his  leg ;  he  was  shivering  and 
speechless. 

"  You  are  my  prisoner,"  said  Bennigsen  ;  "  sign 
at  once  a  deed  of  abdication  in  favour  of  your  son 
Alexander." 

"  What  have  I  done  ?  "  asked  Paul,  trembling. 

"Four  years  ago,"  said  one  officer,  **we  ought 
to  have  made  an  end  of  you."  * 

Paul  fell  on  his  knees ;  begged  and  prayed ; 
promised  great  reformations  in  the  future. 

In  the  meantime  the  Empress,  informed  of 
what  was  going  on,  was  hammering  at  the  door. 

"  Drag  that  woman  away,"  said  Zoubov,  who, 
as  the  former  lover  of  Empress  Catherine,  had  lost 
his  sense  of  the  exalted  position  of  the  lady  and 
saw  in  her  the  mere  woman. 

Alexius  Tatarinov,  a  strong,  powerfully-built 
man,  walked  out,  and  seizing  the  Empress,  who 
was  only  dressed  in  her  nightgown,  carried  her 
back  into  her  bedroom.* 

At  that  moment  Bibikov,  commanding  a  section 

*  Schiemann,  /.^.,  p.  79.  '  /.^.,  p.  30. 


244     THE   CURSE   OF   THE    ROMANOVS 

of  the  soldiers  of  the  Semeonovsky  regiment,  arrived 
in  the  ante-room.  The  conspirators  on  hearing 
the  noise  were  again  frightened,  and  Bennigsen 
rushed  out  to  see  what  was  happening.  Paul 
was  now  loudly  shouting  for  help  and  trying  to 
escape.  The  conspirators,  maddened  by  their  furious 
hatred  of  the  tyrant  and  by  their  fear  of  danger, 
struggled  to  hold  him  back.  Zoubov  struck  Paul 
with  his  tabatiire^  several  officers  threw  themselves 
on  the  desperate  Emperor,  and  one  of  them  re- 
moved his  scarf  and  tied  it  round  the  Autocrat's 
throat.  Paul  still  resisted  for  a  while,  but  they 
tightened  the  knot,  and  when  Bennigsen  returned 
he  was  met  with  the  words,  "  II est  achev^r  Paul  had 
breathed  his  last*  The  officers  whom  he  had 
tortured  for  four  years  had.  taken  their  revenge. 

Pahlen,  who  had  evidently  delayed  his  arrival 
designedly,  now  appeared  on  the  scene,  just  in  time 
to  give  the  necessary  orders  in  the  general  con- 
fusion which  ensued.  "The  murderers,"  writes 
Czartorysky,  "wandered  tumultuously  about  the 
corridors  and  rooms  of  the  Palace  boasting  of  their 
deed ;  they  added  to  the  intoxication  of  the  supper 
by  breaking  into  the  wine-cellars  and  drinking  to 
the  Emperor's  death."* 

The  news  of  Paul's  death  quickly  spread  through 
the  Palace ;  it  was  announced  that  he  had  died  of 
apoplexy,  and  that  Alexander  had  ascended  the 
throne  as  Emperor  of  Russia.  The  report  was 
everywhere  received  with  a  sense  of  relief  and 
satisfaction.  No  heed  was  taken  to  hide  the  uni- 
versal joy   which    broke    out    in    St.    Petersburg. 

*  Revue  Britcmnigue,  p.  73,  and  Schiemann,  p.  80. 

•  Czartorysky,  Memoires^  p.  250. 


THE   DEED   IS   DONE  245 

"The  event  of  March,"  Count  Voronzov  wrote 
afterwards  from  London,  "resembled  the  ides  of 
March  which  Cicero  so  much  extolled."  And  two 
days  after  the  death  of  Paul,  Tatitshev  wrote  that 
Russian  society  had  now  awoke  to  a  new  life.  The 
horrible  and  constant  fear  of  prison,  torture  and 
exile,  which  had  haunted  everybody  during  the 
reign  of  Paul,  had  now  vanished  like  the  phantom 
of  a  dream,  giving  way  to  new  hopes  for  a  happier 
life.  The  whole  nation  fell  to  celebrating  the  event, 
which  had  delivered  it  from  a  tyrant,  with  a  great 
jubilation. 

As  Admiral  Tshitshagov  wrote  to  Voronzov, 
Russia  had  become  in  four  years  as  uncivilised  as 
if  she  had  swung  back  four  centuries.^  And  Kot- 
shoubey  later  on,  after  the  Emperor's  assassination  : 
**  No  one  who  has  not  lived  through  the  last  four 
years  of  PauFs  reign,  and  witnessed  the  disorder, 
disorganisation,  and  chaos,  could  realise  the  labour 
involved  in  remedying  matters.  I  confess  that, 
when  I  reflect  on  it,  I  feel  sure  that  any  other 
nation  would  infallibly  have  been  ruined  thereby.'** 

About  the  same  time  Baron  von  Grimm  wrote 
to  Voronzov,  that  every  one  must  try  to  forget  the 
terrible  years  of  Paul's  reign.  They  clung  to  the 
memory  like  a  bad  dream,  like  a  terrifying  night- 
mare ;  not  a  day  passed  but  some  fresh  misery  was 
added  to  that  which  was  being  already  endured. 
Apart  from  the  incalculable  evil  resulting  from  the 
perverted  system  of  politics,  which  threatened  the 
ruin  of  the  State,  the  continual  persecution  of  pri- 
vate individuals  exercised  a  depressing  influence  on 
the  onlookers ;    it  was   enough  to  drive  anybody 

^  Archives  Voronzov,  xix,  63.  '  LCy  xviii,  pp.  235,  241. 


i 


246    THE   CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

tnad»  &c^  Buturlin,  in  a  letter  to  his  uncle,  Count 
Voronzov,  writes:  *'The  uninterrupted  series  of 
blunders  and  follies,  committed  in  the  name  of  the 
government  which  is  now  ended,  has  so  deeply 
affected  the  nation  that  I  do  not  know  how  long  we 
may  not  go  on  having  relapses.  .  •  •  Public  spirit 
is  still  in  a  corrupt  state.  The  people  who  during 
Paul's  reign  were  always  living  in  a  tremor  of 
suspense  between  the  prison  and  the  Order  of  St 
Anne,  between  Siberia  and  a  present  of  so  many 
thousand  serfs,  must  be  given  time  to  fall  back  by 
degrees  into  peaceful  and  orderly  ways."  And  in 
1 803  he  writes  again :  "  The  late  government  so 
entirely  undermined  the  foundations  of  the  State, 
that  there  are  hardly  ten  persons  to  be  found  who 
might  possibly  be  fitted  to  fill  one  of  the  higher 
posts." 

Thus  another  blood-stained  page  had  been  added 
to  the  history  of  the  Romanovs,  another  victim  had 
fallen  under  the  curse  to  which  the  family  seems  to 
be  doomed.  Paul  died,  just  as  he  had  feared  he 
would  die — by  assassination.  His  character  has 
been  considered  a  psychological  riddle,  which  his- 
torians and  biographers  have  vainly  endeavoured 
to  solve.  Some  maintain  that  he  deserves  pity 
more  than  hate.  His  vagaries  and  eccentricities 
are  to  be  attributed  to  the  restricted  and  almost 
intolerable  position  in  which  he  was  kept  during 
the  life  and  reign  of  his  mother.  Paul  never  wished 
to  be  a  tyrant.  He  had  been  slighted  by  his 
mother  and  by  her  favourites.  As  the  heir-apparent 
he  had  to  endure  insults  and  suffering.  It  was  this 
state,  in  which  he  lived  for  forty-two  years,  which 

*  Archives  Voronzov,  xx,  pp.  386-387. 


THE   DEED   IS   DONE  247 

embittered  his  character  and  led  to  his  attitude 
when  Emperor.  But  he  had  a  warm,  kind  and 
feeling  heart,  say  his  apologists,  adducing  his  youth 
and  the  early  weeks  of  his  reign ;  at  the  threshold 
of  manhood  he  was  endowed  with  noble  senti- 
ments, with  a  passionate  love  for  justice,  and  with 
a  high  sense  of  chivalry.* 

Other  contemporaries,  however,  came  to  the 
conclusion  that  Paul  fully  merited  his  reputation 
of  lunacy.  Whitworth,  the  English  Ambassador, 
did  not  hesitate  to  inform  Lord  Granville  that 
**the  Emperor  is  literally  not  in  his  senses."  And 
Napoleon  told  his  surgeon,  Barry  E.  O'Meara,  on 
St.  Helena,  that  he  was  sure  Paul  had  lost  his 
reason  towards  the  end  of  his  reign. 

Probably  the  real  truth  is  that  Paul  from  his 
birth  bore  in  him  the  hereditary  germs  which, 
aided  by  his  restricted  position  when  Tsarevitsh 
and  by  the  sudden  change  which  made  him  abso- 
lute master  of  the  Empire,  were  bound  to  develop 
into  a  state  of  insanity.  Had  he  been  a  simple 
individual  he  would  have  undoubtedly  manifested 
signs  of  mental  aberration,  but  they  would  have 
taken  a  milder  form.  Catherine  was  a  woman  of 
genius  and  of  an  ardent  temperament  Her  off- 
spring was  a  neuropath.  The  son  paid  the  penalty 
for  the  mother.  His  blood  was  tainted,  and  his 
exalted  position  more  than  his  ill-treatment  helped 
to  develop  the  taint.  Mistrust  was  the  chief  trait 
of  Paul's  character.  *'  His  hand  was  against  every 
man,  and  every  man's  hand  against  him."  He 
was  subject  to  the  mania  of  persecution.  Even 
as  a  young  man,  and  previous  to  the  worst  of  his 

*  De  Sanglen  in  Rousskaya  Starina^  1883,  vol.  xxxvii. 


248    THE   CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

unhappy  experiences,  he  confessed  to  his  friend, 
Andr6  Razoumovsky,  that  the  feeling  of  suspicion 
was  deeply  rooted  in  him.  Already  as  a  child 
he  was  melancholy  and  often  agitated,  and  went 
through  all  the  phases  accompanying  neuropathic 
vesanta.  Thus  heredity  had  doomed  him,  edu- 
cation did  the  rest,  and  autocracy  brought  about 
its  full  development  He  may  have  often  meant 
to  be  just  and  even  generous,  but  his  hasty  and 
violent  temper  made  him  turn  into  the  spirit,  "d&r 
das  Gute  will  und  das  Bose  schafft'' 

I  have  compared  Paul  in  some  respects  to  Cali- 
gula. Like  Caligula,  Paul  suffered  from  intense 
megalomania.  There  was  an  intense  desire  in 
both  these  rulers  to  achieve  something  grandiose, 
to  be  handed  down  to  posterity  as  the  most  im- 
perial of  monarchs.  Paul's  jealousy  of  Napoleon  s 
successes  may  have  served  as  a  stimulus,  intensi- 
fying the  hastiness  and  contradictoriness  which 
characterised  all  his  actions,  as  they  did  those  of 
Caligula.  Like  Caligula,  too,  Paul  brooked  no  con- 
tradiction, he  even  suffered  no  advice ;  and,  like 
Caligula,  Paul  fell  a  victim  to  the  hand  of  the 
assassin — ^an  instrument  in  the  hands  of  fate. 


PART   II 


ALEXANDER    I 


CHAPTER  XII 

THE  BIRTH  OF  ALEXANDER 

Catherine's  joy  at  the  birth  of  her  grandson — Her  letters  to  Grimm — 
Alexander's  early  education  —  Grandmamma's  ABC  —  Catherine's 
grand-children — The  Imperial  babies — ^Alexander's  teachers — Laharpe, 
the  Republican — Lessons  in  history — Catherine's  instructions. 

The  discharge  of  two  hundred  and  one  cannon, 
from  the  fortress  of  Peter  and  Paul  and  from  the 
Admiralty,  on  the  23rd  of  December  (12th)  1777, 
announced  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  Russian 
capital  the  birth  of  Alexander,  the  son  of  Paul,  and 
the  grandson  of  the  Empress  Catherine.  Courtiers 
and  clergy  on  their  knees  offered  thanks  to 
Providence  in  the  Court  Chapel.  Congratulations 
were  also  eagerly  offered  to  the  Empress  herself 
and  to  her  son  the  Tsarevitsh.  The  Russian  poet 
Derzhavin  composed  an  ode  on  the  birth  of  the 
Northern  Prince.  Catherine's  joy  knew  no  bounds. 
The  idea  of  excluding  Paul  from  the  throne  must 
already  have  occurred  to  the  Empress  at  that  time, 
and  the  birth  of  a  grandson  settling  the  question  of 
succession  may  be  considered  as  one  of  the  causes 
of  her  exuberant  joy. 

As  Elizabeth  had  done  in  the  case  of  Paul, 
Catherine,  as  soon  as  her  grandson  was  bom,  took 
him  away  from  his  parents  and  herself  superin- 
tended his  education.  She  wished  to  form  the 
character  of  the  future  ruler  according  to  her  own 
ideas,  and  she  feared,  as  it  seems,  the  influence  of 

9$t 


252    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

his  father.  She  set  down  the  nervousness  and 
irritability  of  Paul  to  the  fussy,  exaggerated  solici- 
tudes of  Elizabeth,  and  she  made  it,  therefore,  her 
first  business  to  strengthen  the  child's  constitution 
and  to  make  him  physically  fit  to  stand  all  sorts 
of  hardships. 

During  his  first  years  the  Imperial  baby  was 
entrusted  to  the  care  of  Madame  Benkendorff,  wife 
of  General  Benkendorff,  and  to  the  nurse  Mile. 
Gessler,  who  was  of  English  extraction.  This  lady 
had  a  great  influence  upon  the  early  physical  and 
moral  development  of  the  future  Tsar.  Catherine 
said  in  1793  :  ''Should  Alexander  have  a  son  and 
have  him  educated  by  this  same  Englishwoman,  the 
succession  of  the  Russian  throne  will  be  consolidated 
for  a  hundred  years.  What  a  difference  between 
his  upbringing  and  that  of  his  father.  In  the  case 
of  Paul  I  had  no  voice  at  first,  and  after  the 
political  change  I  hesitated  to  take  him  away  from 
Panin.  They  all  thought  that  without  Panin  he 
would  be  lost"^ 

In  1779  Maria  F6odorovna  gave  birth  to 
another  boy,  Constantine.  Catherine,  in  one  of  her 
letters  to  Grimm,  explains  why  this  boy  was  so 
christened.*  The  whole  of  these  letters  to  Grimm 
bear  testimony  of  the  care  she  took  of  her  elder 
grandson  and  the  love  she  bore  him.  In  fact, 
Alexander  was  the  only  great  and  noble  passion 
of  the  Northern  Semiramis.  Her  passion,  as  has 
already  been  seen,  was  not  entirely  unrelated  to 
dynastic  designs  and  political  ambitions,  but  in  the 
main  it  was  sincere  and  noble. 

^  Khrapovitzky,  Diary,  1874,  p.  434. 
*  Sbornik,  vol*  xxiii,  p.  136. 


'I 


THE   BIRTH    OF   ALEXANDER     253 

The  following  extracts  from  her  correspondence 
will  show  how  great  her  joy  was  at  the  birth  of 
Alexander,  and  how  passionately  fond  of  him  she 
grew  afterwards. 

"  I  warrant,  however,"  she  writes  to  Grimm, 
"that  you  know  nothing  about  Monsieur  Alexander, 
at  least  of  the  one  of  whom  I  am  about  to  tell  you.  It 
is  not  Alexander  the  Great,  do  not  imagine  it,  but 
a  very  small  Alexander,  who  was  only  born  on  the 
1 2th  of  this  month  at  a  quarter  to  eleven  in  the 
morning.  From  which  you  will  understand  that 
the  Grand  Duchess  has  just  given  birth  to  a  son, 
who,  in  honour  of  St  Alexander  Nevsky,  has 
received  the  magnificent  name  of  Alexander,  and 
whom  I  style  Monsieur  Alexander,  because  if  he 
takes  it  into  his  head  to  live,  his  tradespeople  will, 
without  fail,  in  course  of  time  have  other  trades- 
people. You  see  how  shrewd  and  prophetic  grand- 
mothers can  be.  Have  I  not  given  proof  of 
astonishing  perspicacity  ?  '  Aber^  mein  Gott^  was 
wird  denn  aus  dem  Jungen  werden  ?  *  ( But,  my  God, 
what  will  become  of  the  child  ?).  I  console  myself, 
as  did  Bayle  and  Tristram  Shandy's  father,  who 
were  of  opinion  that  a  name  exercised  an  influence 
on  life  ;  well — this  one  is  illustrious  enough — there 
have  been  matadors  of  the  name — let  us  hope  that 
the  die  has  not  been  cast  for  him  in  that  direction.^ 

"You  must  know  that  when  you  speak  of 
Monsieur  Alexander  you  touch  a  weak  spot  in  me. 
I  have  already  told  you  of  his  health  and  strength, 
and  he  is  now  beginning  to  show  a  remarkable  in- 
telligence for  a  child  of  his  age ;  I  dote  upon  him, 
and  I  intend,  if  possible,  to  have  him  always  with 

*  I.C.,  pp.  71-72. 


254     THE   CURSE   OF   THE    ROMANOVS 

me.  He  has  the  pleasant  temper  of  a  child  in  good 
health,  is  full  of  high  spirits,  ingratiating  in  manner, 
afraid  of  nothing,  and  as  beautiful  as  a  little  god 
of  love.  Everybody  is  fond  of  him,  I  more  than 
others,  and  I  can  do  anything  I  like  with  him.  He 
can  walk  alone  now,  and  even  when  his  teedi  are 
giving  him  pain  he  is  just  as  good-tempered  as 
ever,  and  laughs  and  frolics  while  he  makes  us 
understand  he  is  suffering ;  he  understands  every- 
thing that  is  said  to  him,  and  has  a  wonderful 
language  of  his  own  of  signs  and  sounds.  Gay 
music  pleases  him  best ;  he  will  get  the  band  to 
play  the  tunes  he  likes  and  then  thank  them  in 
his  own  manner.^ 

•*  As  for  M.  Alexander,  just  leave  him  to  him- 
self. Why  should  you  wish  him  to  think  exactly  as 
everybody  else  has  thought,  or  to  know  what 
everybody  else  has  known.  It  is  not  difficult  to 
learn,  but  my  idea  is  that  a  child's  mind  and 
powers  should  be  developed  before  his  head  is 
confused  with  all  kinds  of  stale  trash — ^and  from 
this  trash  a  very  careful  selection  should  be  made 
as  to  what  is  fitted  for  it.  What  nature  cannot 
do,  learning  never  will,  but  learning  often  stifles 
mother-wit,  and,  according  to  the  late  Mme 
Geoffrin,  there  is  nothing  worse  than  to  have  a 
veneer  of  learning  and  science.* 

"  I  have  no  time  just  now  to  attend  to  all  that 
fine  rubbish ;  the  early  morning  is  occupied  with 
the  usual  routine  of  affairs ;  at  half-past  ten  M. 
Alexander  arrives  and  is  with  me  while  I  am  dress- 
ing ;  a  queer  little  fish,  just  as  merry  and  pleasant 
as  a  child  of  that  age  can   be.     His  father  and 

^  Sbomik,  vol.  xxiii,  p.  143.  '  /.r.,  p.  147. 


THE    BIRTH    OF   ALEXANDER     255 

mother  cannot  manage  him  and  he  gets  spoiled 
when  away  from  me."^ 

And  then  Catherine  again  speaks  of  her  de- 
votion to  the  child,  and  describes  how  they  play 
together,  rivalling  each  other  in  the  ingenuity  with 
which  they  make  the  same  plaything  do  duty  for  ten 
or  twelve  others.  After  dinner  the  child  was  allowed 
to  go  into  her  room  as  often  as  he  liked,  and  seems 
to  have  been  as  fond  of  her  as  she  was  of  him. 

"You  will  never  guess  what  my  chief  amuse- 
ment is  now ! "  writes  Catherine  again.  "  Teaching 
M.  Alexander  his  ABC,  who  cannot  yet  talk, 
by-the-bye,  and  is  only  a  year  and  a  half  old.  He 
found  an  A  on  a  bow-wow,  and  since  then  he  picks 
it  out  wherever  he  sees  it ;  and  we  are  now  going 
on  to  the  other  vowels.  He  is  a  delightful  little 
monkey,  and  loves  to  imitate  everything  he  sees 
me  do. 

"Another  child  was  baptized  yesterday  with 
M.  Alexander,  who,  hearing  the  former  cry,  made 
us  understand,  in  his  monosyllabic  language,  that 
he  was  to  be  given  to  his  nurse,  and  as,  according 
to  Sancho  Panza's  proverb,  *a  seller  of  onions  is 
a  good  judge  of  a  shallot,'  I  had  M.  Alexanders 
orders  executed,  and  the  child  did  in  truth  leave 
off  crying.* 

"M.  Alexander  will  not  be  very  pleased  to 
see  me  depart — when  he  leaves  me  he  does  it  of 
his  own  accord,  and  with  tears,  but  when  I  leave 
him  he  begins  to  scream.  He  writes  me  letters 
from  his  own  room,  sends  for  me  if  he  is  ill, 
and  really  seems  to  get  better  as  soon  as  I  ap- 
pear.    Those   who   do  not   watch  him  as  closely 

^  /.^.,  p.  148.  '  /.^.,  p.  152. 


256    THE   CURSE   OF   THE    ROMANOVS 

as  I,  do  not  know  how  much  understandmg  or 
what  quick  instincts  he  has ;  he  is  as  advanced 
in  all  ways  as  a  child  of  four  or  five  years  old. 
He  comes  to  me  whenever  he  wants  anything 
explained,  and  as  I  have  always  told  him  the  truth 
and  talked  sensibly  to  him,  he  does  not  consider  he 
knows  a  thing  properly  unless  he  has  learnt  it 
from  me."  * 

In  another  letter,  Catherine,  after  enumerating 
the  various  papers  she  has  before  her  to  get  through, 
begs  Grimm  to  allow  her  to  turn  for  a  while  to  a  more 
pleasing  subject,  that  she  may  gain  courage  to  begin 
her  task.  The  subject,  of  course,  was  M.  Alexander, 
for  whom  she  was  just  then  preparing  an  A  B  C 
of  maxims.  This  little  book,  according  to  her  de- 
scription, began  by  informing  M.  Alexander  that  he 
was  only  a  naked  little  infant  when  he  came  into  the 
world,  that  all  men  were  born  so,  and  that,  as  regards 
their  birth,  all  men  were  equal,  but  that  afterwards 
they  differed  widely  from  one  another  according  to 
their  education — and  so  from  maxim  to  maxim 
"  strung  together  like  a  string  of  beads,"  she  taught 
her  grandson  one  wholesome  truth  after  another. 
She  had,  she  said,  but  two  aims  in  view,  one  to 
awaken  the  child's  intelligence,  the  other  to  elevate 
his  mind  and  feelings.  "  My  A  B  C  is  full  of 
illustrations,  and  every  one,  even  Papa  and  Mamma, 
agrees  that  it  is  an  excellent  book.  As  for  the  child, 
it  is  just  another  game  for  him.  At  times  he  makes 
very  curious  answers ;  for  instance,  I  am  having 
his  portrait  painted  by  Brompton«  a  good  English 
artist,  but  I  could  not  get  him  to  keep  still  the  other 
day  during  the  sitting,  and  when  I  asked  him  if  he 

'  /.^.,Lpp.  273i  274. 


THE    BIRTH   OF   ALEXANDER     257 

knew  how  badly  he  was  behaving,  he  said,  *  I  cannot 
see  myself.'  I  was  struck  with  the  depth  of  thought 
in  the  child,  and  more  so,  that,  finding  the  sitting 
irksome,  he  gave  me  a  rap  over  the  knuckles."  ^ 

Later  on  Catherine  again  extols  her  grandson. 

"  May  God  bless  M.  Alexander,"  she  writes, 
"  who  is  and  always  will  be  the  first-born  in  every- 
thing— in  mind  and  will."  She  enlarges  on  his 
desire  for  knowledge,  and  says  that  he  did  not  even 
care  to  play  with  those  who  knew  less  than  he  did 
himself,  as  they  were  unable  to  answer  his  questions 
satisfactorily  ;  what  his  grandmother  said,  however, 
was  gospel  to  him.  She  again  speaks  of  his 
charming  disposition  :  **  If  he  does  not  get  on  in  the 
world,"  she  adds,  '*  I  do  not  know  who  would.  I 
am  mistaken  if  the  beauty  of  mind  and  soul  will  not 
equal  that  of  his  body ;  if  it  is  not  so,  then  white 
can  become  black,  and  he  will  not  be  the  same 
personality  that  he  is  now.  All  this  is  very 
mystical,  fanatical,  prophetic."  * 

In  another  letter,  Grimm  having  referred  to 
M.  Alexander  s  train-bearer,  Catherine  sends  him  a 
drawing  of  the  garment  which,  she  says,  the  child 
had  worn  ever  since  he  was  six  months  old.  She 
describes  it  as  all  made  of  a  piece,  trimmed  with  a 
fringe,  and  fastened  at  the  back  with  four  or  five  little 
hooks,  in  which  dress  M.  Alexander  appears  fully 
apparelled.  **The  King  of  Sweden,  the  Prince  of 
Prussia,  have  both  sent  to  ask  for  a  pattern  of  his 
costume."  Catherine  had  herself  invented  the  dress, 
and  wished  Grimm  to  know  of  this  "  work  of  genius," 
into  which  the  child's  arms  and  legs  could  be  thrust 
simultaneously,  so  that  he  was  hardly  conscious  of 

*  Sbomik,  vol.  xxiii,  p.  176.  •  /.r.,  p.  184. 

R 


258     THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

being  dressed.  Alexander  was  now  becoming  even 
more  accomplished — he  could  spell,  draw,  dig,  play 
at  being  a  soldier,  ride,  and  make  twenty  toys  out 
of  one ;  he  still  continued  to  ask  eildless  questions, 
such  as  :  "  How  was  it  that  there  were  men  on  the 
earth,  and  what  had  he  been  born  to  do  in  the 
world?"  He  was  of  a  profoundly  thoughtful  dis- 
position, although  extremely  cheerful  and  light- 
hearted.  His  grandmother  would  not  allow  him  to 
apply  himself  closely  to  any  particular  study,  but 
preferred  he  should  occupy  himself  as  he  pleased, 
provided  he  did  no  harm  to  himself  or  others,^ 

*'  Brompton  is  an  English  painter  settled  in 
Russia ;  he  is  a  pupil  of  Mengs,  and  shows  great 
talent ;  he  has  painted  my  two  grandsons  and 
made  a  charming  picture  of  them  ;  the  elder  one  is 
amusing  himself  with  cutting  the  Gordian  knot,  and 
the  younger  has  arrogantly  thrown  the  standard  of 
the  Emperor  Constantine  over  his  shoulders."" 

Referring  again  to  her  grandsons  in  one  of  her 
letters,  Catherine  returns  to  the  subject  of  M.  Alex- 
ander s  avidity  for  knowledge  ;  young  as  he  was  he 
could  amuse  himself  for  an  hour  or  two  with  a  book 
of  engravings,  and  he  appears  to  have  picked  up  a 
great  deal  of  general  information.  He  was  clever 
with  his  fingers,  and  the  Empress  tells  of  his  turning 
the  stick  of  a  cane  into  the  figure  of  a  man  by 
fastening  on  a  wax  head,  legs  and  arms;  other 
things  underwent  transformation  at  his  hands  / 
according  as  his  fancy  led  him.  The  elder  grandson  '\ 
is  described  by  Catherine  as  being  of  an  extremely 
restless  disposition,  and  with  a  face  like  a  young 
Bacchus,  although  the  eyes  were  intelligent ;  a  great 

^  /.r.,  p.  205.  '  /.^.,  p.  206. 


THE   BIRTH    OF   ALEXANDER     259 

contrast   in  appearance  to  his  brother,  who  might 
have  stood  to  a  sculptor  for  a  model  of  Cupid.^ 

Catherine  did  her  best  to  satisfy  M.  Alexander's 
curiosity  on  all  subjects.  On  one  occasion  he  began, 
as  she  relates,  by  making  inquiries  about  the  carpet 
in  her  room,  and  finally  arrived  at  questions  con- 
cerning the  shape  of  the  earth,  whereupon  his 
grandmother  was  obliged  to  have  the  globe  brought 
from  the  library  of  the  Hermitage.  Once  in  pos- 
session of  this,  he  travelled  at  full  gallop  over  the 
whole  of  the  terrestrial  globe,  and  **  If  I  am  not 
mistaken,  in  less  than  half-an-hour  he  knew  nearly 
as  much  about  it  as  the  late  M.  Wagner,  who  for 
years  went  twaddling  on  to  me,  repeating  the 
same  thing  over  and  over  again."*  M.  Alexander 
believed  nothing  on  hearsay,  and,  having  begun 
to  learn  arithmetic,  would  not  be  convinced  that 
two  and  two  made  four  until  he  had  counted  the 
numbers  himself.  At  the  date  of  Catherine  s  letter, 
1781,  her  grandson  already  understood  German 
and  was  well  advanced  in  French  and  English  ; 
he  chattered  incessantly,  like  a  parrot,  was  very 
fond  of  telling  stories  as  well  as  of  hearing 
them,  and  his  memory  was  so  good  that  it  was 
seldom  he  could  be  caught  in  a  mistake.  Apart, 
however,  from  his  unusual  intelligence,  he  was 
in  nowise  precocious,  but  just  as  much  of  a  child 
as  others  of  his  age. 

''The  Venetian  fStes,  given  in  honour  of  the 
Comte  du  Nord,"  writes  Catherine,  "were  most 
beautiful  in  all  ways.  They  have  now  been  away 
six  months,  and  they  will  be  astonished  on  their  re- 
turn at  the  progress  which  will  have  been  made  by 
^  Lcy  p.  214.  '  /.^.,  p.  222. 


26o    THE   CURSE   OF   THE    ROMANOVS 

M.  Alexander.  His  nurse  has  to  scold  him  to  get 
him  away  from  his  book,  as  other  children  have 
to  be  scolded  to  leave  their  play,  and,  as  he  is 
only  four  years  old,  I  have  been  obliged  to  have 
a  book  prepared  which  is  suitable  to  his  compre- 
hension, and  this  volume  is  his  chief  delight.  A 
third  of  the  kind  is  already  in  course  of  com- 
position for  him — he  is  a  regular  glutton  as  regards 
learning.  You  will  say,  a  well-bred  dog  needs  no 
training ;  nothing  is  learnt  from  books."  ^ 

In  another  letter  to  Grimm,  written  in  April 
1782,  Catherine  gives  an  account  of  her  days 
work.  Matters  of  state  occupied  her  from  six 
o'clock  in  the  morning  till  nine  o'clock ;  then  the 
usual  affairs  of  the  day  till  eleven,  when  M.  Alex- 
ander and  M.  Constantine  arrived ;  for  half-an- 
hour  before  and  for  an  hour  after  dinner  she 
was  occupied  with  the  A  B  C  of  these  gentlemen 
and  With  telling  them  tales ;  this  was  followed  by 
a  rest  of  two  hours,  and  then  came  letter-writing, 
&c.,  which  occupied  another  hour  and  a  half.  The 
above-named  gentlemen  were  then  allowed  to  return 
and  they  set  up  the  usual  racket  until  eight  o'clock, 
when  Catherine  was  free  until  ten  to  see  any  one 
who  liked  to  attend  upon  her.  "  I  think  I  may  justly 
say,"  she  adds,  **  that  this  is  a  well-occupied  day, 
and  that  it  would  be  a  clever  person  who  could 
find  time  to  make  any  further  comments  upon  it"* 

"If  you  could  only  see  Alexander  the  shop- 
man, Alexander  the  cook,  Alexander  undertaking 
in  turns  every  class  of  work,  hairdressing,  papering, 
mixing  colours,  chopping  wood,  cleaning  die  furni- 
ture, acting  as  coachman  or  groom,  copying  mathe- 

*      LCy    p.    231.  *     IX,^    p.    231. 


THE   BIRTH   OF   ALEXANDER     261 

matical  figures,  teaching  himself  to  read,  write, 
draw,  and  count,  picking  up  information  in  all  sorts 
of  ways,  and  with  an  infinitely  larger  number  of 
acquaintances  than  any  other  child  of  his  years, 
none  of  his  acquaintance  being  above  him  in  age, 
as  it  is  not  they  who  seek  him,  but  he  who  seeks 
them;  and  if,  moreover,  you  could  see  how  light- 
hearted  this  queer  little  creature  always  is,  for  he 
does  not  know  what  it  is  to  be  ill-tempered,  and 
how  obedient,  how  fond  of  giving,  especially  to 
those  who  are  in  want,  how  grateful  to  those  about 
him,  how  ready  to  do  good,  never  doing  harm  to 
a  single  thing  on  earth,  and  yet  never  idle  or 
unoccupied  for  a  single  moment,  I  wonder  what 
you  would  say?  I  do  not  know  how  M.  de 
Falkenstein  can  have  got  possession  of  M.  Alex- 
ander's large  ABC,  since  it  has  never  left  my 
portfolio,  and  he  for  whom  it  is  prepared  has 
at  present  only  the  ordinary  one,  printed  for  the 
infant  schools."^ 

We  are  also  told  that  if  in  the  course  of  his 
reading  he  came  across  the  name  of  a  town  or 
country,  he  never  rested  until  he  had  found  it 
on  the  globe.  The  moment  his  eyes  were  open 
in  the  morning,  and  the  instant  he  had  finished 
his  dinner,  he  ran  to  his  book.  "  I  must  begin  to 
read  at  once,"  he  would  say  as  he  jumped  out  of 
bed,  **as  presently  I  may  like  to  take  a  walk 
instead,  and  so,  if  I  don't  read  now,  I  shall 
waste  my  day."  No  one  had  ever  given  him  any 
orders  about  reading  or  studying,  but  both  were 
to  him  a  pleasure,  and  he  read  his  books  over 
and  over  again,  until  he  knew  them  by  heart. 

*  /,c.y  p.  233. 


262    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

Catherine  repeatedly  speaks  of  his  kind-hearted- 
ness and  ready  obedience,  and  indeed  he  practically 
brought  himself  up.  One  autumn  the  fancy  took 
him  that  he  would  like  to  go  over  the  china  works 
and  the  arsenal,  on  which  occasions  his  intelligent 
questions  and  his  politeness  equally  astonished  and 
pleased  the  officers  and  the  men  at  work.  At  this 
time  he  was  not  quite  five  years  old,  but,  as  the 
Empress  writes,  he  had  a  power  of  consecutive 
thinking  which  is  rare  in  childhood.  His  brother, 
although  intelligent,  was  far  from  his  equal  in  mind. 
Catherine  attributed  Alexander  s  superior  intel- 
ligence to  his  physical  strength  and  beauty— 
*'  beautiful  as  an  angel,"  she  describes  him  in  one 
letter.  She  relates  that  Alexander  told  her  one  day 
that  Quarenghi  spoke  too  loudly,  and  asked  her  the 
reason,  when  she  explained  that  it  was  because  he 
had  not  been  taught  to  modulate  his  voice  as  a 
child.  Constantine  thought  his  nose  too  large,  and 
decided  that  it  was  because  he  had  scratched  it  with 
his  fingers  when  little.^ 

**  I  don't  know  if  it  will  rain  Catherines  in 
Russia,  but  I  am  certain  of  one  thing,  that  if  there 
were  no  statues  but  mine  along  this  riverside  I 
should  care  very  little  about  it,  and  would  willingly 
make  place  for  M.  Alexander,  who  says  to  his 
attendants  when  he  is  afraid  :  '  I  am  afraid,  but  that 
does  not  matter.'  He  will  put  energy  and  intre- 
pidity into  all  that  he  undertakes,  and  I  do  not 
think  he  will  ever  undertake  what  is  unserviceable 
to  his  fellow-creatures,  for  the  tears  rise  to  his 
eyes  at  once  at  any  harm  that  happens,  or  that  he 
thinks  may  happen,  to  others,     M.  Alexander  does 

^  l,c.,  p.  250. 


THE    BIRTH    OF   ALEXANDER     263 

not  yet  own  a  regiment  of  cuirassiers ;  he  is  learn- 
ing to  read  and  write,  in  the  hopes  of  receiving  a 
scarf  and  a  round  collar  as  a  reward,  these  being 
two  things  of  which  he  has  a  great  ambition 
to  become  possessor:  this  is  the  reason  that  for 
the  last  two  years  he  has  been  so  indefatigable 
with  his  studies."  ^ 

On  December  29th  Catherine  writes :  "  The 
powers  above  seem  to  have  taken  pleasure  for  the 
last  four  months  in  sending  me  one  trouble  after 
another;  and  now  M.  Alexander  and  his  brother 
are  both  ill.  I  found  the  former  yesterday  standing 
in  front  of  his  door  with  a  cloak  over  him  ;  I  asked 
him  what  the  meaning  of  this  ceremony  was :  his 
answer  was,  *  It  is  a  sentinel,  dying  of  cold.*  He 
was  feverish,  and  while  the  attack  was  upon  him 
he  thought  to  amuse  himself  and  make  me  laugh 
by  standing  sentinel  with  his  cloak  on.  This  is  cer- 
tainly a  lively  invalid  who  takes  his  illness  with  much 
courage,  as  I  am  sure  you  will  agree  with  me."  ^ 

In  one  of  Catherine's  letters,  after  discussing 
the  history  of  Russia  and  stating  her  opinion  that 
Christianity  was  more  readily  embraced  by  those  of 
good  disposition  and  open  minds  than  by  the  fools 
and  the  evil-minded,  she  begs  Grimm  to  send  a 
hand  printing-machine  without  delay  for  M.  Alex- 
ander, who  was  ransacking  the  shops  for  one.  She 
also  reminds  him  of  the  statue  of  Voltaire  which  he 
is  to  forward  as  soon  as  he  can,  and  she  would  like, 
she  adds,  to  have  the  Diana,  but  was  afraid  of 
asking  for  this  in  case  it  should  be  doing  an  injury 
to  the  Duke  of  Saxe-Gotha.  Further,  she  desired 
to  obtain  a  plaster  cast  of  the  Farnese  Hercules  for 

*  Lc,  pp.  264-265.  "  /.f.,  p.  266. 


264    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

Alexander,   but  did    not    know   how  it  could   be 
forwarded.^ 

Writing  on  April  30th  Catherine  tells  Grimm 
that  she  is  sending  him  a  German  translation  of  the 
first  period  of  Russian  history — that  is,  from  the 
Creation  to  the  year  862.  This,  she  adds,  is  part 
of  the  Alexander-Constantine  library  :  "  Do  you 
not  pity  these  poor  little  wretches  having  to  digest 
such  heavy  morsels  as  this?"  In  the  same  letter 
she  tells  an  anecdote  of  her  grandson,  who,  taking 
one  of  her  ladies-in-waiting  into  a  corner  one  day, 
asked  her  to  tell  him  who  he  was  like.  On  her 
answering  that  he  had  his  mother  s  features,  "  That 
is  not  what  I  want  to  know,"  he  said ;  ''  whom  am 
I  like  in  character  and  manners ? "  "In  those  you 
are  certainly  more  like  your  grandmother  than 
any  one  else."  "  Ah !  "  he  exclaimed,  **  that  is  what 
I  wished  you  to  tell  me,"  and  thereupon  he  threw 
his  arms  round  the  lady's  neck  and  kissed  her.* 

A  further  account  of  Alexander's  industry  and 
intelligence  is  given  in  a  later  letter,  in  which  his 
grandmother  describes'  how  he  digs  and  sows  peas 
and  cabbages,  pushes  the  plough  and  drives  the 
harrow,  and  then,  perspiring  from  his  hard  work, 
goes  and  washes  himself  in  a  stream,  after  which 
he  and  his  brother  start  fishing.  They  carefully 
separate  the  pikes  from  the  perch,  because  the 
former  eat  up  the  other  fish.  To  rest  himself 
Alexander  then  goes  in  search  of  his  writing  master 
or  his  drawing  master  ;  and  all  this  industry  is  quite 
voluntary,  and  everything,  Catherine  continues,  is 
done  with  perfect  cheerfulness  and  good  temper, 
without  a  sign  of  grumbling,  ill-humour,  or  obsti- 

*  U.f  p.  269.  «  U.J  p.  274. 


THE   BIRTH   OF   ALEXANDER     265 

nacy,  without  tears  or  cries.  Alexander  took  up 
a  book  to  read  much  in  the  same  tone  of  spirit  as 
he  would  jump  into  a  boat  Alexander  was  also 
astonishingly  strong  and  agile.  It  appears  that 
some  one  brought  a  suit  of  armour  to  show  Cathe- 
rine, which  she  could  hardly  lift,  but  which  the  child 
caught  up  and  ran  ofi  with  so  quickly  that  they  had 
a  difficulty  in  overtaking  him.^ 

"  Another  girl,  named  Alexandrine,  in  honour  of 
her  eldest  brother,  has  been  added  to  my  grand- 
children," wrote  Catherine  on  August  27,  1783; 
"to  speak  the  truth,  I  am  infinitely  fonder  of 
boys  than  girls."  Then  she  goes  on  to  speak  of 
her  two  grandsons  as  usual,  describing  their  agility 
and  courage,  their  cleverness  in  managing  their 
boats,  and  again  referring  to  their  delight  in  study. 
She  had  taken  them  with  her  a  few  days  before  to 
Peter hof,  where  they  lodged  at  Mon  Plaisir,  and 
where,  as  she  writes,  there  was  not  a  spot  they  did 
not  visit  which  was  accessible  either  by  hands  or 
feet.  "It  made  no  difference  whether  they  went  in 
and  out  by  the  doors  or  the  windows ;  if  you  could 
only  see  the  break-neck  performances  they  go 
through  in  the  coolest  manner,  and  they  rarely 
come  to  grief!"* 

"  October  8th.  Alexandrine  Pavlovna  is  an  ugly 
little  thing,  especially  as  compared  to  her  brothers. 
Her  eldest  brother  was  to  have  been  her  godfather, 
but  the  heat  prevented  him."  In  this  same  letter 
Catherine  tells  an  anecdote  of  Alexander  which 
shows  the  courage  and  determination  of  his  char- 
acter. It  appears  that  he  had  been  seized  with  cer- 
tain violent  dislikes  to  particular  people  and  things, 

»  Lc.f  p.  279.  «  /.f.,  pp.  281-282. 


266    THE   CURSE   OF   THE    ROMANOVS 

among  them  to  the  singer  Marchetti  and  his 
grimaces*  Some  of  these  dislikes  were  interpreted 
as  fears,  and  those  about  him  tried  to  reason  with 
him  and  shame  him  out  of  them.  Catherine,  how- 
ever, gave  orders  that  he  was  to  be  let  alone.  She 
was  right,  for  one  day  Alexander  began  to  reason 
with  himself  and  told  his  friends  that  he  was  going 
to  examine  closely  everything  of  which  he  was 
afraid  ;  this  resolution  he  carried  out  for  a  week,  at 
the  end  of  which  time  he  had  regained  his  courage 
and  was  as  gay  and  happy  as  ever.^ 

In  March  1784  we  learn  from  Catherine  that 
her  young  grandsons  were  learning  carpentry  under 
a  German,  Mayer,  and  spent  the  best  part  of  the 
day  over  this  new  occupation.  She  asks  Grimm 
what  he  thinks  of  this  as  part  of  the  education  of 
embryo  sovereigns,  but,  as  she  wisely  adds,  Alex- 
ander no  longer  cared  for  toys,  and  therefore  the 
cutting  and  sawing  kept  him  out  of  idleness.  By 
this  time  Alexander  could  speak  English,  and 
Catherine  had  just  appointed  Laharpe  to  converse 
with  him  in  French,  and  another  tutor  for  German. 
The  Empress  again  expresses  her  belief  that  Alex- 
ander will  grow  into  an  excellent  man  in  every  way 
if  certain  others  do  not  put  a  bar  to  his  progress ; 
although,  as  she  adds,  there  was  that  in  his  character 
which  would  brook  no  turning  from  the  course 
prompted  by  its  own  instincts. 

"  I  am  afraid  to  send  you  specimens  of  his 
writing,  or  his  drawing  and  arithmetic,  as  you 
would  find  it  difficult  to  believe  they  were  done 
by  a  child  of  six.  His  physical  strength  promises 
to  equal  his  mental  capacity,  as  you  would  know 

^     LCy    p.    288. 


THE   BIRTH   OF   ALEXANDER     267 

if  you  saw  him  running  and  leaping."  Then  she 
finishes  with  a  characteristic  anecdote  of  the  child. 
His  brother,  having  a  cold,  had  been  told  not  to 
go  near  a  particular  window  through  which  the 
wind  blew :  as  he,  however,  kept  thoughtlessly 
running  near  it,  somebody  drew  a  line  on  the  floor 
beyond  which  he  was  not  to  pass;  but  this  was 
equally  ineffectual  in  keeping  him  away  from  the 
window.  Whereupon  his  elder  brother  said  to  him, 
**  Brother,  when  I  am  told  not  to  go  beyond  a  cer- 
tain point,  I  draw  an  imaginary  line  behind  the  one 
that  has  been  made,  and  when,  by  accident,  I  go 
beyond  the  one  I  have  drawn  for  myself,  I  remem- 
ber that  I  am  not  to  go  beyond  the  other  one."  ^ 

Alexander  was  Catherine's  great  passion,  but 
the  Empress  conceived  a  deep  affection  for  all 
her  grandchildren.  She  sent  Grimm  an  engraving 
containing  the  portraits  of  the  Imperial  babies, 
accompanied  by  the  following  description :  "  M. 
Alexander  is  remarkable  for  his  physical  beauty 
as  well  as  for  his  intellectual  and  moral  qualities. 
He  is  lively  and  reflective,  quick  and  intelligent ; 
he  thinks  deeply  and  has  such  extraordinary  agility 
in  all  bodily  exercises  that  one  would  think  these 
had  been  his  sole  occupation  ever  since  birth.  He 
is  very  tall  and  very  vigorous  for  his  age,  very 
adroit  and  very  active.  The  boy's  character  is 
a  mingling  of  the  most  diverse  qualities,  which 
is  the  reason  of  his  being  such  a  favourite  with 
every  one.  Friends  of  his  own  age  adopt  his  views 
without  hesitation,  and  cheerfully  follow  him  as 
their  leader.  One  thing  alone  causes  me  anxiety, 
the  danger  he  incurs  with  regard  to  women.     They 

*  Lc.f  pp.  297-298. 


268    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

all  run  after  him,  which  is  natural,  for  everybody 
is  attracted  by  his  fascinating  appearance.  What 
is  more,  he  is  unaware  of  his  good  looks,  and 
seems  so  far  to  care  very  little  about  his  appear- 
ance. It  does  not  enter  into  any  one's  head,  you 
may  be  sure,  to  make  a  coxcomb  of  him.  He  is 
well  advanced  for  his  years,  speaks  four  languages, 
is  thoroughly  conversant  with  the  history  of  the 
world,  is  fond  of  reading,  is  never  lazy,  and  enters 
with  zest  and  pleasure  into  the  amusements  of 
his  age.  When  I  speak  seriously  to  him  on  any 
subject,  he  listens  attentively  and  makes  me  charm- 
ing answers ;  when  I  insist  on  his  playing  blind- 
man's  buff,  he  is  equally  ready  to  do  what  I  wish. 
His  teachers,  as  well  as  myself,  are  in  general  fully 
satisfied  with  his  behaviour.  His  tutor,  Laharpe, 
speaks  of  him  as  an  accomplished  young  man ;  just 
now  he  is  teaching  him  mathematics,  for  which 
he  shows  as  much  facility  as  for  other  subjects. 
In  short,  I  here  introduce  to  you  M.  Alexander, 
who  is  to  be  distinguished  from  others  of  his  age 
and  class.  If  he  does  not  make  a  success  of  life, 
well!  I  can  only  say  I  do  not  know  on  whom 
here  below  we  have  a  right  to  base  our  hopes. 
Notice  also  that  if  M.  Alexander  is  not  well, 
which  happily  does  not  often  happen,  or  feels 
tired  in  the  evening,  he  likes  to  be  surrounded 
with  artistic  works,  and  amuses  himself  in  studying 
engravings,  coins,  and  engraved  stones. 

"The  second  portrait  given  in  the  engraving 
is  M.  Constantine.  His  petulance  almost  amounts 
to  insolence ;  he  has  a  kind  heart  and  good  brains, 
but  does  everything  by  fits  and  starts,  and  entirely 
lacks  the  perseverance  which  is  one  of  the  chief 


THE   BIRTH    OF   ALEXANDER     269 

virtues  of  his  elder  brother;  but  he  will  make 
himself  renowned  some  day,  as  you  will  see.  He 
can  also  chatter  in  four  languages,  but  while  his 
brother  is  a  perfect  English  scholar,  this  one  knows 
every  turn  of  the  Greek  language,  and  says  to 
his  brother  at  times,  *Why  do  you  read  all  those 
wretched  French  translations?  I  read  my  Greek 
authors  in  the  original.' 

'*  Being  in  my  room  one  day  studying  his 
Plutarch,  he  informed  me  that  such  and  such  a 
passage  was  badly  translated.  '  I  flatter  myself 
that  I  can  translate  them  more  correctly,  and  am 
now  going  to  prove  it  to  you,'  which  he  did. 
He  read  out  some  passages  according  to  his  own 
version,  and  under  these  he  wrote  'translated  by 
Constantine.'  I  thoroughly  enjoy  his  conversation  ; 
he  is  of  a  very  bellicose  nature  and  takes  a  lively 
interest  in  the  navy.  At  the  beginning  of  the 
present  war  with  Turkey,  Captain  Sacken,  being 
surrounded  by  the  enemy,  set  fire  to  his  brig 
and  blew  it  up.  This  Sacken  has  become  my 
grandson's  great  hero ;  I  have  on  several  occa- 
sions noticed  that  when  Constantine  heard  of  any 
splendid  action  he  was  filled  with  the  desire  to  go 
and  do  likewise ;  his  enthusiasm  is  very  quickly 
aroused.    In  a  word,  his  personality  is  a  pleasing  one. 

**The  third  represents  Mademoiselle  Alexan- 
drine. For  six  years  there  was  nothing  particular 
about  her  to  call  for  remark,  but  during  the  last 
year  and  a  half  she  has  made  surprising  progress. 
Not  only  has  she  grown  very  pretty  in  face,  but 
she  has  now  quite  a  good  figure ;  she  is  taller  and 
slighter  than  most  children  of  her  age ;  she  speaks 
four  languages,  writes  and  draws  with  care,  plays 


270    THE   CURSE   OF   THE    ROMANOVS 

the  harpsichord,  sings,  dances,  and  learns  with 
ease ;  she  has  much  sweetness  of  disposition,  and, 
if  you  would  like  to  know  what  her  ruling  passion 
is — believe  me  when  I  tell  you  it  is  myself.  She 
would  throw  herself  into  the  fire  for  her  grand- 
mother ;  she  does  everything  in  the  desire  to 
please  me,  or  in  order  to  draw  my  attention  to 
her,  if  only  for  a  moment. 

"  The  fourth  head  is  that  of  H61^ne.  I  think 
she  will  be  a  beauty  in  every  sense  of  the  word. 
Her  features  are  extremely  regular ;  she  is  slight 
of  figure,  adroit  and  agile,  and  naturally  graceful 
in  all  her  movements ;  full  of  fun  and  mischief, 
and  kind-hearted,  while  her  excessive  liveliness 
renders  her  dear  to  her  sisters.  This  is  all  that 
I  have  to  say  about  her. 

"The  fifth  head  is  Marie.  She  ought  to  have 
been  a  boy.  The  smallpox  has  completely  dis- 
figured her ;  her  features  are  thickened,  and  she 
looks  just  like  a  dragon ;  she  is  afraid  of  nothing 
and  has  all  the  tastes  of  a  boy.  I  do  not  know 
how  she  will  turn  out.  Her  favourite  attitude  is 
to  stand  with  her  hands  on  her  hips,  and  she 
walks  with  them  held  in  the  same  fashion. 

"  The  sixth,  who  is  not  yet  two  years  old,  is  as 
yet  too  small  for  me  to  be  able  to  say  anything 
about  her,  but  I  think  she  is  not  as  advanced 
as  her  brothers  and  sisters  were  at  that  age.  She 
is  a  fat,  chubby  little  thing,  very  fair,  with  pretty 
eyes,  who  squats  herself  down  in  a  corner,  sur- 
rounds herself  with  toys,  and  chatters  the  whole 
day  without  uttering  a  single  word  worthy  of 
remark."^ 

*  /.^.,  pp.  497-5oa 


THE   BIRTH    OF   ALEXANDER     271 

"The  birth  of  the  two  Princes,"  says  Masson, 
"had  filled  the  Empress  with  joy.  Her  vast 
projects  and  hopes  expanded  over  a  wider  field, 
of  which  the  very  names  of  the  Princes  gave 
intimation.  She  had  the  infants  painted,  one 
cutting  the  Gordian  knot,  the  other  bearing  the 
cross  of  Constantine ;  for  them  she  was  desirous 
of  renewing  the  division  of  the  world  into  two 
Empires.  Their  education  seemed  at  first  to  be 
merely  the  development  of  these  grand  ideas. 
Constantine  had  Greek  nurses,  and  was  sur- 
rounded by  Greeks ;  in  his  infancy  he  spoke 
no  other  language,  but  he  forgot  it  as  soon  as 
masters  were  appointed  to  teach  it  him  in  a 
better  manner.  The  persons  about  Alexander 
were  Englishmen,  and  endeavours  were  made  to 
inspire  him  with  a  predilection  for  that  nation."^ 

Imperial  children  are  supposed  to  be  made  of 
different  clay  from  others.  They  are  superbabies ; 
so  the  staunch  supporters  of  autocracy  and  absolute 
monarchy  maintain.  Catherine,  as  has  been  seen 
from  her  letters,  had  great  ambitions  for  Mons. 
Alexander.  Alexander  himself  said  that  he  was 
only  a  happy  accident.  But  in  reality  Alexander, 
like  other  Imperial  babies,  with  very  rare  excep- 
tions, was  nothing  else  but  what  heredity,  circum- 
stances, and  education  had  made  him.  Like  other 
Imperial  children,  he  was  to  become  a  ladies'  man, 
with  a  thousand  and  one  love  affairs,  a  coureur,  not 
always  particular  in  his  choice,  and  continuously 
unfaithful  to  the  young  wife  who,  herself— rumours 
to  the  contrary  notwithstanding — never  deviated 
from  the   path   of  duty   and   virtue.     It   was   the 

^  C.  F.  P.  Masson,  Mhnaires  Secrets f  Paris,  1859,  p.  218. 


272     THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

hereditary  instinct,  too,  that  was  to  make  the  pupil 
of  Laharpe,  the  dreamer  of  Republics,  finish  as  an 
Autocrat.  His  education  was  exposed  to  conflict- 
ing influences.  On  the  one  hand,  the  corrupt 
atmosphere  that  reigned  at  the  court  of  his  grand- 
mother; on  the  other,  the  teaching  of  Laharpe, 
making  him  despise  the  court  life.  He  was 
surrounded  by  atheists  or  deists  on  the  one  side, 
and  by  staunch  supporters  of  the  church  on  the 
other.  The  result  was  that  with  his  receptivity 
he  ended  as  a  mystic 

Alexander's  character,  the  gentleness  and  sensi- 
bility, the  very  curiosity  and  dreaminess,  that  led 
to  his  ultimate  mysticism,  are  already  noticeable 
in  his  early  childhood  and  plainly  contrasted 
with  the  obstinacy  and  violence  of  his  brother, 
Constantine. 

In  1783  Madame  Benkendorff"  died.  Alex- 
ander was  six  years  old.  Catherine  thought  that 
it  was  time  to  replace  feminine  tutorship  by  mas- 
culine. General  Nicholas  Soltykov  was  accordingly 
appointed  as  governor  to  Prince  Alexander  and 
his  brother  Constantine.  The  principal  functions 
of  this  gentleman  lay  in  protecting  the  young 
Princes  from  currents  of  air  and  "  in  keeping  their 
systems  in  good  order." 

Gribowsky,  Catherine's  Secretary  of  State,  de- 
scribes the  new  tutor  as  follows:  ** Soltykov  was 
very  short,  very  thin,  and  had  a  short  pointed 
nose,  and  two  somewhat  intelligent  brown  eyes; 
his  face  was  clean  shaven,  and  his  hair  done  up 
in  a  very  high  greased  and  powdered  top-knot, 
quite  in  the  fashion  of  the  day.  He  had  an  open 
wound  in  one  of  his  legs,  which  caused  him  to 


THE    BIRTH    OF   ALEXANDER     273 

limp.  When  he  stood  upright  he  had  a  nervous 
trick  of  hitching  up  his  trousers.  He  wore  a 
green  military  uniform  with  a  waistcoat  of  the 
same  colour;  his  clothes  were  always  unbuttoned. 
Instead  of  boots  he  wore  gaiters,  and  walked 
leaning  on  a  large  stick.  He  was  very  pious 
and  said  long  prayers  every  morning.  He  was 
reputed  to  be  a  man  of  intellect  and  penetration, 
which  is  to  say  that  he  had  the  grand  manners 
of  the  Court ;  as  to  affairs  of  government,  he  had 
but  a  superficial  knowledge  of  these.  Neverthe- 
less, for  the  space  of  four  years,  all  the  affairs  of 
the  Empire  were  submitted  to  him  for  his  approval. 
I  cannot  remember  that  he  ever  once  uttered  an 
opinion  contrary  to  that  which  had  been  suggested 
to  him.  As  to  the  duties  which  were  more  par- 
ticularly assigned  to  him,  he  relied  for  the  per- 
formance of  these  on  his  secretary ;  at  home,  he 
submitted,  without  murmur,  to  the  rule  of  his  wife. 
His  style  in  writing  was  confused,  as  was  the 
fashion  then,  nor  did  he  write  without  difficulty. 
He  was  too  feeble  of  character  for  any  reliance 
to  be  placed  upon  him ;  he  often  humbled  him- 
self to  the  great,  and  avoided  those  who  were  in 
disgrace."  ^ 

Among  the  other  masters  and  governors  were 
Von  Sacken,  Professor  Krafft,  who  gave  the  Princes 
lessons  in  experimental  philosophy,  and  Pallas,  who 
taught  them  botany.  The  course  of  botany,  how- 
ever, had  soon  to  be  given  up.  Masson  gives  the 
following  explanation  :  "  As  Linnaeus's  system  of 
the    sexes    gave   the    children    the    first   ideas  of 

^  Gribovsky,  A.  M.,  Diary  and  Reminiscences,   Moscow,  1899, 
pp.  3-4- 

S 


274     THE   CURSE   OF   THE    ROMANOVS 

those  of  human  nature,  the  Princes  were  putting 
a  number  of  questions  which  greatly  embarrassed 
their  governors.  Pallas  was  therefore  requested  to 
avoid  entering  into  particulars,  and  then  to  break 
off  the  course  of  botany  altogether.  Catherine  had 
particularly  enjoined  that  her  pupils  should  be  kept 
in  the  most  perfect  ignorance  in  everything  that 
related  to  the  intercourse  of  the  sexes."  * 

Russian  literature  and  history  were  taught  by 
Michael  Mouraviev,  and  mathematics  by  Colonel 
Masson.  The  chief  preceptorship,  however,  had 
to  be  entrusted  to  a  man  of  superior  talents,  and, 
at  the  recommendation  of  Grimm,  Catherine's 
choice  fell  upon  Frederick  Caesar  Laharpe.  This 
Russian  Aristotle  was  a  disciple  of  Rousseau  and 
Voltaire,  and  openly  professed  republican  senti- 
ments. Catherine,  though  well  aquainted  with  his 
sentiments,  thought  highly  of  him,  and  entrusted 
him  with  the  education  of  her  grandchildren.' 

An  interesting  letter  has  come  down  to  us, 
written  by  Laharpe  to  his  friend  Jean- Marc-Louis 
Faure.  It  is  dated  from  Tsarsko6-Sdo,  August  8, 
1785.  It  gives  us  an  insight  into  the  philoso- 
phical and  political  views  of  the  Prince  s  tutor, 
who  evidendy  did  his  utmost  to  instil  republican 
ideas  into  his  pupil.  After  having  explained  his 
method  of  teaching  French,  he  goes  on  to  speak  of 
that  employed  by  him  in  teaching  geography  and 
history,  as  follows  :  *•  As  regards  Turkey,  I  thought 
it  well  to  explain  to  them  (the  Grand  Dukes  Alex- 
ander and  Constantine)  that  the  first  Empires  had 
arisen  in  the  Asiatic  provinces,  and  this  led  me  on  to 

^  Masson,  /.r.,  p.  217. 

'  Mimoirti  de  F,  C.  Laharpe^  Bern,  1864,  p.  76. 


THE   BIRTH   OF   ALEXANDER     275 

speak  of  the  first  inhabitants  of  the  globe,  of  their 
manner  of  living,  customs,  &c.  I  dwelt,  like  a  true 
republican,  on  the  fact  of  the  perfect  equality  which 
then  reigned  among  them,  and  after  having  drawn  a 
picture  of  the  primitive  chiefs  clothed  in  the  skins  of 
lion  or  tiger,  seated  on  a  stone  which  served  them  for 
throne,  and  dwelling  in  huts  roofed  with  the  branches 
of  trees,  I  then  showed  them  these  same  beings 
after  they  had  given  up  thinking  that  other  men  were 
their  equals,  and  had  been  installed  as  kings,  not 
by  virtue  of  any  human  mandate,  but  by  the  grace 
of  God,  who  has  so  made  men,  that  the  strongest, 
the  most  skilled,  the  best  gifted  and  cleverest  among 
them,  believes  he  has  a  perfect  right  to  usurp  power 
over  his  fellow-men,  and  takes  advantage  of  his 
superiority  whenever  the  negligence  or  the  patience 
of  the  latter  allows  him  to  do  so  without  inter- 
ference. I  urged  this  doctrine,  which  is  a  difficult 
one  to  digest,  on  my  pupil,  and  exerted  myself  to 
bring  him  to  the  thorough  understanding  and  con- 
viction that  all  men  are  born  equal,  the  power 
which  is  inherited  by  some  being  a  matter  of  pure 
accident.  Here  are  a  few  of  the  detached  clauses 
of  my  lecture : — *  At  that  time  there  were  no  such 
distinctions  known  as  those  of  magistrate,  prince, 
subject,  rich  and  poor,  for  all  men  were  brothers 
and  equals.  Not  one  of  them  had  as  yet  imagined 
that  he  alone  was  to  be  allowed  to  indulge  all  his 
whims  and  to  do  exactly  what  he  wished,  every  one 
else  being  born  to  serve  and  obey  him,  and  do  his 
work  for  him.  ...  A  cave,  the  hollow  of  a  tree,  a 
hut  covered  with  branches  or  with  skins  of  beasts, 
was  equally  the  first  dwelling-place  of  the  ancestors 
of  the  miserable  peasant  who  now  works  for  others, 


276     THE   CURSE   OF   THE    ROMANOVS 

and  of  the  monarch  who  has  so  many  under  his 
command.  These  early  chiefs  were  not  surrounded 
or  ornamented  with  any  special  signs  of  magni- 
ficence. A  good-sized  hut  was  the  first  royal 
residence,  a  stone  or  a  rough  block  of  wood  the 
first  throne,  the  knotty  branch  of  a  tree  the  first 
sceptre,  and  the  skin  of  a  wild  beast  the  first  royal 
mantle — you  see  there  was  nothing  in  all  that  of 
which  to  be  particularly  proud ! ' "  ^  .  .  . 

The  Empress  of  all  the  Russias,  the  correspon- 
dent of  Grimm  and  Voltaire,  does  not  seem  to  have 
been  shocked  at  these  ideas.  She  told  Laharpe 
that  she  considered  the  maxims  he  instilled  into 
his  pupil  as  well  fitted  to  strengthen  his  char- 
acter, that  she  herself  read  them  with  great  plea- 
sure, and  that  she  was  exceedingly  pleased  with 
his  method  of  instruction.* 

Rostoptshin  too  wrote  as  follows  to  Count  Vor- 
onzov :  "  The  Grand  Duke  has  the  best  heart 
in  the  world,  but  he  hears  so  many  platitudes 
and  so  much  conversation  about  matters  which 
are  unworthy  of  his  attention,  that  it  would  be 
surprising  if  he  did  not  succumb.  Those  about 
him,  moreover,  forget  the  important  position  they 
hold,  as  well  as  the  regard  one  ought  to  feel  for 
the  character  of  a  yotmg  prince,  and  their  sole 
aim  is  to  amuse  him.  Up  to  the  present  time 
he  rather  likes  people  to  tell  him  the  truth  about 
himself,  and  tries  to  correct  his  faults.  I  took 
the  liberty  of  letting  him  know  what  I  thought 
about  the  puns  in  which  he  was  fond  of  indulging, 
and  apparently  he  has  cured  himself  of  them,  for 

*  Revue  historique  vaudoise^  1896,  p.  302. 
'  Masson,  Lcy  p.  215. 


THE   BIRTH    OF   ALEXANDER     277 

I  have  not  heard  any  from  him  lately.  He  is 
extremely  fond  of  Kotshoubey.  The  two  Princes 
have  an  excellent  tutor  named  Laharpe,  a  Swiss, 
but,  for  some  reason  or  other,  MM.  the  Prince 
of  Nassau  and  Esterhazy  slandered  him  to  the 
Empress,  basing  their  accusations  on  certain  letters 
written  from  his  own  country  during  the  dis- 
turbances in  the  Vaud  province.  The  poor  man 
has  been  very  badly  treated ;  when  rewards  were 
given  to  the  Grand  Duke  Alexander's  suite  he 
was  left  out.  He  wished  to  leave  the  country, 
which  would  have  been  a  great  loss,  for  the 
Princes  owe  their  education  to  him.  The  Empress, 
however,  sent  for  him  twice,  and  the  Swiss 
explained  matters  to  her,  disclosing  the  under- 
hand behaviour  of  M.  Esterhazy,  and  finally  came 
out  victorious."  ^ 

Laharpe  considered  that  history  should  take 
the  first  place  in  the  studies  of  his  pupils,  and 
he  explained  his  views  on  this  subject  to  the 
Empress  as  follows :  **  There  is  no  necessity  for 
the  future  sovereign  to  be  a  physician,  a 
naturalist,  a  mathematician,  a  geographer,  a 
grammarian,  a  metaphysician,  a  logician,  a  doctor 
of  law,  &c.  But  it  is  very  necessary  that  he 
should  be  an  upright  man  and  an  enlightened 
citizen,  and  that  he  should  know  so  much  of 
these  branches  of  knowledge  as  will  enable  him 
to  understand  their  true  value,  and  prevent  him 
from  ignoring  the  duties  which  devolve  upon  the 
prince  of  a  realm  throughout  which  the  happi- 
ness or  misery  of  millions  of  human  beings 
depends    upon   his    absolute   will.     Every    citizen 

^  Archives  Voronzov,  vol.  viii,  p.  75. 


278    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

who  is  desirous  of  being  of  use  to  his  country 
by  his  management  of  public  affairs  ought  to 
study  history.  Much  more  is  this  duty  incum- 
bent on  a  prince,  but  in  the  case  of  the  latter  the 
study  should  be  so  directed  that  the  possibility 
of  imbibing  dangerous  principles  may  be  avoided. 
It  should  be  continually  borne  in  mind  that  Alex- 
ander, who  was  naturally  gifted  with  a  fine  genius 
and  qualities  of  the  highest  kind,  neverdieless 
ravaged  Asia  and  committed  innumerable  horrors, 
simply  because  he  wished  to  imitate  the  Homeric 
heroes;  that  Julius  Caesar,  in  emulation  of  this 
same  Alexander,  was  induced  to  commit  the  crime 
of  destroying  the  liberty  of  his  country;  and 
that,  in  our  own  times,  a  king  of  the  Nordi, 
born  of  an  heroic  spirit,  became  a  tyrant  over 
his  subjects  and  a  scourge  to  many  millions  of 
human  beings,  as  the  result  of  the  unfortunate 
perusal  of  Quintus  Cur  tins!'  * 

Laharpe  took  every  opportunity  of  instilling 
into  his  pupils  the  fundamental  principle  that 
the  people  have  a  right  to  defend  themselves 
against  oppression.  Referring  to  the  sanguinary 
war  carried  on  by  the  Romans  in  Sicily,  he 
remarked  to  them  that  there  was  a  lesson  to  the 
Romans  showing  them  that  oppression  had  its 
limits,  and  that  humanity  possessed  the  right  to 
exercise  lawful  resistance,  and  that  it  was  equally 
incontestable  that  it  was  always  dangerous  to 
reduce  men  to  despair.  Laharpe  often  came  back 
to  the  same  theme ;  the  revolt  of  the  Gladiators 

^  M.  T.  Soukhomlinov,  St  Petersburg,  1871.  (I  quote  this  pas- 
sage from  Shilder's  "Alexander  I,"  vol.  i,  pp.  36-37),  and  U 
Gouvemeur  dun  Prince^  Paris,  Appendix,  p.  235. 


THE    BIRTH   OF   ALEXANDER     279 

gave  him  the  opportunity  of  expressing  similar 
sentiments.  "No  living  creature  is  subject  to 
evil  treatment  without  endeavouring  to  defend 
itself.  The  bee  stings  the  hand  that  clutches 
it,  the  ant  the  heel  that  treads  upon  it — why 
should  man  alone,  therefore,  have  the  right  to 
injure  his  neighbour  with  impunity.  ...  It  is 
absurd  to  preach  that  the  oppressed  should 
bear  their  troubles  without  complaining;  it  is 
cruel  to  shut  their  mouths,  to  stifle  their  cries, 
and,  finally,  it  is  immensely  imprudent  to  reduce 
men  to  despair,  for  it  results  in  terrible  and  in- 
calculable disaster."  Laharpe  brought  forward 
three  modern  instances  to  corroborate  his  words : 
the  revolt  of  the  Swiss  against  the  House  of 
Austria,  of  the  Low  Countries  against  Spain, 
and  that  of  the  Genoese  against  the  House  of 
Austria.  "No  one,"  he  added,  "denies  the 
right  of  legitimate  resistance  except  tyrants,  to 
whose  interest  it  is  to  proclaim  all  resistance  to 
their  will,  and  all  opposition  to  their  cruelties 
and  oppression,  as  a  crime." 

In  like  manner  the  "  right  of  conquest "  had 
no  existence  for  Laharpe.  He  set  forth  his 
views  on  this  matter  as  follows :  "  The  difference 
between  you  and  me,  said  a  robber  to  a  certain 
conqueror,  is  that  I  do  my  robbing  alone  and 
because  of  my  necessity,  and  you  pillage  at  the 
head  of  some  thousands  of  men,  and  do  it  simply 
for  your  pleasure  and  to  be  extolled  for  it  by 
flatterers." 

Laharpe  naturally  took  occasion  also,  while 
giving  instruction  in  Roman  history,  to  dwell 
on    princes    and    their    conduct.       Remembering 


28o    THE   CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

that  his  pupils  were  princes,  and  that  one  of 
them  would  one  day  wield  the  sceptre,  he  showed 
them  where  the  difference  lay  between  good  and 
bad  rulers.  "  Princes  could  not  be  so  insolent 
and  proud,  if  they  would  pause  to  ask  themselves 
who  am  I  ?  What  do  I  know  ?  What  meri- 
torious act  have  I  performed  ?  Am  I  the  only 
person  in  the  world  who  has  intellect,  talents, 
and  ability  ?  The  insolence  of  private  indi- 
viduals meets  with  scorn  and  dislike,  and  it  is 
happy  for  them  that  this  is  all  the  punishment 
they  receive,  but  insolence  and  pride  in  a  prince 
is  never  forgiven,  and  a  long  list  of  arrogant 
and  overbearing  princes  could  be  drawn  up,  who 
have  received  punishment  at  the  hands  of  those 
they  had  insulted  and  despised/'  Caligula  who 
made  his  horse  Consul,  Charles  XII  of  Sweden 
who  threatened  to  send  one  of  his  boots  to  re- 
present him  in  the  Senate,  and  the  retribution 
that  fell  upon  both  of  them,  were  brought  for- 
ward as  examples.  On  the  other  hand,  there 
was  Titus  mourning  over  a  day  passing  without 
having  made  some  one  happy ;  there  was  Trajan, 
handing  his  sword  to  the  Prefect  with  the  words, 
"  Use  it  for  me  if  I  do  well,  and  against  me 
if  I  do  evil ; "  and  there  were  Antoninus  Pius, 
Marcus  Aurelius,  and  Julian,  regretting  the  hours 
they  had  to  waste  in  sleep,  and  regarding  their 
subjects  as  fellow-creatures  who  looked  to  him 
for  their  happiness.  Again,  Laharpe  pointed  out 
to  his  pupils  that  the  sacred  rights  of  the  people 
were  only  an  offence  to  bad  rulers,  but,  on  the 
contrary,  a  protection  to  the  wise  and  good.  He 
also  gave  them  excellent  precepts  concerning  their 


THE   BIRTH   OF   ALEXANDER    281 

behaviour  towards  their  subjects.  '*  Princes,"  he 
said,  "are  so  placed  that  they  are  prevented 
from  obtaining  the  experience  of  the  ordinary 
individual,  and  cannot  gain  understanding  of  men 
and  things  by  direct  intercourse  with  them  ;  they 
are  forced  to  depend  for  their  guidance  on  others 
who  may  deceive  them.  Does  a  prince  recognise 
his  state  of  captivity,  and  does  he  wish  to  break 
away  from  it?  It  takes  courage  and  perseverance 
to  succeed  in  this.  If  he  is  weak,  he  will  only 
become  more  entangled  in  the  meshes  that  sur- 
round him,  and  his  position  will  be  worse  than 
it  was  before.  If  his  courage  is  evanescent  he 
may  partly  struggle  out  of  his  toils,  but  ere  the 
outer  boundary  is  broken  through  he  will  suc- 
cumb. But  has  he  a  stern,  persistent  courage.*^ 
Has  he  learnt  in  good  time  not  to  be  dis- 
heartened by  failure  and  opposition  ?  Has  he 
learned  to  make  a  good  use  of  his  strength  and 
intellect?  Has  he,  in  a  word,  learnt  to  depend 
upon  himself  rather  than  upon  others  ?  Then, 
and  only  then,  may  he  hope  to  recover  his 
liberty,  and  there  can  be  no  question  but  that  he 
will  come  across  many  things  beyond  the  walls  ot 
his  prison  which  will  fill  him  with  astonishment." 

Such  views  as  these  can  seldom  have  been 
preached  with  greater  eloquence  and  sincerity 
than  by  the  Princes'  Vaudois  tutor,  but  the  latter 
reached  a  climax  of  plain  speaking  when  he  came 
to  dwell  upon  the  sovereigns  **who  held  them- 
selves to  be  such  by  the  gprace  of  God." 

"  Usurpers,  tyrants,  ill-governing  princes  have 
at  all  times  striven  to  have  their  persons  regarded 
as  sacred,  and  in  every  century  there  have  been 


282     THE   CURSE   OF   THE    ROMANOVS 

men  foolish  and  cowardly  enough  to  consent  to 
this  doctrine.  The  upright  man,  on  the  contrary, 
needs  only  to  examine  himself  to  understand  that 
those  who  can  maintain  their  rights  only  by  the 
sword  deserve  to  perish  by  it.  It  is  right  that 
these  insolent  men  who  play  with  the  lives  and 
fortunes  of  others  should  be  taught  that  nature 
has  not  rendered  them  invulnerable,  and  that  every 
man  who  is  bold  enough  to  wish  it  can  make 
himself  master  of  their  life.  Thrones  were  founded 
by  force,  but  to  uphold  them,  it  is  law,  order  and 
justice  which  are  required,  and  the  sovereign  who 
treads  these  under  foot  calls  in  question  that 
which  had  seemed  settled,  by  reminding  the  world 
of  the  impure  source  from  which  he  inherited  his 
power. 

"In  vain  sovereigns  and  their  ministers  have 
endeavoured  to  represent  their  authority  to  be  of 
divine  origin ;  in  vain  sovereigns  have  called  them- 
selves such  by  the  grace  of  God ;  in  vain  held  that 
they  owed  no  one  any  account  of  their  actions; 
they  have  not  succeeded  in  deceiving  either  them- 
selves or  others,  and  when  a  rupture  has  at  last 
been  declared  between  sovereign  and  subjects,  the 
latter  have  not  hesitated  to  show  the  contempt  in 
which  they  held  all  such  pretensions.  Would  it 
not  be  absurd  to  suppose  that  the  creator  of  those 
innumerable  suns  which  shine  above  us  should  have 
given  certain  individuals,  often  weaker  than  their 
fellow-men,  the  right  to  dispose  according  to  their 
will  of  all  the  rest  of  the  world,  and  how  is  it 
possible  to  imagine  that  such  monsters  as  Caligula, 
Nero,  the  Borgias,  Philip  II,  Tshengis  Khan, 
Louis  XI,  born  to  be  the  scourge  of  humanity, 


THE   BIRTH   OF  ALEXANDER     283 

can  have  been  sent  as  the  agents  and  representa- 
tives of  the  divine  being."  ^ 

Laharpe  went  on  to  impress  upon  the  Princes 
that  the  only  sure  guarantee  of  maintaining  sove- 
reign power  was  by  a  scrupulous  observance  of 
laws,  by  the  maintenance  of  established  govern- 
ment, and  consideration  for  subjects.  History 
would  show  them  that  the  throne  which  rested  on 
these  foundations  remained  firmly  established,  but 
that,  on  the  contrary,  where  might  was  right,  as 
was  the  case  with  the  sovereignties  of  Asia  and 
Africa,  there  were  continual  revolutions,  as  the 
result  of  which  thrones  were  thrown  down  and 
those  who  sat  upon  them  crushed  beneath  their 
ruins. 

The  history  of  England  afforded  Laharpe  two 
examples  of  the  disastrous  consequences  arising 
from  the  violation  of  the  people^s  rights — Charles  I 
and  his  son  James  H,  one  meeting  his  death  on 
the  scaffold,  the  other  deposed  by  the  unanimous 
voice  of  the  nation. 

"  Such  are  the  fruits  of  those  evil  counsels 
with  which  flatterers  poison  the  minds  of  weak  and 
credulous  princes,  such  the  consequences  of  those 
base  and  dangerous  principles  which  would  lead 
a  sovereign  to  believe  that  he  is  above  all  law, 
that  he  is  not  responsible  for  his  actions  towards 
his  subjects,  and  that  the  latter  are  born  only 
to  work  and  obey  without  murmuring." 

We  have  other  details  of  Alexander  s  educa- 
tion ;  for  example,  he  had  to  keep  a  weekly 
journal,  and  if  he  had  committed  a  fault  of  any 

'  Cf.  Russian  Archives,  1866,  pp.  75-94,  and  Le  Gouvemeitr^  &c., 
Appendix. 


284    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

kind  he  was  bound  to  give  his  tutor  a  detailed 
account  of  his  bad  conduct.  The  following  are 
a  few  examples  of  his  confessions:  ''Instead  of 
urging  myself  to  redouble  my  efforts  so  as  to 
profit  by  the  years  of  study  which  still  remain 
to  me,  I  am  becoming  daily  more  indifferent, 
lazier,  and  less  apt  at  my  lessons,  and  am  grow- 
ing more  and  more  like  those  of  my  equals,  who 
foolishly  imagine  themselves  to  be  perfect  merely 
because  they  are  princes,  I  am  as  childish  now  at 
thirteen  as  I  was  at  eight,  and  the  older  I  grow 
the  more  good-for-nothing  I  become.  What  sort 
of  man  am  I  going  to  be  ?  A  nonentity,  it  seems, 
and  men  of  sense  will  shrug  their  shoulders  when 
they  salute  me,  and  will  perhaps  laugh  at  me 
behind  my  back,  seeing  that  I  am  fool  enough 
to  imagine  that  the  marks  of  respect  they  show 
to  me  are  due  to  my  distinguished  merits.  So 
men  burnt  incense  to  the  idols  while  mocking  at 
the  senseless  comedy."  * 

On  another  occasion  the  Prince  confesses  having 
told  a  lie  to  prevent  himself  getting  into  trouble 
for  his  laziness,  as  he  had  left  a  task  undone  for 
two  whole  days,  having  spent  his  time  in  trifling 
and  gossiping ;  in  short,  he  had  behaved,  he  says, 
like  a  person  entirely  without  ambition  and  in- 
sensible to  shame.  His  consolation  is,  he  adds, 
that  he  is  persuaded  he  will  know  as  much  as 
other  persons  of  his  rank,  whom  he  should  be 
sorry  to  offend  by  knowing  too  much.* 

Similarly  he  accuses  himself  another  time  of 
being  entirely  without  a  desire  to  learn,  and  pro- 
vided  he   has  enough   to  eat  and   drink,  and  is 

»  Sbomik,  vol.  v,  p.  7.  *  IbitLy  pp.  lo-ii. 


THE    BIRTH    OF   ALEXANDER     285 

allowed  to  play  like  a  child  of  six,  and  chatter 
like  a  parrot,  nothing  gives  him  any  trouble.  *'  I 
shall  always  be  clever  enough,"  he  writes;  "why 
therefore  should  I  give  myself  the  trouble  of  be- 
coming so  ?  Princes,  like  myself,  know  everything 
without  having  to  be  taught."  * 

Catherine  herself  composed  a  memorandum,  in 
which  the  system  of  education  of  the  Princes  was 
laid  down.  The  following  are  some  of  the  instruc- 
tions drawn  up  by  Catherine  for  the  guidance  of 
Nicholas  Soltykov.* 

'*  Dress. — At  no  time  of  the  year  must  the  dress 
of  their  Highnesses  be  too  warm  or  too  heavy ; 
above  all,  care  must  be  taken  that  nothing  they 
wear  is  made  tight  across  the  chest.  The  dress 
must  be  as  light  and  simple  as  possible. 

"  Food. — The  quality  and  quantity  of  their  food 
must  be  regulated  by  circumstances.  Their  food 
and  drink  must  be  simple,  dressed  without  spice 
or  anjrthing  heating  to  the  blood,  and  without 
much  salt.  If  their  Highnesses  wish  for  food 
between  meals,  a  piece  of  bread  is  to  be  given 
to  them.  Wine  is  forbidden  unless  ordered  by 
the  doctor.  In  summer  they  may  have  cherries, 
strawberries,  currants,  and  ripe  apples  and  pears, 
either  for  breakfast  or  between  dinner  and  supper. 
Their  Highnesses  are  not  to  be  allowed  to  eat 
when  they  are  not  hungry,  nor  drink  when  they 
are  not  thirsty.  They  are  not  to  drink  cold  water 
when  they  are  heated.  If  they  are  perspiring, 
they  must  not  drink  until  they  have  first  eaten 
a  piece  of  bread. 

*'  Air. — In  winter  their  Highnesses'  apartments 

*  Sbomik,  vol.  xxvii,  pp.  30i-33a  '  Ibid,^  pp.  12-13.  ' 


286     THE   CURSE   OF   THE    ROMANOVS 

are  to  be  aired  twice  a  day  by  opening  the  small 
casements. 

**  Their  Highnesses  must  be  out  of  doors,  winter 
and  summer,  as  much  as  possible,  except  at  times 
when  it  would  be  prejudicial  to  their  health. 

**  Their  Highnesses  are,  as  far  as  possible,  to  be 
kept  away  from  the  fire  in  winter,  and  their  rooms 
are  not  to  be  heated  above  thirty  or  forty  degrees 
R^umur.  In  summer  they  are  to  play  exposed  to 
the  full  sun  and  wind.  It  does  not  matter  if  they 
get  sunburnt.  They  are  not  to  be  allowed  to  lie  on 
the  grass  when  they  are  heated. 

'' BalAin^.— Their  Highnesses  are  accustomed, 
winter  and  summer,  to  bathing  in  cold  water. 
Every  four  or  five  weeks  they  are  to  be  taken  to 
the  Russian  bath,  as  experience  has  shown  the 
beneficial  effects  of  this  regime.  The  bath  should 
be  prepared  according  to  Doctor  Sanhesse's  direc- 
tions, namely,  the  cold  water  is  to  be  thrown  on  to 
the  hot  bricks  before  their  Highnesses  enter  the 
bath,  so  that  they  may  not  inhale  a  dry  heat 

"  Their  Highnesses  must,  by  all  means,  learn  to 
swim. 

"They  should  be  accustomed  to  washing  their 
feet  frequently  in  cold  water,  as  a  preventive  of 
chills  and  corns ;  they  are  to  be  taught  not  to  fear 
wetting  their  feet.  In  summer  their  Highnesses' 
baths  can  be  arranged  as  seems  best. 

**Bed  and  Sleep. — Their  Highnesses  are  to  sleep 
on  mattresses,  not  on  feather  beds,  and  the  cover- 
ing should  be  light.  A  plain  chintz  cover,  with  a 
sheet  under  for  summer  and  a  wadded  one  in 
winter.  They  are  to  sleep  with  their  heads  un- 
covered, and  as  long  as  they  wish,  as  sleep  is  good 


THE    BIRTH    OF   ALEXANDER     287 

for  children;  but  as  it  is  healthful  to  rise  early, 
their  Highnesses  must  make  it  a  habit  to  go  to  bed 
in  good  time.  After  they  have  passed  their  seventh 
year,  eight  to  nine  hours  of  sleep  ought  to  be 
enough  for  them. 

"  When  it  is  time  to  awaken  their  Highnesses, 
they  are  to  be  called  by  name  in  a  low  voice, 
so  as  not  to  startle  them. 

**  Games  and  Good  Spirits. — Their  Highnesses 
are  not  to  be  checked  in  their  love  of  play  and 
liveliness  of  disposition,  but,  on  the  contrary,  they 
are  to  be  encouraged  to  enter  into  all  kinds  of 
games,  so  long  as  they  only  exercise  themselves  in 
a  manner  conformable  to  their  age  and  sex.  Exer- 
cise develops  the  intellect  as  well  as  the  physique 
of  a  child.  They  are  to  be  allowed  to  play  as 
long  as  they  like,  provided  they  do  themselves  and 
any  other  living  creature  no  harm,  and  preserve 
their  good  behaviour  to  those  about  them. 

*•  Trifling  faults  are  to  be  passed  over.  Those 
who  have  the  superintendence  of  them  are  not 
to  join  in  their  games  unless  invited  to  do  so  by 
their  Highnesses.  The  children  are  to  choose  their 
own  games,  as  their  choice  in  this  matter  is  an 
index  to  their  characters.  Children,  as  a  rule,  do 
not  like  to  be  idle,  and  games  to  them  are  serious 
occupations ! 

**  Variety  and  liberty  in  their  occupations  keep 
children  cheerful  and  good-tempered.  And  to 
this  end  care  must  be  taken  to  keep  from  their 
sight  and  hearing  all  painful  objects,  and  all 
tales  of  sorrow,  cowardice,  or  moral  evil.  No 
flattery  must  be  allowed  to  come  near  them. 

"  Their   Highnesses  must  never  be  allowed  to 


288    THE   CURSE   OF   THE    ROMANOVS 

remain  idle,  and,  if  not  playing  or  studying,  some 
amusement  must  be  provided  for  them  suitable  to 
their  age  and  intelligence,  and  of  an  instructive 
kind.  All  children  like  to  be  taught  if  they  are 
not  forced  to  learn,  and  no  pressure  must  be  put 
upon  them,  as  this  is  injurious  to  their  health  as 
well  as  to  their  intelligence. 

**  Sickness  and  Remedies. — Those  who  are  bom 
healthy  in  mind  and  body  have  no  need  of  especial 
care,  and  as  their  Highnesses  have,  God  be 
thanked,  been  bom  with  good  constitutions,  the 
only  thing  necessary  is  to  see  that  this  precious 
gift  of  health  is  not  impaired.  Therefore,  all 
remedies  and  specifics  are  to  be  avoided,  except 
in  cases  of  extreme  need.  The  use  of  these  more 
often  causes  disease  than  cures  it. 

**  The  children  often  have  slight  attacks  of  shiver- 
ing, of  heat,  or  of  pains  in  their  limbs  :  these  are 
signs  of  growing,  and  cure  themselves  without 
the  help  of  remedies ;  physicking  in  these  cases 
absorbs  the  strength  that  is  required  by  the 
organism.  Should  real  illness  intervene,  and  mild 
remedies  do  not  avail  to  relieve  it,  then  medical 
advice  may  be  of  use.  When  the  children  are  not 
well,  they  should  be  taught  to  carry  through  their 
illness  with  patience,  sleep,  and  abstinence.  All 
persons,  at  some  time  or  another,  suffer  from 
disease,  wounds,  hunger,  thirst,  cold,  heat,  somno- 
lence, or  fatigue,  but  this  is  no  reason  why  any 
one  should  grow  impatient  In  many  cases  it  is 
necessary  to  send  for  assistance,  but  this  should 
not  be  called  for  in  a  hurry."  ^ 

Laharpe  inculcated  his  Imperial  pupil  with  ideas 

^  Sbornik,  vol.  xxvii,  pp.  30i-33a 


THE   BIRTH    OF   ALEXANDER     289 

of  liberty  and  fraternity.  This  Swiss  Republican, 
who  was  fated  to  become  the  head  of  the  Helvetic 
Directory,  was  proud  of  the  idea  that  he  was 
instilling  useful  truths  into  the  mind  of  a  Prince 
called  upon  to  decide  the  fate  of  many  millions. 
He  taught  his  pupil  to  detest  despotism,  no  matter 
how  it  was  exercised,  and  to  love  liberty,  which 
was  the  appanage  of  all  men,  and  justice,  to  which 
all  had  an  equal  right.  Alexander  s  opinions  were 
so  extreme,  even  in  1796,  that  his  friend  Adam 
Czartorysky  had  to  moderate  them.  The  grand- 
son of  Catherine,  who,  it  was  thought,  would  have 
carried  on  her  system  of  government,  considered 
a  hereditary  monarchy  an  unjust  and  absurd  institu- 
tion.^ In  spite  of  the  many  enemies  which  Laharpe 
had  at  the  Russian  Court,  he  remained  the  principal 
instructor  of  the  future  Tsar  until  the  latter  was 
married,  when  his  education  came  to  an  end.  To 
counterbalance  the  liberal  influence  of  Laharpe, 
A.  Y.  Protassov,  for  whose  devoted  attachment  the 
Grand  Duke  was  heartily  grateful,  was  a  staunch 
supporter  of  the  old  regime  of  Church  and  State. 

*  Czartorysky,  Mimaires^  p.  103. 


CHAPTER   XIII 

THE  MARRIAGE  OF  ADONIS 

"Go  to  Canaan  and  bring  a  wife  for  my  son." 

Roumyanzev  sent  to  Carlsrahe — The  two  Princesses — Princess  Louisa  (Eliza- 
beth)— Catherine  delighted — The  Imperial  Don  Juan — Plan  to  exclude 
Paul  from  the  throne — Laharpe's  views — ^Adam  Czartorysky  and  Alex- 
ander meet  in  the  gardens  of  the  Taurida  Palace — Alexander's  dreams 
and  aspirations. 

Every  woman  is  by  nature  a  match-maker.  She 
enjoys  the  subtle  and  diplomatic  game  of  bring- 
ing together  two  suitable  beings  of  opposite  sex. 
Mothers  are  more  eager  than  fathers  to  marry  their 
daughters  and  sons.  Imperial  mothers  make  no 
exception  to  the  rule.  Catherine,  who  displayed 
such  eagerness  in  marrying  her  son  Paul,  seemed 
to  have  impatiently  awaited  the  moment  when  she 
could  give  a  spouse  to  her  darling  grandson  Alex- 
ander. The  Prince  was  scarcely  more  than  a  youth 
when  grandmamma,  who  had  been  watching  the 
approach  of  the  age  of  puberty — elle  sy  connaissait 
— decided  to  marry  him. 

In  1791  Protassov,  the  tutor  of  the  Prince, 
mentions  in  his  reports  that  "  The  Grand  Duke 
is  growing  lazy"  and  that  "physical  desires  are 
manifesting  themselves,  which  are  constandy  in- 
creasing in  a  measure  as  the  Prince  often  converses 
with  good-looking  women."  ^  Alexander  was  ex- 
ceedingly good-looking,  and  he  knew  it.     It  was 

^  Shilder,  The  Emperor  Alexander,  1897,  vol.  i^  p.  56. 


THE   MARRIAGE   OF   ADONIS       291 

his  beauty  which  won  him  the  hearts  of  all  the 
women,  and  which  made  him  a  Don  Juan  on  the 
throne.  Napoleon  was  jealous  of  him,  and  during 
his  stay  in  Vilna  he  once  said  to  the  Lithuanian 
ladies :  *'  The  Emperor  Alexander  is  exceedingly 
amiable ;  he  has  turned  all  your  heads  and  gained 
your  hearts."  Rostoptshin,  with  a  great  deal  of 
insight,  wrote:  "They  have  put  it  into  his  head 
that  his  beauty  will  conquer  all  the  women  for 
him.  He  will  find  enough  adventuresses  to  make 
him  forget  his  duties."  And  so  it  happened.  It 
is  only  the  exceptional  woman  who  does  not  prefer 
physical  beauty  to  mental  superiority,  and  it  is  a 
fact,  worthy  of  notice,  that  all  the  contemporary 
memoirs  written  by  ladies  are  full  of  praise  for 
Alexander  and  of  scorn  for  Napoleon.  His  grand- 
mother too  was  proud  of  his  beauty,  and  said  :  **  He 
will  be  run  after."  She  was,  however,  a  prudent 
woman,  and,  in  order  to  put  a  curb  on  his  passions, 
she  decided,  when  he  was  a  lad  of  sixteen,  **to 
submit  him  to  the  sacred  tie  of  marriage."  The 
choice  fell  upon  the  Princesses  of  Baden. 

Count  Roumyanzev  was  ordered  by  Catherine 
to  go  to  Germany,  the  Canaan  whence  Russian 
empresses  are  to  be  fetched  by  faithful  Eliezers, 
and  bring  a  wife  for  her  grandson,  for  Alexander. 
Negotiations  were  entered  upon  with  the  Court  of 
Carlsruhe,  and  in  1792  the  two  Princesses,  Louisa 
and  Fredericka,  were  brought  to  St.  Petersburg  to 
be  submitted  to  the  critical  scrutiny  of  Catherine. 
Louisa  was  thirteen  and  Fredericka  eleven  years 
old.  "  Do  not  imagine,"  wrote  Catherine  to  Grimm,^ 
"  that  we  marry  children  of  that  age  in  our  country. 

^  Sbomik,  vol.  xxiii,  p.  577. 


292     THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

The  Princesses  have  been  brought  here  not  for  the 
present  moment,  but  for  the  future ;  in  the  mean- 
time they  will  get  accustomed  to  our  manners 
and  mode  of  life.  As  for  the  young  man,  he  is 
quite  ignorant  of  all  that  is  going  on  in  his  inno- 
cence of  heart.  It  is  a  diabolical  trick  I  am 
playing  him." 

Princess  Louisa  had  the  good  fortune  to  please 
the  Empress.  Beautiful  as  Psyche,  and  proud 
not  only  of  her  beauty,  but  also  of  the  historical 
traditions  of  her  country.  Princess  Louisa  shrank 
at  the  idea  of  submitting  her  future  to  the  caprices 
of  a  young  barbarian.  At  the  moment  of  leaving 
her  home,  she  precipitated  herself  towards  the 
carriage  door,  and,  full  of  despair,  stretching  her 
arms  towards  the  beautiful  mountains  of  her  native 
land,  she  bade  them  a  heartrending  farewell.  Her 
tears  produced  no  impression  upon  her  mother, 
who  accompanied  her  on  the  journey.*  Such  is 
the  sad  lot  of  princesses  who  are  compelled  to 
accede  to  the  tempting  offer  of  a  throne  and  an 
empire. 

Catherine  found  Princess  Louisa  charming. 
Her  younger  sister  had  a  nice,  intelligent  face, 
but  she  was  still  only  a  child.  When  Princess 
Louisa  was  introduced  to  Prince  Alexander  she 
turned  pale  and  began  to  tremble,  whilst  the 
latter  only  looked  at  her  and  said  nothing.  But 
Louisa— or  Elizabeth  Alexeevna,  as  she  was  soon 
to  be  called  in  the  Greek  Church — won  all  hearts, 
and  could  not  fail  to  inspire  a  boyish  passion, 
which,  however,  never  became  deep,  in  the  heart  of 
a  lad  of  sixteen  years.     The  grandmother  rejoiced 

^  Mme.  Edling,  Mimoires^  Moscow,  1888,  pp.  33-34. 


THE   MARRIAGE   OF  ADONIS      293 

to  see  her  darling  boy  growing  more  and  more 
attached  to  the  girl  whom  she  had  chosen  as  his 
consort  "She  is  very  smart,"  wrote  Catherine, 
"and  is  nubile  at  thirteen."  ''This  Princess," 
said  Maria  F^odorovna,  **is  not  only  beautiful, 
but  from  her  whole  figure  there  emanates  a  charm 
which  wins  the  heart  of  the  most  indifferent ;  she 
captivates  with  her  amenity  and  her  candour." 
As  soon  as  the  official  consent  of  the  parents 
arrived,  the  Princess  Louisa  began  to  study  the 
Russian  language  and  the  dogmas  of  the  Greek 
orthodox  faith.  She  received  the  name  of  Eliza- 
beth Alexeevna.  The  engagement  was  announced 
with  great  solemnity,  and  accompanied  by  feasts 
and  banquets.  **  Two  angels,"  wrote  the  Empress, 
"  have  been  engaged  to  each  other ;  there  is 
nothing  so  beautiful  as  this  fiancd  of  fifteen  and 
his  fiancee  of  fourteen ;  besides,  they  are  in  love 
with  each  other."  ^ 

The  Prussian  Ambassador  wrote  that  since  his 
sojourn  in  St.  Petersburg  he  had  never  seen  the 
Empress  in  such  good  spirits  as  on  the  day  of 
her  grandson's  betrothal.  With  due  pomp  the 
marriage  was  celebrated.* 

It  had  been  intended  that  the  Grand  Duke, 
although  married,  should  continue  his  studies,  but 
it  was  natural  that  he  should  no  longer  be  inclined 
to  give  them  much  attention;  he  had,  moreover, 
been  led  to  understand  that  his  time  was  to  be  now 
at  his  own  disposal.  During  his  short  engagement 
he  had  already  begun,  little  by  little,  to  neglect  his 
books,  and,  once  married,  he  gave  himself  up  to  all 

^  Sbomik,  vol.  xxiii,  p.  583. 

^  Berlin  Archives,  vol.  ii,  1793,  xi,  No.  40. 


294    THE   CURSE   OF   THE    ROMANOVS 

kinds  of  childish  follies  and  military  amusements, 
while,  in  imitation  of  his  brother,  he  indulged  in 
games  with  his  servants  which  were  hardly  becoming 
to  his  dignity.  His  wife  seems  to  have  found  him 
boyish  also  in  his  relations  with  her — ^affectionate  but 
somewhat  rough.  His  tutor,  Protassov,  unable  to 
get  him  to  attend  to  his  work,  was  also  concerned 
at  his  comradeship  with  gentlemen  of  the  household, 
who  enlightened  him  in  many  undesirable  ways-^ 
He  tried  to  get  opportunities  of  private  conversa- 
tion with  his  pupil,  who,  however,  always  managed 
to  escape,  taking  refuge  sometimes  in  the  Grand 
Duchess's  dressing-room,  whither  his  tutor  could  not 
follow  him. 

By  the  end  of  1793  Alexander  made  no  further 
pretence  of  studying,  his  whole  time  being  taken  up 
with  hunting  and  playing  pranks  with  his  hair- 
dresser and  other  attendants.  No  improvement 
took  place  in  1794,  although  Laharpe  and  other 
professors  were  there  to  instruct  him.  As  was  the 
custom  of  the  time»  a  small  theatre  was  erected  in 
his  apartment,  and  from  this  moment  the  young 
Prince  began  also  to  neglect  his  wife. 

It  is  interesting  to  notice  how  readily  ladies  are 
disposed  to  excuse  the  amiable  frailties  of  men — 
except  those  of  their  own  husbands — ^and  will  attri- 
bute the  blame  to  the  wife,  who  did  not  know  how 
to  rivet  her  husband's  affection.  If  the  Don  Juan 
is  a  crowned  head,  then,  of  course,  a  veil  of  romance, 
and  even  martyrdom,  is  woven  over  his  amatory 
transgressions  by  delicate  female  fancy.  The  con- 
temporary memoirs  written  by  ladies,  who  were 
well   acquainted  with  the  intimate  history  of  the 

*  Archives  Voronzov,  vol.  xv,  p.  13. 


• 


THE    MARRIAGE   OF   ADONIS       295  f 

Russian  Court,  are  full  either  of  pity  and  of  ad- 
miration for  Alexander  or  of  blame — even  if  gently 
administered — ^for  Elizabeth. 

Elizabeth  did  not  know  how  to  capture  and 
retain  her  boy-husband's  affections.  '•  Married  so 
young,"  writes  one  lady  author,  "  and  naturally  en- 
dowed with  lively  passions,  friendship  alone  was 
not  enough  to  fill  the  heart  of  Alexander,  which 
was  only  too  susceptible  to  the  dangerous  impres- 
sions of  love.  Elizabeth,  wounded  in  her  dearest 
affections,  did  not,  in  the  pride  of  her  more  con- 
stant heart,  allow  herself  to  employ  any  means  to 
bring  back  the  love  of  her  husband.  And,  while 
affecting  perfect  indifference,  she  was  often  to  be 
seen  bathed  in  tears,  contemplating  the  portrait  of 
her  lovable  but  unfaithful  husband."  ^ 

Madame  Gouf5[ier  may  be  right,  but  what  she 
overlooks,  or  does  not  care  to  admit,  is  the  con- 
siderable probability  that,  had  Alexander  been  more 
faithful,  Elizabeth  might  have  loved  him  less. 
Such  is  the  nature  of  woman,  beggar-woman  or 
duchess.  But  Madame  Gouffier  hastens  to  turn 
away  her  eyes  from  the  sorrows  of  Elizabeth.  She 
is  anxious  to  plead  for  Alexander,  the  prodigal  hus- 
band. "  Ah !  to  find  him  less  guilty  let  us  turn  our 
regards  from  the  sorrows  of  the  angelic  Elizabeth ! 
As  a  man,  Alexander  had  all  the  weaknesses  of  a 
man.  Perfection  without  blemish  is  not  compatible 
with  human  nature.  And  if  a  man  like  Alexander 
failed  to  attain  to  it  in  all  its  respects  in  his  private 
life,  what  other  mortal  will  dare  hope  to  attain 
to    it."*      She    finishes    her  plaidoyer    with    the 

1  Madame  Choiseul-Gouffier,  M^nwires^  Paris,  1829,  p.  50. 
8  Ibid. 


A 


296    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

following  naive  remarks :  ''In  any  case,  no  one 
will  accuse  Alexander  of  having  seduced  inno- 
cence. He  always  knew  how  to  respect  and 
honour  merit  and  virtue ;  and,  moreover,  he  was 
careful  to  avoid  scandal.  Never  did  he  in  mad 
profligacy  squander  the  revenues  of  the  State,  nor 
did  he  allow  his  favourites  to  gain  a  dangerous 
influence  over  his  mind.  Alexander  too  renounced 
his  errors  at  an  age  when  Louis  XIV  was  still 
under  the  influence  of  Madame  de  Montespan  and 
beautiful  Fontanges,  and  he  was  younger  than  Henri 
IV,  when  that  king,  disguised  as  a  lackey,  was  run- 
ning after  the  carriage  of  the  Princess  of  Condi."* 
**  Alexander,"  writes  another  lady,  proud  of  the 
friendly  relations  that  existed  between  herself  and 
the  Emperor,  **  loved  the  society  of  ladies ;  he  took 
an  interest  in  them  and  manifested  a  chivalrous 
respect  towards  them,  full  of  grace  and  kind- 
ness. This  sentiment  was  so  pure  that — whatever 
may  have  been  said  in  a  corrupt  society — it 
never  altered  even  when  age  had  subdued  the 
fire  of  passion.  He  was  gallant  to  all  women, 
but  he  only  loved  one.*'*  The  Grand  Duchess 
Elizabeth  was  unhappy.  But  with  a  little  less 
pride  and  a  little  more  amiability,  she  would 
have  gained  his  heart.  Accustomed  as  she  was 
to  being  extolled  and  admired,  she  scorned  the 
idea  of  studying  the  means  for  regaining  her 
husband's  love.  She  would  have  accepted  the 
homage  of  his  tenderness,  but  she  would  not  stoop 
to  court  it.* 

^  Choiseul-Gouffier,  /.^.,  p.  6i. 

'  This  was  Madame  Narishkin,  of  whom  we  shall  say  more  in  a 
subsequent  chapter. 

'  Madame  la  Comtesse  Edling,  Mimoiresy  pp.  60-61. 


THE   MARRIAGE   OF   ADONIS       297 

In  1793  it  was  already  rumoured  that  the  Em- 
press intended  to  alter  the  settlement  of  her 
previous  will  in  favour  of  her  grandson  Alexander, 
and  belief  in  the  truth  of  this  report  became  general 
when  the  Baden  Princesses  actually  arrived  at  St. 
Petersburg,  and  the  Grand  Duke's  approaching 
marriage  was  made  public. 

Paul  had  made  himself  universally  detested, 
and  everybody  was  pleased  at  the  prospect  of 
Alexander  ascending  the  throne  in  his  stead.  As 
was  stated  above,  the  French  refugees,  with 
Choiseul-GoufBer,  the  former  French  Ambassador 
at  the  Court  of  Constant inople.  Count  Esterhazy, 
and  the  Prince  of  Nassau-Siegen  at  their  head, 
had  instilled  ideas  into  the  Grand  Duke  which 
had  rendered  him^  even  more  suspicious  of  every 
one  about  him  than  formerly,  and  had  inclined 
him  to  look  upon  all  those  who  did  not  share 
their  views  as  his  enemies.  Catherine's  advisers, 
aware  of  Laharpe's  advanced  liberalism,  were  now 
scheming  together  to  draw  the  latter  into  a  plot 
which  should,  if  successful,  rid  Russia  without  delay 
of  a  modem  Tiberius.  If  they  failed,  it  would  be 
easy,  they  thought,  to  throw  all  the  onus  of  the 
affair  on  the  shoulders  of  this  unfortunate  foreigner, 
who  would  be  decried  as  a  confessed  Jacobin, 
and  sent  into  exile  on  Pauls  accession  as  an 
accomplice  in  a  plot  from  which  he  would  have 
recoiled  in  horror  and  indignation.  The  most 
difficult  part  of  their  task  was  the  necessity  of 
preparing  the  Grand  Duke  Alexander  for  a 
possible  catastrophe,  and  as  Laharpe  was  the 
only  person  who  had  the  required  influence  over 

*  Archives  Voronzov,  vol.  viii,  p.  67. 


298    THE   CURSE  OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

hinip  the  conspirators  decided  that,  on  this  ground 
alone,  his  co-operation  was  indispensable. 

Catherine,  with  this  object  in  view,  sent  for 
her  grandson's  tutor.  The  summons  was  a  hasty 
one,  and  Laharpe  arrived  without  delay  on  the 
1 8th  October  1791.  Count  Soltykov,  who  appears 
to  have  been  in  the  Empress's  confidence,  replied 
to  Laharpe's  interrogation  as  to  the  cause  of  his 
summons  that  the  Empress  alone  could  make 
it  known  to  him.  Then  followed  an  interview, 
which  lasted  two  hours,  between  the  Empress 
and  Laharpe,  during  which  the  former  endeavoured 
by  every  possible  insinuation  to  make  Laharpe 
understand  why  she  had  sent  for  him,  but  the 
latter,  who  had  no  difficulty  in  perceiving  the 
drift  of  her  conversation  or  in  interpreting  her 
hints,  exerted  himself  with  equal  skill  on  the 
other  side  to  prevent  her  actually  disclosing  her 
designs  to  him,  and  to  lead  her  to  believe  that 
she  had  failed  to  make  him  comprehend  her 
intentions.  He  was  fortunately  successful  in  both 
these  efforts,  but  to  the  end  of  his  days  he 
suffered  from  the  recollection  of  these  two  hours 
of  mental  torture,  and  the  remainder  of  his  stay 
in  Russia  was  thereby  rendered  especially  painful 
to  him. 

Fearful  that  he  might  not  a  second  time  be  able 
to  fence  successfully  with  such  nerve-shattering 
manoeuvres,  he  withdrew  more  and  more  from 
general  society ;  and  the  Empress,  seeing  that  he 
studiously  avoided  appearing  at  Court  except  during 
the  hours  of  lessons,  made  up  her  mind  that  he  sus- 
pected the  part  he  was  required  to  play  and  was 
determined  not  to  undertake  it.     Indeed,  Laharpe, 


THE   MARRIAGE   OF  ADONIS      299 

in  opposition  to  Catherine  s  designs,  endeavoured  to 
bring  Paul  and  his  sons  into  more  cordial  relations 
with  one  another.  The  children  complained  to  their 
tutor  of  their  father's  rough  and  violent  outbursts 
of  temper,  and  Laharpe  had  difficulty  in  trying  to 
represent  Pauls  conduct  in  as  favourable  a  light  as 
possible.  Although  himself  suspected  of  Carton- 
arism,  he  was  not  the  less  indignant  at  the  violent 
measures  which  were  being  concerted  against  Paul, 
and  he  sought  an  opportunity  to  warn  the  latter  of 
the  danger  that  threatened  him.  The  Tsarevitsh, 
prejudiced  against  Laharpe,  had  not  spoken  to 
him  for  three  years ;  it  was  difficult,  therefore,  for 
Laharpe  to  obtain  an  interview  with  him,  but  at 
last  he  achieved  his  purpose.  Without  betraying 
all  his  apprehensions  to  the  Grand  Duke,  he  suc- 
ceeded in  persuading  him  to  alter  his  conduct 
towards  his  children  and  in  dispelling  his  doubts 
as  to  their  affection  for  him  ;  beseeching  him,  at  the 
same  time,  to  treat  them  with  greater  confidence, 
to  be  their  friend,  and,  above  all,  not  to  communi- 
cate with  them  through  a  third  person.^ 

Paul  rightly  interpreted  Laharpe's  intentions, 
and  thanked  him  warmly  for  his  kindly  counsel, 
promising  to  lay  it  to  heart.  Seeing  this  change 
of  attitude,  the  public  naturally  began  to  look  upon 
the  Grand  Duke's  tutor  as  an  obstacle  which  must 
at  all  risks  be  removed,  and  Laharpe  suddenly 
received  notice  that  his  services  as  tutor  would  not 
be  required  after  May  of  the  following  year.  La- 
harpe left  Russia  at  the  close  of  1 794.  There  can 
be  no  doubt  as  to  the  veracity  of  Laharpe's  state- 
ments.    In  a  letter  to  the  Emperor  Paul,  written 

>  Soukhomlinov,  /.r.,  p.  51. 


3CX)    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

from  abroadp  he  says :  *'  I  address  myself  to  you, 
Sire,  as  one  to  whom  you  are  probably  indebted 
for  your  life,  which  was  seriously  threatened  during 
the  years  1793  ^tnd  1794." 

It  may  be  safely  asserted  that  if  the  proposal, 
of  which  Laharpe  speaks,  had  been  submitted  to 
the  Grand  Duke  Alexander,  he  would  have  indig- 
nandy  rejected  it.  At  the  moment  when  Catherine 
was  thinking  of  settling  the  succession  upon  him, 
Alexander  was  beginning  to  ponder  on  the  vanity 
of  earthly  things.  Three  years  later  he  gave  his 
opinion  of  matters  in  general  as  follows :  "  My 
position  is  to  me  far  from  being  a  happy  one.  It  is 
too  conspicuous  and  restless  to  suit  a  nature  which 
cares  only  for  peace  and  quietness.  I  am  not  suited 
for  a  Court  life.  I  never  come  upon  its  scene 
without  a  feeling  of  suffering,  and  I  am  revolted 
at  the  sight  of  the  infamies  that  are  committed  on 
all  sides  in  order  to  obtain  distinctions,  which,  to 
my  idea,  are  not  worth  a  farthing.  It  is  a  misery 
to  me  to  be  obliged  to  mingle  with  people  whom 
I  would  not  have  by  choice  for  my  valets,  and 
who  yet  hold  some  of  the  highest  offices,  such 
as  Prince  Z.  P.  B.,  the  two  Counts  S.  M.,  and  many 
others  who  are  not  worth  the  trouble  of  mentioning, 
and  who,  arrogant  as  they  are  in  their  behaviour 
to  lesser  men,  yet  cringe  before  those  they  fear. 
In  a  word,  I  am  not  made  for  the  high  position  I 
now  hold,  and  still  less  for  that  which  is  reserved 
for  me  in  the  future  and  from  which  I  have 
sworn  to  myself  to  escape  in  some  way  or  another. 
I  have  studied  the  question  on  all  sides  and  have 
no  hesitation  in  coming  to  this  decision.  Our 
affairs  are  now  in  a  state  of  incredible  disorder. 


THE    MARRIAGE   OF   ADONIS       301 

There  is  pilfering  going  on  in  every  direction, 
all  departments  of  State  are  badly  administered, 
and  order  seems  banished  from  one  and  all  of 
them,  and  yet  the  Empire  continues  to  increase. 
With  things  in  this  state,  how  is  it  possible  to 
govern  the  country  single-handed,  or  for  one 
person  to  uproot  so  many  abuses?  It  would  be 
a  task,  not  only  above  the  power  of  a  man  en- 
dowed like  myself  with  ordinary  faculties,  but 
above  that  of  a  genius.  It  has  always  been  my 
conviction  that  it  is  far  better  to  refuse  to  under- 
take a  task  than  to  perform  it  badly;  and, 
according  to  this  principle,  I  have  decided  to  act 
as  I  stated  above.  My  plan  is,  when  the  time 
comes,  to  make  known  my  intention  of  renounc- 
ing a  career  beset  with  such  difficulties  (I  have 
not  yet  fixed  the  date  for  this),  to  retire  with  my 
wife  to  the  shores  of  the  Rhine,  there  to  lead  the 
quiet  life  of  a  private  individual,  enjoying  the 
pleasure  of  my  friends'  society  and  of  the  con- 
templation of  nature."* 

That  the  lessons  of  Laharpe  had  not  been 
without  influence  upon  the  young  Prince,  and 
that,  for  a  time  at  least,  he  was  inspired  by  liberal 
and  even  democratic  ideas,  may  be  easily  gathered 
from  the  Mimoires  of  Prince  Adam  Czartorysky, 
whom  Alexander  met  in  the  gardens  of  the 
Taurida  Palace,  and  for  whom  he  conceived  a 
lively  attachment.  Laharpe,  however,  had  not 
succeeded  in  developing  an  independent  spirit  in 
Alexander,  and  he  remained  vacillating  and  un- 
decided most  of  his  life  up  to  the  period  of  his 
mysticism ;    but  the    Swiss    patriot    had   at   least 

1  Sbomik,  vol.  v,  pp.  23-24. 


302     THE  CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

inspired  his   Imperial  disciple  with  an  abhorrence 
of  evil  and  a  respect  for  the  dignity  of  man. 

Catherine  had  invited  the  two  Princes,  Adam 
and  Constantine  Czartorysky,  to  come  to  St  Peters- 
burg, and  here  they  became  acquainted  and  soon 
intimate  with  the  Imperial  Princes  of  Russia. 
Rostoptshin  did  not  like  the  growing  intimacy  of 
the  Polish  magnate  with  the  future  Tsar,  and  main- 
tained that  Prince  Adam  was  encouraging  Alex- 
ander's weakness  for  the  fair  sex.^  Catherine, 
however,  looked  favourably  upon  the  friendship 
between  her  grandson  and  the  scions  of  an  old 
Polish  aristocratic  family.  "With  her  old  ideas 
concerning  the  splendour  of  the  Polish  aristocracy," 
writes  Prince  Adam  in  his  MAnoires^  "the  Em- 
press of  Russia  probably  thought  that  it  would 
be  useful  to  attach  an  influential  family  to  her 
grandson.  And  her  approval  of  this  friendship 
soon  silenced  all  objectors."  It  was  during  their 
walks  in  the  gardens  of  the  Taurida  Palace  that 
the  grandson  of  Catherine,  who  had  crushed 
Poland's  liberty  and  independence,  confided  his 
ideas  and  thoughts  to  the  Polish  exile.  Alexander 
told  Czartorysky  that  he  neither  approved  the 
policy  and  conduct  of  his  grandmother,  nor  did 
he  share  the  ideas  and  doctrines  of  Court  and 
Cabinet.  He,  the  future  Tsar  of  Russia,  had  de- 
plored the  fall  of  Poland,  and  his  sympathies  had 
been  with  Kosciuszko,  who,  in  his  glorious  struggle 
for  liberty,  had  fought  not  only  for  his  country 
but  for  justice  and  humanity.  He  had  also  taken 
a  great   interest   in  the   French   Revolution,  and 

*  Archives  Voronzov,  vol.  viii,  p.  155. 
'  Lc^  p.  loi. 


PRINCE  ADAM   CZARTORVSKY. 


THE    MARRIAGE   OF   ADONIS       303 

rejoiced  at  the  establishment  of  the  French  Re- 
public and  wished  it  success.  The  ideas  and 
opinions  of  Alexander  were  those  of  1789.  He 
wished  to  see  republics  everywhere,  and  looked 
upon  that  form  of  government  as  the  only  one  in 
conformity  with  the  wishes  and  rights  of  humanity* 

Although  Prince  Adam  Czartorysky  was  natu- 
rally very  enthusiastically  liberal  himself,  born  and 
bred  as  he  had  been  in  a  Republic  where  the 
principles  of  the  French  Revolution  had  been 
eagerly  accepted,  he  had  constantly  to  moderate 
his  friend's  views.  "He  held,"  writes  Czar- 
torysky, '*  that  hereditary  monarchy  was  an  absurd 
and  unjust  institution,  and  that  the  supreme 
authority  should  not  be  granted  through  the  acci- 
dent of  birth,  but  by  the  votes  of  the  nation,  which 
best  knew  who  was  most  capable  of  governing 
it"  Czartorysky  had  to  prove  to  Alexander  that 
Russia  was  neither  prepared  nor  adapted  for  such 
an  election.^  Whether  Czartorysky  had  failed  to 
convince  his  Imperial  friend,  or  whether  Alexander, 
when  Emperor,  wished  to  impress  the  son  of  the 
Revolution,  it  is  a  fact  that,  even  as  late  as  1807, 
at  Tilsit,  Napoleon  had  to  use  all  his  logic  to  prove 
to  the  Autocrat  of  all  the  Russias  that  hereditary 
monarchy  was  the  sole  guarantee  of  the  peace  and 
happiness  of  nations.  The  Tsar  of  Russia  still 
maintained  that  it  was  an  abuse  of  sovereignty. 

The  Grand  Duke,  the  heir-apparent  to  the 
Russian  throne — most  probably  in  consequence  of 
the  influence  of  Laharpe — thought  not,  in  those 
early  days  of  his  friendship  for  Adam  Czartorysky, 
of  thrones  and  empires,  but  of  farms  and  smiling 

^  Czartorysky,  MimoireSy  p.  103. 


304    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

landscapes.  The  dream  he  yearned  to  realise  was 
to  retire  from  the  Court  and  from  the  burden  of 
government,  and  to  lead  an  irresponsible  life  ac- 
cording to  his  own  pleasure.  Gardens  and  fields, 
flowers,  village  girls,  fascinated  him  more  than 
palaces  and  the  ladies  of  the  Court;  agriculture 
interested  him  more  even  than  politics.  The  diffi- 
culties of  the  position  which  awaited  him  frightened 
him.^  Alexander  was  in  this  respect  not  only 
unlike  his  father,  but  also  unlike  his -grandmother, 
who,  to  judge  from  her  letters  to  Grimm,  did  not 
understand  the  true  character  of  her  grandson  nor 
the  real  state  of  his  mind.  Alexander  had  no  self- 
confidence  and  no  will-power.  His  lack  of  these 
became  more  manifest  later  when  his  mysticism 
at  last  declared  itself,  and  he  fell  under  the  influ- 
ence of  Madame  Kruedener.  Czartorysky  in  his 
Mimoires  admits  that  he  had  been  deceived  in 
Alexander,  and  that  he  had  been  blamed  by  his 
countrymen  for  having  placed  too  much  confidence 
in  his  assurances.  But  even  in  later  years  the 
Polish  Prince  never  cToubted  the  sincerity  of  the 
opinions  _and  sentiments  expressed  by  Alexander 
mjSe  jg^ardens  of  the  Taurida  Palace. 

In  spite  of  all  the  influence  she  had  exerted,  in 
spite  of  the  particular  care  she  had  taken  of  her 
grandson,  Catherine  was  now  forced  to  admit,  not 
without  a  certain  amount  of  displeasure,  that  there 
was  an  understanding  between  Alexander  and  Paul, 
and  that  the  Prince,  even  in  spite  of  Paul's  continual 
scoldings,  was  attached  to  his  father.  Alexander 
appeared  to  like  holding  a  command  under  Paul  at 
Gatshina,  and  the  army — ^his  pastoral  instincts  not- 

^  Czartorysky,  Mitnmrts^  p.  104. 


THE    MARRIAGE   OF   ADONIS      305 

withstanding — became  his  hobby.  In  the  mean- 
time his  education,  which  had  not  so  far  enriched 
him  with  wisdom,  was  utterly  neglected.  He  was 
no  longer  advised  to  work,  and,  what  is  more,  he 
felt  no  inclination  to  do  so.  Czartorysky  indeed 
counselled  the  future  Tsar  to  read  various  books 
on  politics,  on  history  and  legislation,  but  although 
Alexander  made  up  his  mind  to  do  so,  he  was  not 
endowed  with  a  sufficient  passion  for  knowledge, 
and  his  will  failed  to  carry  out  his  design.  "He 
only  read  by  fits  and  starts,  without  ardour  or  zeal." 
"  He  never  read  to  the  end  a  single  serious  book, 
and  when  he  came  to  his  rooms  it  was  not  to  work, 
but  for  the  purpose  of  reposing."  * 

^  Czartorysky,  /.<:.,  p.  114. 


U 


CHAPTER   XIV 

"SIRE,   VENEZ  RfeGNER" 

Alexander  awaiting  the  result  of  the  conspiracy  against  his  fi&ther— His  grief 
and  remorse — Attitude  of  Maria  F^odorovna — First  years  of  Alexandci's 
reign — Coronation — Universal  joy — Reforms  and  benevolent  admimstia- 
tioD — ^The  Secret  Council — New  code  of  laws — Educadooal  establish- 
ments and  universities — The  Coalition — Ill-feeling  towards  France. 

In  one  of  the  rooms  of  the  Michael  Palace,  Alex- 
ander, undressed,  lay  on  his  bed,  awaiting  in  feverish 
anxiety  the  result  of  the  final  great  conspiracy 
against  his  father.  He  knew  that  at  that  very 
moment  Paul  was  being  compelled  to  abdicate,  but 
perhaps  shut  his  eyes  to  the  possibility  of  the  last 
grim  scene  of  the  tragedy  which  had  been  enacted 
The  tumult  and  the  noise  came  nearer. 

Suddenly  there  is  a  knock  at  his  door,  Valerian 
Zoubov*  enters  and  informs  him  that  "all  is  over." 
** What  is  over.^"  "Your  father  is  dead,  and  you 
are  Emperor  Alexander." 

Whether  moved  by  remorse  or  grief,  Alexander 
at  once  exclaimed,  * '  I  will  not  accept  a  crown 
stained  with  the  blood  of  my  father."  Possibly 
Alexander  had  hugged  to  himself  the  delusion  that 
Paul  would  be  compelled  to  abdicate  bloodlessly. 
But,  however  it  may  have  been,  Alexander,  face  to 
face  with  the  accomplished  deed,  was  undoubtedly 
overwhelmed  with  horror. 

Historians  have  endeavoured  to  exonerate  Alex- 

^  Czartorysky  says  it  was  Nicholas  Zoubov. 

306 


'•SIRE,   VENEZ    Rl&GNER*'  307 

ander  from  any  moral  guilt.  He  had  been  com- 
pelled to  sanction  the  conspiracy  in  order  to  protect 
his  mothers  life,  which,  owing  to  Paul's  violent 
temper,  was  in  constant  danger ;  but,  so  the  apolo- 
gists maintain,  he  had  never  given  his  consent 
to  the  assassination.  This  hair-splitting  apology 
appears  somewhat  absurd.  Was  there  any  neces- 
sity for  Alexander  formally  to  consent  to  such  a 
deed  ?  Tacitly  he  did  so.  He  had  intelligence 
enough  to  understand  that  if  the  slightest  danger 
arose  for  themselves  the  conspirators  would  not 
hesitate  to  do  away  with  Paul,  whom  they  all  hated. 
Alexander  knew  how  the  revolution  of  '62  had 
ended,  and  that,  considering  Paul's  temper — so 
much  more  violent  than  that  of  Peter  HI — it  was 
almost  a  certainty  that  the  issue  of  the  conspiracy 
of  1 801  would  be  similar  to  that  of '62.  The  very 
fact  that  he  did  not  punish  the  conspirators  is  in 
itself  of  sufficient  significance. 

Alexander  himself  had  also  attached  very  great 
importance  to  the  assistance  of  the  troops.  When 
Pahlen  insisted  on  having  the  plan  carried  out  on 
the  7th  of  March,  Alexander  compelled  him  to  wait 
till  the  nth,  because  then  the  Semeonovsky  regi- 
ment, on  which  he  could  rely,  would  be  mounting 
guard.  It  is  absurd  to  imagine  that  Alexander, 
availing  himself  of  such  a  dangerous  instrument 
as  a  band  of  turbulent  young  officers,  could  have 
reasonably  expected  that  everything  would  pass 
off  decently  and  without  bloodshed.  That  the  con- 
spirators were  officers,  that  the  whole  undertaking 
had  a  military  character,  is  sufficient  proof  that  the 
actors  in  this  play  were  prepared  for  the  tragic 
ending.     Certain    it   is  that   Alexander's   remorse 


A 


3o8     THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

and  his  fits  of  despair  never  left  him.  These  facts 
show  that — tacitly  at  least — ^he  had  agreed  not  only 
to  the  deposition,  but  also  to  the  assassination. 

"His  grief  and  the  remorse,"  writes  Czar- 
torysky,^  **  which  he  was  continually  reviving  in 
his  heart  were  inexpressibly  deep  and  touching. 
He  continually  saw  in  his  imagination  the  muti- 
lated body  of  his  father,  and  his  mental  tortures 
never  ceased."  For  hours  he  remained  alone  sitting 
in  silence,  with  fixed  and  haggard  looks.^  When 
Pahlen  and  the  other  conspirators  appeared  on  the 
morning  following  the  murder,  urging  him  to  show 
himself  to  the  immense  crowd  of  people  and  to  the 
detachments  of  soldiers  who  had  assembled  under 
the  walls  of  the  Palace,  he  still  persisted  in  refusing. 
Then  at  last  Pahlen  approached  and,  taking  Alex- 
ander rudely  by  the  arm,  said:  *'Stre,  cest  assez 
/aire  r enfant :  allez  rigner^  venez-vous  mantrer  aux 
gardes!'^  Pale  and  exhausted  the  new  Autocrat 
was  half  carried  into  the  presence  of  the  soldiers, 
where  he  received  the  oath  of  allegiance.  Con- 
stantine  was  fast  asleep  while  the  catastrophe  was 
taking  place — so  he  afterwards  told  Count  Lan- 
geron — and  was  suddenly  awakened  by  Platon 
Zoubov,  who  brutally  told  him  that  Paul  was  dead 
and  that  the  new  Emperor  Alexander  had  com- 
manded his  presence.  **  I  dressed  quickly,"  says 
Constantine,  **and  followed  the  Count  into  the 
presence  of  my  brother,  whom  I  found  crying 
bitterly."  Alexander,  now  accompanied  by  his 
brother,  left  for  the  Winter  Palace. 

The  Grand  Duchess  Elizabeth,  now  Empress, 

*  Czartorysky,  /.r.,  pp.  236-237.         ■  Comtesse  Edling,  /.^.,  p.  38. 
*  Revue  Britannique^  1865,  July,  pp.  76-77. 


"SIRE,   VENEZ   R^GNER"         309 

mounted  to  the  Dowager  Empress,  to  whom  Alex- 
ander had  despatched  Pahlen  to  inform  her  of  what 
had  occmred.  (According  to  various  eye-witnesses, 
it  was  the  Countess  Lieven  whom  Pahlen  commis- 
sioned to  execute  this  order.)  She  gave  vent  to 
cries  of  despair  and  rage.  **As  your  Emperor 
has  died  a  victim  of  treason,"  she  cried,  "then 
I  am  your  Empress."  Bennigsen  and  Pahlen,  who 
now  appeared,  tried  to  calm  her.  Elizabeth  joined 
her  prayers  to  their  entreaties.  She  was  the  only 
member  of  the  family  who  retained  her  presence 
of  mind.^  Bennigsen  asked  Maria  F^odorovna  to 
proceed  to  the  Winter  Palace  and  to  acknowledge 
her  son  as  Emperor.  "Who  is  Emperor?"  cried 
Maria  F^odorovna;  "who  calls  Alexander  Em- 
peror?" "The  voice  of  the  nation,"  replied  Ben- 
nigsen. "Tell  him,"  replied  the  widow  of  Paul, 
"  that  I  shall  never  acknowledge  him  for  my  sove- 
reign, until  he  has  given  me  an  account  of  his 
conduct  in  this  affair."  Her  daughter-in-law  again 
entreated  her  to  obey  and  to  accompany  her  to 
the  Winter  Palace.  Maria  F^odorovna  replied 
passionately:  "CV  nest  pas  d  mot  d  obHr;  alUz 
obdissez  si  vans  voulez!''^  She  again  vehemendy 
seized  Bennigsen's  arm  and  commanded  him  to 
obey  her  as  his  Empress.  He  rudely  exclaimed : 
*^  Madame,  on  ne  joue  pas  la  comidie''  Alexander, 
informed  of  his  mother's  intention  to  seize  the  reins 
of  government,  exclaimed :  "  Mon  Dieuy  encore  ce 
surcroit  cCembarrasy  But  as  his  mother  emphati- 
cally refused  to  leave  the  Michael's  Palace  until 
she  had  seen  her  husband  dead  with  her  own  eyes, 

1  PoHHsche  Correspondenz  Karl  FridricJCs  v.  Baden,  1896,  vol. 
iv,  p.  141.  '  Bennigsen  in  Schiemann,  /.r.,  p.  80. 


3IO    THE  CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

permission  was  at  last  granted  to  take  her  to  the 
room  where  Paul,  who  had  in  the  meantime  been 
dressed  up  and  painted  by  the  various  artists,  was 
laid  out  in  his  coffin.  Maria  Fdodorovna's  conduct 
was  somewhat  theatrical.  Approaching  the  corpse, 
the  Dowager  Empress  paused  in  dead  silence,  and 
fixed  her  eyes  on  it  steadily  without  shedding  a 
tear.  According  to  the  account  given  by  Princess 
Darya  Lieven*  the  Empress  was  then  conveyed 
to  the  Winter  Palace,  where  the  first  interview 
took  place  between  mother  and  son.  Sablukov, 
however,  to  whom  the  whole  scene  was  afterwards 
related  by  Moukhanov,  who  was  in  attendance 
on  Maria  F6odorovna,  says  that  Alexander  and 
Elizabeth  accompanied  the  Dowager  Empress  to 
the  fatal  apartment.  Alexander,  who  now  saw  his 
father's  mangled  face,  was  horrified  and  stood  trans- 
fixed. His  mother  then  turned  to  him  and,  with 
a  grave  and  dignified  air,  said :  "  Now  I  wish 
you  joy,  you  are  an  Emperor."  At  these  words 
Alexander,  overcome  with  grief,  fell  to  the  ground. 
Maria  F6odorovna  gazed  on  her  son  without 
emotion,  and,  taking  Moukhanov's  arm,  retired 
to  her  apartment.  On  recovering  his  senses 
Alexander  immediately  rejoined  his  mother,  and 
they  poured  out  their  grief  in  a  flood  of  tears.* 

Thus  Alexander  ascended  the  throne  of  Russia. 
"Russia  will  now  breathe  freely  after  an  oppres- 
sion which  has  lasted  four  years,"  wrote  Empress 
Elizabeth,  "but  the  sensitive  soul  of  her  new 
Emperor  will  for  ever  remain  torn.  Only  the 
idea  that  he  will  be  able  to  give  back  to  his  country 

*■  And  by  Bennigsen,  cf.  Schiemann,  /.r.,  p.  82. 
'  Fraser^s  Magcunniy  ibid,y  p.  324. 


"SIRE,   VENEZ   Rl^GNER"  311 

well-being  and  prosperity  will  lend  him  support  and 
strength."  ^ 

The  new  Emperor  issued  the  following  Mani- 
festo on  his  accession  to  the  throne. 

"It  has  pleased  the  Almighty  to  cut  short 
the  life  of  our  beloved  father  the  Emperor  Paul 
Petrovitsh,  who  died  suddenly  from  an  apoplectic 
stroke,  at  night,  between  the  nth  and  12th  days 
of  this  month. 

*'On  receiving  the  Imperial  hereditary  throne 
of  all  the  Russias,  we  do  also  receive  at  the  same 
time  the  obligation  to  rule  over  the  people  com- 
mitted to  our  care  by  the  Almighty  according 
to  the  laws  and  the  benevolence  of  her  who  rests 
in  God,  our  august  grandmother,  Catherine  the 
Great,  whose  memory  will  for  ever  be  dear  to 
us  and  to  the  whole  country.* 

**  In  accordance  with  her  wise  intention,  we 
hope  to  be  able  to  carry  Russia  to  the  summit 
of  glory,  to  procure  peace  and  uninterrupted 
happiness  to  all  our  faithful  subjects,  whom  we 
hereby  invite  to  take  the  oath  of  fidelity  to  us 
before  the  face  of  God.  May  He  lend  us  His 
assistance  and  grant  us  power  to  support  the 
weight  now  laid  upon  us.  Alexander." 

The  spirit  of  Catherine  seemed  to  have  revived 
in  Alexander.  Trained,  as  he  had  been,  by  the 
great  Empress  from  the  cradle,  he  gave  promise 
of  following  in  her  footsteps. 

He  was  only  twenty-four  years  of  age  when 
he   ascended   the  throne,  surrounded  by  the   late 

*  PoKHsche  Correspondenz  Karl  FridricJCs  v.  Baden  y  p.  140. 
'  Shilder,  /.r.,  vol.  ii,  p.  6. 


312    THE   CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

conspirators  and  the  murderers  of  his  father,  who 
no  doubt  hoped  to  control  him  and  to  rule  in 
his  name.  He  was  not  strong  enough  to  punish 
the  conspirators,^  even  if  he  had  wished  to  do 
so ;  and  now  that  he  was  actually  in  possession 
of  the  sceptre,  perhaps  in  a  way  he  felt  he  owed 
some  gratitude  towards  those  who  had  braved  ihe 
danger.  But,  in  order  to  satisfy  his  mother  and 
to  calm  his  own  conscience,  Von  Pahlen  was  exiled 
to  his  estates,  and*  Zoubov  and  the  other  con- 
spirators to  various  provinces  of  the  Empire. 
Count  Panin,  who  was  recalled  to  St.  Petersburg 
and  honoured  with  the  Emperors  confidence,  fell 
— not  long  afterwards — a  victim  to  the  Dowager 
Empress's  implacable  hatred  and  vengeance.  He 
was  advised  to  send  in  his  resignation.  ''  I  could 
not,"  said  Alexander  to  Kotshoubey,  "refuse  to 
accept  his  resignation ;  he  would  have  thought 
himself  so  absolutely  necessary  to  the  Empire 
that  it  would  have  been  impossible  to  deal 
with  him."  *  Panin  was  succeeded  as  Minister  for 
Foreign  Affairs  by  Count  Kotshoubey. 

As  a  pupil  of  Laharpe,  Alexander  acknow- 
ledged the  grandeur  of  a  prince  of  peace  more  than 
that  of  a  triumphant  warrior ;  he  preferred  the 
ambition  of  a  wise  and  peaceful  rule  to  that  of 
conquest.  None  of  his  friends,  with  the  exception 
of  Paul  Strogonov,  were  in  St.  Petersburg  when 
Alexander  ascended  the  throne.  Adam  Czartorysky, 
Count  Kotshoubey  and  Novosyltsov  were  sent  for 
without  delay.  **  Leave  your  present  post,"  wrote 
Alexander  to  Czartorysky,  "and  come  at  once  to  St 

*  Cf,  Czartorysky,  Lc.^  p.  257. 

*  Archives  Voronzov,  vol.  xviii,  p.  245. 


"SIRE,  VENEZ   R^GNER"         313 

Petersburg.  I  am  awaiting  you  with  the  greatest 
impatience.  I  enclose  a  passport  for  you  to  show 
on  your  arrival  at  the  frontier."^  This  quartette 
rallied  round  the  young  Emperor,  ready  to  support 
him  in  his  reforms.  There  was  now  no  question  of 
extreme  liberalism,  of  abdicating  the  throne,  and 
other  dreams  such  as  Alexander  had  cherished  in 
the  gardens  of  the  Taurida  Palace.  But  he  was 
still  determined  to  bring  about  great  reforms  and  to 
establish  Liberal  institutions.  The  public,  however, 
was  not  yet  ready  to  appreciate  such  a  policy ;  and 
while,  therefore,  the  Ministers  and  the  Senate  con- 
tinued to  govern  in  the  old  manner,  Alexander 
formed  the  Secret  Council  which  was  composed  of 
his  most  intimate  friends,  wherein  the  plans  of 
reforms  were  debated.  "Although,"  says  Czar- 
torysky,  "the  discussions  at  the  meetings  of  the 
Secret  Council  had,  for  a  long  time,  no  practical 
result,  yet  no  useful  reform  was  tried  or  carried 
out  during  the  reign  of  Alexander  which  did  not 
originate  in  them."  * 

On  the  27th  (15th)  of  September  1801,  Alex- 
ander, followed  by  the  Court,  proceeded  to  Moscow, 
where  the  Metropolitan  Platon  crowned  the  young 
Tsar.  "  Near  the  angels  of  light,"  said  the  Metro- 
politan in  his  address,  "  your  eye  will  discover  the 
spirits  of  darkness.  Flattery,  calumny  and  cunning, 
with  all  their  wretched  brood,  will  surround  your 
throne.  You  will  be  besieged  by  the  riotous  band 
of  luxury  and  dissipation,  of  perilous  joys  and  volup- 
tuous charms  that  will  endeavour  to  lead  you  astray 
from  the  path  of  virtue  and  justice.     Monarch  of 

*  Alexander  I  et  le  Prince  Csartorysky^  1865,  P-  4- 
■  Czartorysky,  Mimoires^  p.  269. 


314    THE  CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

Russia  I  a  struggle  awaits  you.  Gird  on  your  sword 
for  the  contest.  Draw  it  with  valour,  young  hero. 
Eighty  conquer,  and  govern;  the  omnipotent  arm 
of  the  Almighty  will  protect  you.  And  though 
the  decree  of  the  Eternal  Being  has  appointed  for 
you  an  exalted  rank  among  men,  you  are  neverthe- 
less a  man  like  any  one  of  us."  ^  Solemnities  of  all 
kinds  followed  the  ceremony  of  coronation;  fStes 
were  given  to  the  people  and  the  joy  was  universal. 
But  in  the  midst  of  all  the  brilliant  and  sumptuous 
festivals,  in  the  midst  of  all  the  happy  figures 
crowding  round  the  newly-crowned  Emperor,  the 
gloom  of  the  past  tragedy  lay  heavily  on  the  royal 
pair.  The  very  ceremony  of  coronation  increased 
Alexander's  sadness;  set  his  conscience  working 
with  an  ever-increasing  and  unbearable  remorse. 
Czartorysky  succeeded  so  far  in  exhorting  him  to 
exercise  self-command,  that  he  at  least  did  not  too 
openly  betray  his  despair  in  public' 

The  accession  of  Alexander  was  greeted  with 
genuine  and  universal  acclamation.  The  Ode  of 
Klopstock,  the  new  German  Pindar,  was  not  the 
only  congratulation  the  Tsar  received  from  abroad 
in  which  he  was  enthusiastically  proclaimed  as  the 
Guardian  Angel  of  mankind.  Within  the  realm  of 
Russia  itself  there  were  no  limits  to  the  rejoicings, 
which  were  renewed  with  undiminished  heartiness, 
when,  in  1802,  the  Emperor  was  passing  through 
the  Baltic  provinces  on  his  way  to  visit  Frederick 
William  HI,  who  was  then  at  Memel.  Nor  had 
enthusiasm  died  out  in  St.  Petersburg,  and  his 
journey  from  the  Palace  to  the  frontier  was  a  verit- 

1  Bogdanovitsh,  M.  T.,"  History  of  Alexander,"  1869,  vol.  h  A<^^> 
pp.  30-31.  *  Czartorysky,  /^,,  pp.  291-292. 


"SIRE,   VENEZ   R^GNER"  315 

able  triumphal  progress.  At  Riga,  in  spite  of  the 
Emperor's  protest,  the  inhabitants  insisted  on  un- 
harnessing the  horses  and  dragging  the  carriage 
themselves,  and  he  was  thus  drawn,  amid  the 
huzzas  of  the  populace,  to  his  destination,  which 
was  the  former  Archbishop's  Palace. 

Strangers  also  shared  in  the  general  delight,  and 
a  sea  captain  from  Lubeck  forced  his  way  through 
the  crowds  to  the  Emperor's  carriage,  crying  out, 
'*  Make  room !  Make  room !  I  must  see  the  Em- 
peror of  Peace  with  my  own  eyes ! "  ^  For  even 
such  had  Alexander  declared  himself  to  be,  and  as 
such  men  looked  for  him  to  fulfil  his  promise. 

The  war  which,  shortly  before  his  accession,  had 
been  declared  against  England,  had  scarcely  been 
seriously  intended  by  Paul,  and  Alexander  hastened 
to  put  a  stop  to  it.  Friendly  relations  were  re-es- 
tablished between  the  two  countries,  and  the  whole 
condition  of  afiairs  became  transformed  as  by  magic 
as  soon  as  Alexander  mounted  the  throne.  Com- 
mercial relations  were  re-established,  and  the  second 
treaty  of  "armed  neutrality"  was  renounced  in  less 
than  twelve  months  after  it  had  been  concluded 
under  a  maritime  convention  with  Great  Britain,  by 
which  the  principle  of  the  treaty  of  1780,  **  that  the 
neutral  flag  protected  merchandise,"  was  entirely 
abandoned.  (Convention  of  St.  Petersburg,  June 
19,  1 801.) 

Russia  was  still  on  the  most  friendly  footing 
with  France,  and  Paul's  son,  having  been  brought 
up  by  a  Republican,  incurred  none  of  the  hate  and 
suspicion  which  his  father  had  drawn  upon  himself. 

*  J.  H.  Schnitzler,  Hisioire  intime  de  la  Russie^  Paris,  1847,  vol.  i, 
P-43- 


3i6    THE  CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

Free  from  all  prejudice  as  regards  a  country  to 
which  the  throes  of  revolution  had  gfiven  a  new 
birth,  Alexander  signed  an  agreement  of  peace, 
the  duration  of  which  depended  solely  on  the  First 
Consul.  A  commercial  treaty  was  entered  into 
with  Sweden ;  the  incorporation  of  Georgia  and 
Imeritia  with  the  Russian  Empire  was  completed 
in  1 80 1,  under  Alexander,  and  Persia  agreed  to 
abstain  from  the  renewal  of  war.  Relations  with 
the  Porte  had  been  established  on  amicable  grounds 
at  the  Convention  of  Constantinople  in  1800,  and 
the  permission  to  establish  a  fort  in  the  Republic  of 
the  seven  Ionian  Isles,  which  were  acknowledged 
to  be  under  Turkish  dominion,  was  an  advance 
favourable  to  the  possible  renewal  of  the  old  designs 
on  Morea.  Being  thus  at  peace  with  the  foreign 
powers,  Alexander  was  able  to  give  his  whole 
strength  and  thought  to  the  internal  conditions  of 
his  realm,  in  which  he  found  much  to  reform  of 
greater  importance  than  the  shape  of  caps  or  beards. 
During  this  early  peaceful  period  of  his  reign,  he 
devoted  himself  to  carrying  out  the  plans  and  inten- 
tions of  Peter  the  Great  and  Catherine  II.  And 
Alexander — ^upright,  generous,  and  philanthropic, 
and  capable  of  noble  enthusiasm — was  well  fitted 
for  a  work  of  this  kind.  And  yet  he  allowed 
himself  to  be  led  astray ;  he  fell  into  error,  and 
ambition,  even  in  his  case,  became  a  stumbling- 
block.  He  aimed  at  playing  a  conspicuous  rdle  in 
European  affairs,  and  at  carrying  out  his  favourite 
theories  on  the  world's  stage.  He  was  encouraged 
in  these  high-flown  designs  by  the  young  friends 
with  whom  he  was  in  close  comradeship,  most  of 
whom  were  animated  by  noble  and  unselfish  aims. 


•^SIRE.   VENEZ    R^GNER"  317 

From  other  quarters,  however,  there  were  obstacles, 
such  as  might  have  been  expected,  to  the  practical 
carrying  out  of  his  schemes,  since  the  general  good 
of  the  community  is  seldom  in  harmony  with  the 
interests  of  private  individuals,  and  to  overcome 
these  would  have  required  a  firmness,  patience, 
and  strength  of  purpose  which  were  not  present 
in  the  gentle  character  of  the  Emperor  Alexander. 
The  truth  remains  that  Alexander  fell  into  exactly 
the  same  mistakes  as  his  predecessors.  Ere  long. 
Court  intrigues  and  external  affairs  were  occupying 
the  new  Emperor  more  than  the  inner  conditions  of 
Russia,  and  in  agreement  with  his  father's  policy  he 
frequently  showed  himself  more  of  a  European  than 
a  Russian,  and  interested  himself  in  anything  rather 
than  in  the  matter  which  stood  nearest  to  hand, 
namely,  the  deliverance  of  his  country  from  the  un- 
civilised condition  which  in  itself  was  a  chief  source 
of  danger.  To  the  latter  half  of  his  reign  belongs 
the  period  of  warlike  and  higher  political  activity. 

During  the  earlier  years  of  his  government 
Alexander  endeavoured  to  follow  in  the  footsteps  of 
his  statesmanlike  grandmother;  he  was  ambitious 
of  enlarging  the  borders  of  Russia,  his  motives  not 
being  entirely  without  a  touch  of  egoism.  Led  on 
by  the  Russian  traditional  policy  of  acquisition,  the 
philanthropic  Emperor  added  thirty  thousand  square 
miles  of  territory  to  his  dominions.  He  further 
extended  his  sovereignty,  at  the  cost  of  Sweden, 
over  the  whole  of  Finland,  which  was  treacherously 
seized  from  the  King  Gustavus  Adolphus  IV,  who 
had  stood  Russia's  firm  ally  against  Napoleon.  He 
took  the  greater  part  of  Armenia  from  Persia,  con- 
quered other  states  on  the  farther  side  of  the  Cau- 


A 


3i8    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

casus,  and  finally  incorporated  under  his  sovereignty 
the  greater  part  of  the  duchy  of  Warsaw,  which 
was  traversed  by  the  Vistula,  the  lower  courses  of 
this  river  belonging  to  another  power. 

These  conquests  had  not,  it  is  true,  been  all 
premeditated,  but  when  opportunity  offered,  Alex- 
ander's ambition  could  not  withstand  the  temptation 
of  territorial  aggrandisement  Full  of  good  inten- 
tions  at  his  accession,  kind  of  heart,  possessed  of  a 
glowing,  almost  Eastern  imagination,  and  of  unusual 
powers  of  mind,  and,  moreover,  gifted  with  diplo- 
matic clearness  and  fineness  of  judgment,  the  young 
Emperor,  who  had  been  encouraged  in  all  these  char- 
acteristics by  the  careful  training  he  had  received, 
was  unfortunately  also  of  a  weak  and  wavering 
disposition  and  wholly  lacking  in  endurance  and 
patience ;  he  was  consequently  guilty  of  much  of 
which,  in  the  depths  of  his  heart,  he  was  ashamed. 
Thus  alone  can  the  contradictions  presented  by  the 
history  of  his  reign  be  accounted  for,  a  reign  which 
was  nevertheless  one  of  the  best  which  Russia  has 
known. 

Reform  succeeded  reform  at  the  commence- 
ment of  his  reign,  and  Europe  applauded  the  young 
monarch.  The  system  of  terror  which  had  existed 
under  Paul  was  immediately  brought  to  an  end  by 
Alexander.  "  I  acknowledge  no  power  as  just,  save 
that  which  is  supported  by  the  laws,"  were  his 
words,  and  he  did  not  delay  in  removing  all  such 
instruments  as  had  served  his  father  to  carry  out 
his  capricious  cruelties,  while  he  did  his  best  to 
atone  for  the  crying  injustice  of  which  so  many 
of  his  subjects  had  been  victims.^ 

*  Ix.^  p.  47. 


*'SIRE,   VENEZ   R^GNER"  319 

He  abolished  the  secret  tribunal,  instituted  in 
1 80 1,  before  which  political  prisoners  were  brought 
and  forced  to  confession  by  subjection  to  hunger, 
thirst,  and  such-like  sufferings,  actual  torture  being 
avoided.  General  Procurator  Obulyaminov  had 
presided  over  this  northern  inquisition  like  a 
Turkish  grand  vizier.  Alexander  selected  certain 
members  to  form  a  permanent  council,  and  under- 
took the  entire  reorganisation  of  the  central  govern- 
ment, and  with  the  same  liberal-mindedness  that 
led  him  to  abolish  the  secret  police,  he  granted 
freedom  to  the  press  and  permission  for  foreign 
books  to  enter  the  country.  He  lowered  the  taxes, 
enabling  himself  to  do  this  by  lessening  the  ex- 
penditure of  the  Court,  and  he  abstained,  for  the 
first  year  of  his  reign,  from  all  conscription — the 
institution  which,  of  all  others,  was  most  hated 
throughout  Russia. 

Like  Peter  the  Great,  he  was  in  the  habit  of 
rising  at  five  o'clock  in  the  morning;  and,  as  a 
rule,  devoted  three  hours  to  his  people  before  his 
Ministers  were  admitted.  Alexander  did  not  spare 
his  own  person.  He  desired  all  heads  of  depart- 
ments to  render  full  accounts,  and,  what  was  an 
unheard-of  thing  at  that  time,  he  ordered  them  to 
be  printed  and  submitted  to  public  investigation. 
He  abolished  all  torture,  which  he  considered  a 
disgrace  to  the  Russian  nation  and  to  humanity  in 
general,  and  he  forbade  the  seizure  of  hereditary 
property  as  a  punishment  for  any  kind  of  mis- 
demeanour or  crime,  being  unwilling,  he  said,  to 
take  back  what  had  been  often  given  in  the  past 
in  return  for  service  done  to  the  crown.  The 
advertising  of  serfs   for  sale  was  also  forbidden, 


320    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

and   so  an   end  was  put  to  the  existing  scandal 
of  human  traffic. 

He  hastened  to  amend  the  general  code  of 
laws,  a  work  which  Catherine  had  begun,  a 
special  commission  having  been  appointed  by  her 
for  this  purpose.  Even  more  actively  did  Alex- 
ander interest  himself  in  matters  of  manufacture 
and  commerce ;  he  instituted  certain  regulations 
concerning  shipment,  and  helped  towards  the 
furtherance  of  inland  communication  by  the  con- 
struction of  new  roads  and  canals.  Banks  and  a 
sinking  fund  were  established  as  an  assistance  to 
finance;  the  system  of  tolls  was  improved  and 
concessions  made  as  regards  open  harbours.  In 
the  further  interest  of  commerce  he  oi^[anised 
voyages  round  the  world,  embassies  to  Persia, 
Cochin  China,  and  Khiva,  made  treaties  with 
the  United  States,  Brazil,  Spain,  and  the  Porte, 
and  settled  colonies  on  the  west  coast  of  North 
America.  His  foreign  travel,  his  constant  visita- 
tion of  his  own  provinces,  and  his  intercourse 
with  enlightened  men  and  women,  as  well  as  his 
careful  consideration  of  everything  that  might 
be  of  service  to  his  people,  and  his  readiness  to 
adopt  all  just  and  large  ideas,  fitted  him  to  be 
the  ruler  of  the  mighty  realm  over  which  he 
held  sway. 

He  was  an  advocate  of  general  education, 
and  founded  fresh  universities,  as  well  as  two 
hundred  and  four  gymnasiums  and  two  thousand 
normal  schools,  introducing  in  part  the  Bell- 
Lancaster  system,  which  had  been  studied  in 
Paris  by  his  private  physician  Hamel.  He  also 
took  a  lively  interest  in  the  higher  development  of 


^'SIRE,   VENEZ    Rl^GNER"  321 

the  Russian  language  and  literature,  giving  large 
sums  towards  the  publication  of  important  works, 
and  rewarding  in  an  imperial  manner  the  scien- 
tific services  of  his  own  countrymen,  as  well  as 
of  foreigners.  He  bought  costly  collections,  and 
thus  laid  the  foundation  of  the  school  of  oriental 
languages  of  which  Russia  can  boast.  Talented 
young  noblemen  were  assisted  by  him  in  their 
education  and  were  given  means  to  travel.  Re- 
lig^ion  also  received  his  attention,  and  no  sovereign 
ever  did  more  to  propagate  a  knowledge  of  the 
Scriptures,  Bible  societies  being  established  by 
him  in  the  various  provinces ;  at  the  same  time 
he  forbade  proselytism,  and  gave  free  permission 
for  the  exercise  of.  religion  by  the  various  sects 
and  by  Jews.  The  Jesuits  were  expelled  from 
St.  Petersburg  and  Moscow,  and  finally  from  the 
whole  of  Russia,  simply  because  they  meddled  in 
State  affairs,  and  disturbed  the  domestic  peace  of 
families. 

In  the  same  spirit  Alexander  endeavoured  to 
relieve  his  subjects  from  the  oppression  of  the 
nobles,  the  Boyars  and  Starosts,  without,  however, 
interfering  with,  or  injuring  the  rights  of  posses- 
sion owned  by  the  latter.  He  gave  the  nobles 
permission  to  enfranchise  their  serfs,  and  dedi- 
cated a  part  of  the  inheritance  of  the  former  Chan- 
cellor Romanzov  to  enable  the  serfs  to  buy  their 
freedom  from  their  masters,  and  finally  granted 
them  unconditional  possession  of  the  property 
transferred  to  them,  thus  laying  the  foundation  of 
an  agricultural  and  artisan  class.  Permission, 
which  previously  had  been  restricted,  was  now 
given  to  all  his  subjects  to  visit  foreign  parts,  as 

X 


322     THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

well  as  freedom  to  start  any  business  or  manu- 
facture they  chose,  irrespective  of  birtL  The 
stupendous  plan  of  founding  military  colonies  was 
carried  out  with  a  view  to  mingling  the  peasant  and 
soldier  class,  and  to  building  up  the  pillars  of  the 
State,  while  the  less  populated  portions  of  the  realm 
were  colonised  with  German  immigrants.  Under 
Alexander  the  army  reached  a  higher  pitch  of 
excellence  than  it  had  previously  known. 

The  widowed  Empress,  with  the  help  of  her 
son,  laid  the  foundation  of  all  the  hospitals  and 
educational  establishments  which  have  won  a  just 
tribute  of  honour  for  her  name.^ 

In  order  to  assure  himself  of  the  obedience  of 
his  agents,  and  in  order  to  make  himself  acquainted 
with  the  wants  of  his  subjects,  Alexander  frequently 
journeyed  to  various  parts  of  his  Empire.  Every 
subject,  no  matter  to  what  class  he  belonged,  was  ad- 
mitted to  his  presence,  and  all  petitions  were  received. 
The  monarch  appeared  everywhere  as  "an  amiable 
and  benevolent  prince,"  as  a  man  amongst  men. 

The  Emperor  s  zeal  for  the  good  of  his  people, 
and  his  determination  to  look  into  everything  him- 
self, met  with  opposition  on  many  sides,  and  many 
of  his  wise  schemes  fell  through.  As  has  been 
said,  he  had  not  the  strength  to  hold  his  own 
against  Court  intrigue  and  calumny.  The  immense 
size  of  his  realm  made  the  control  of  the  more 
distant  spots  a  matter  of  enormous  difficulty,  and 
Alexander,  moreover,  allowed  himself  to  be  led 
away  by  the  idea  that  he  was  the  chosen  umpire 
of  his  division  of  the  world,  and  that  Russia  was 
the  centre  of  the  whole  organisation  of  Europe, 

^  Cf,  Czartorysky,  /u:.,  p.  275. 


-SIRE,    VENEZ   R^GNER"  323 

and  in  part  also  of  Asia.  The  question  of 
alliances,  the  overstepping  of  the  terms  of  treaties 
and  such-like  matters,  led  him  to  declare  wars, 
during  the  course  of  which  the  old  system  again 
had  free  play  throughout  his  realm.  At  last,  tired 
out  and  disillusioned,  the  dreams  of  his  youth 
dispelled,  he  more  and  more  became  a  prey  to 
indifference  and  sloth,  while  a  restlessness  took 
possession  of  him  which  led  him  to  undertake 
useless  journeys  to  one  place  or  another.  He 
saw  himself  confronted  by  an  invincible  and  im- 
measurable evil — the  evil  of  corruption — and  as 
soon  as  he  ceased  to  combat  with  this  evil,  he 
allowed  the  guardianship  of  affairs  also  to  pass 
out  of  his  own  hands. 

And  into  whose  hands  did  the  guidance  of  the 
ship  of  the  State  fall  ?  Into  those  of  General  Arakt- 
sheev,  a  man  of  undoubtedly  good  intentions  and 
loyal  to  the  Emperor,  but  a  Russian  of  the  old 
school,  who  set  himself  in  opposition  to  all  pro- 
gressive measures  however  reasonable  they  might 
appear.  Under  him  the  press  was  again  sub- 
jected to  the  severest  censure,  and  foreign  books 
forbidden  to  be  imported.  A  tyrannous  inquisition 
was  exercised  over  many  of  the  Professors  at  the 
new  universities,  and  they  were  ordered  to  organise 
the  courses  of  teaching  according  to  a  programme 
drawn  up  by  the  State ;  freemasonry  was  forbidden 
all  over  the  kingdom,  and  every  kind  of  difficulty 
was  again  placed  in  the  way  of  those  who  wished 
to  travel  abroad.  Araktsheev  exercised  the  autho- 
rity that  had  been  placed  in  his  hands  by  a  master 
whose  gentleness  had  at  length  dwindled  into  weak- 
ness  with   an   ever-increasing   severity.     And  yet 


324    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

the  Emperor  still  loved  to  discuss  philosophical 
problems  concerning  the  rights  of  man,  and  sym- 
pathised like  a  true  Christian  with  the  sufferings  of 
his  fellow-creatures.*  What  a  strange  and  contra- 
dictory picture !  And  this  contradiction  of  character 
was  displayed  in  private  as  well  as  in  public  life. 
There  was  neither  stability  nor  reason  in  his  dis- 
position strong  enough  to  overcome  the  self-love 
that  passionately  sought  for  satisfaction.  When 
the  fascination  of  his  early  ideas  had  died  out,  he 
became  a  prey  to  the  passing  impression  of  the 
moment,  until  it  came  to  pass  that  this  all-powerful 
Autocrat  was  guided  in  his  decisions  solely  by 
transitory  impulses  and  external  influences. 

By  the  part  he  had  taken  in  the  Coalition 
of  1798,  his  father  Paul  had  involved  Russia  in 
the  affairs  of  Europe,  and  Souvarov  s  victory  on 
the  Trebbia  and  near  Novi  had  made  Russia  a 
chief  weight  in  the  scale  in  which  many  rival  in- 
terests were  weighed.  At  the  Diet  of  Regensburg, 
which  was  dominated  by  the  First  Consul,  it  was 
decided  that  the  only  possible  counter-weight  to 
the  latter's  power  was  the  protectorate  of  the 
Russian  Autocrat,  and  haste  was  made  to  secure 
the  re-organisation  of  Germany.  '*  All  the  reigning 
princes  of  Germany  are  looking  to  Alexander  as  to 
their  deliverer,"  are  the  words  found  in  an  oflScial 
document  issued  by  the  Russian  cabinet.  On  his 
side  the  Russian  Autocrat  looked  upon  it  as  a 
mission  confided  to  him  to  take  Germany  under  his 
protection,  and  his  self-love  was  delighted  to  have 
Germany,  as  he  already  had  Naples  and  Sardinia,* 
dependent  upon  his  power. 

^  Sdmitzler,  LCf  pp.  54-55. 


••SIRE,   VENEZ   R^GNER"  325 

Alexander  acted  at  first  with  great  precaution 
and  foresight,  and  both  his  love  of  peace  and  his 
religious  turn  of  character  were  very  palpable  in 
his  foreign  relations.  He  remained  faithful  to  his 
father's  policy,  and  on  October  1 1,  i8oi,he  concluded 
a  treaty  with  Napoleon,  in  which  it  was  agreed  that 
Russia  and  France  should  share  the  honour  of 
bringing  into  order  the  affairs  of  Germany  and 
Italy,  which  had  been  in  a  disastrous  state  of  con- 
fusion since  the  unfortunate  conclusion  of  peace  at 
Lundville.  The  nominal  sovereign,  the  German 
Emperor,  was  entirely  powerless,  and  each  separate 
member  of  the  Holy  Roman  Empire  carried  out 
his  own  ideas  of  policy  with  no  consideration  at 
all  for  the  general  good.  After  the  unhappy  war 
with  France  it  became  an  immediate  necessity  to 
redistribute  the  countries,  so  that  the  princes  who 
had  lost  or  resigned  their  possessions  to  France 
should  be  compensated ;  those  who  enjoyed  the 
goodwill  of  France  and  England  also  expected  to 
receive  further  grants  of  dominion.  The  good 
understanding,  however,  between  Alexander  and 
Napoleon  did  not  last  long.  The  former  admired 
the  warlike  qualities  of  Napoleon,  but  he  considered 
himself  as  capable  as  the  latter  to  be  the  rightful 
leader  of  European  affairs,  and,  finding  that  Napo- 
leon wished  to  prescribe  laws  to  him  and  that  he 
was  expected  to  play  only  a  secondary  r61e,  a 
certain  ill-feeling  towards  the  French  potentate 
grew  up  in  him,  which  soon  led  to  a  coolness 
between  the  two,  and  finally  put  an  end  to  the 
friendliness  of  their  relations. 


CHAPTER  XV 

THE  SON   OF  THE   REVOLUTION   AND  THE 
FIRST  GENTLEMAN   OF  EUROPE 

Napoleon's  victories — ^The  meeting  of  the  two  Emperors— The  nft  on  the 
Niemen — ^Tilsit  and  Erfurt—Plans  for  the  partition  of  the  world— War 
between  France  and  Russia — Napoleon  at  Dresden — The  burning  of 
Moscow — Ale3under*s  appeal  to  the  European  nations — The  entry  of  the 
Allies  into  Paris — ^The  Congress  of  Vienna — Second  entry  of  the  Allies 
into  Paris. 

The  demand  made  to  France  by  Russia  to  vacate 
the  territories  in  Italy  and  Germany  which  were 
occupied  by  her  troops,  and  the  special  Russian 
protection  of  Hanover,  the  English  possession  in 
Germany,  led  to  the  first  misunderstanding.  All 
might  have  been  peaceably  arranged,  however, 
had  it  not  been  for  the  hostile  attitude  assumed 
by  the  Russian  Ambassador  at  Paris  towards 
the  French  Government  Von  Markov  was  appa- 
rently desirous  of  playing  the  same  r6le  in 
France  that  Stackelberg  and  others  had  formerly 
played  in  Stockholm  and  Stamboul.  Owing  to 
his  intrigues  he  was  at  last  forced  to  leave  the 
country,  and  it  awakened  surprise  and  anger  in 
the  French  that  the  Emperor  should  reward  the 
man,  who  had  done  his  best  to  arouse  enmity  be- 
tween the  two  nations,  with  a  pension  of  twelve 
thousand  roubles  and  a  post  in  the  Foreign  Office. 
An  open  breach  between  the  two  nations  was 
hastened  by  Napoleon's  unjustifiable  murder  of 
the  Due  d'Enghien,  which  aroused  Alexander's 
tenderer    and    more    chivalric    spirit,    and    he   no 

3«6 


THE   SON   OF  THE    REVOLUTION   327 

longer  hesitated  to  join  the  coalition  between 
England,  Austria,  and  Sweden,  further  engag- 
ing himself  to  support  the  Austrian  army  in 
Italy,  or  in  Germany,  with  a  supply  of  one 
hundred  and  eighty  thousand  men.  The  main 
purpose  in  hand  was  to  deliver  Germany  and 
Italy  from  the  French  troops,  to  re-establish  the 
King  of  Sardinia,  and  to  deprive  France  of  her 
allies.  Unfortunately,  Alexander  sent  less  than  a 
hundred  thousand  men  into  the  field,  and,  what 
was  more,  ordered  them  to  advance  into  Austria 
in  three  divisions,  widely  separated  from  one 
another.  The  first  of  these,  under  Koutousov, 
marched  so  slowly  that  it  had  not  even  crossed 
the  boundary  of  Austria  by  the  time  the  Austrians 
themselves  were  in  full  flight.  Under  such  circum- 
stances Austria's  brave  efforts  against  Napoleon 
were  bound  to  meet  with  failure,  especially  as 
the  latter  had  disposed  his  troops  with  admirable 
skill  and  foresight. 

The  first  blow  to  Austria's  power  was  the 
capitulation  of  General  Mack  at  Ulm ;  the  French, 
meeting  with  no  opposition,  marched  on  to  Vienna, 
which  they  entered  in  November.  Napoleon  him- 
self, with  praiseworthy  consideration,  would  not 
appear  in  Vienna  as  its  conqueror,  but  remained  at 
Schonbrunn.  The  Emperor  Francis  was  inclined 
for  peace,  and  would  have  certainly  come  to  fav- 
ourable terms  with  Napoleon  if  the  arrogance  of 
Russia  had  not  intervened  to  spoil  everything. 
Napoleon  feared  that  the  Russians  would  not  be 
satisfied  without  coming  to  a  pitched  battle  with 
him,  and  therefore  sent  Savary,  a  skilled  diplo- 
matist,  to   Olmlitz,    with   the  ostensible   intent  of 


328    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

greeting  Alexander,  but  in  reality  to  ascertain  the 
tone  of  mind  of  those  who  were  about  the  Emperor. 
Savary  became  aware  that  the  Russian  generals 
nursed  the  fond  idea  that  Napoleon  stood  in  awe 
of  them  and  the  Emperor.  It  must  be  further 
remembered  that  Napoleons  position,  notwith- 
standing his  victories,  was  an  uncertain  one. 
Meanwhile,  Koutousov,  his  army  being  still  intact, 
began  marching  towards  Moravia,  where  he  was 
to  join  Baxhofden  with  whose  forces  the  Em- 
peror was  in  person.  The  third  army,  under 
Bennigsen,  was  already  on  the  march.  The  Arch- 
dukes Karl  and  Johann  were  hastening  south  with 
considerable  forces  and  had  already  got  within 
reach  of  Vienna.  The  Archduke  Ferdinand,  who 
had  fought  his  way  through  from  Ulm  into  Bohemia, 
was  at  the  head  of  24,000  men,  and  Hungary  could 
offer  considerable  support,  for  there  an  armed  force 
could  be  quickly  raised  by  means  of  an  insurrection. 
Moreover,  Prussia,  offended  at  the  interference  with 
her  neutrality  by  the  invasion  of  the  Anspach  terri- 
tory, began  to  mobilise  her  army,  and  had  posted 
forces  in  Silesia,  whence,  if  they  had  been  able  to 
make  use  of  their  full  power,  they  might  easily 
have  paved  the  way  for  Napoleon's  downfall.  The 
latter,  however,  was  perfectly  aware  with  whom  he 
had  to  deal  in  the  persons  of  the  men  then  con- 
trolling State  affairs  in  Prussia,  and  troubled  himself 
very  little  about  its  army.  It  was  of  far  more 
importance,  as  he  saw,  to  force  the  Russians  and 
Austrians  to  meet  him  in  battle  before  their  ex- 
pected auxiliaries  could  reach  them. 

Not    until    Napoleon    had    entered    Berlin   in 
triumph    after    the    decisive    battles    of  Jena  and 


THE    SON   OF   THE   REVOLUTION    329 

Auerstadt,  and  had  driven  the  remains  of  Frederick 
WiUiam's  army  back  on  the  Russian  frontier,  did 
Alexander  rouse  himself.  He  now  declared  Napo- 
leon to  be  the  enemy  of  Europe,  and  ordered  his 
army  to  march  against  him  in  Prussia.  His  forces, 
after  many  sanguinary  engagements,  were  driven 
back,  and  the  Russians  for  the  first  time  for  a 
hundred  years  saw  themselves  threatened  on  their 
own  territory.  They  came  to  a  halt,  however,  on 
the  banks  of  the  Niemen,  and  Alexander  prepared 
for  a  fresh  attack,  proudly  declaring  that  he  would 
not  lay  down  his  arms  until  Prussia  had  recovered 
all  her  possessions,  and  had  received  a  full  in- 
demnity in  men  and  land.  When,  however,  in 
this  same  month  of  June  his  armies  were  again 
beaten  at  Friedland,  he  concluded  an  armistice  with 
France,  glad  at  this  price  to  keep  the  enemy 
beyond  the  borders  of  his  dominions. 

Alexander  was  now  desirous  of  having  an  inter- 
view with  Napoleon,  in  order,  as  he  expressed  it  in 
writing  his  request,  that  he  might  see  the  greatest 
man  of  the  century  in  person  and  exchange  views 
openly  with  him.  Napoleon  arranged  to  receive 
him  the  following  day,  being  flattered  on  his  side 
at  the  thought  of  the  representative  of  the  oldest 
monarchy  in  Europe  coming  to  offer  homage  to  a 
son  of  the  Revolution. 

It  was  a  most  imposing  spectacle,  this  meeting 
of  the  two  greatest  sovereigns  between  the  armies 
which  were  drawn  up  on  either  side  of  the  Niemen. 
Their  intention  was  to  discuss  the  fate  of  the  nations, 
and  to  consider  how  best  peace  might  be  restored  to 
their  portion  of  the  globe  and  humanity  comforted 
after  the  succession  of  disasters  it  had  gone  through. 


330    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

Napoleon  had  done  his  utmost  to  make  the  cere- 
mony as  magnificent  and  striking  as  possible.  The 
interview  between  the  two  sovereigns  took  place 
at  Tilsit  on  a  raft  on  the  Niemen.  The  French 
soldiers  had  constructed  ^'a  tent,  beautifully  fur- 
nished/' consisting  of  two  rooms.*  Alexander 
arrived  accompanied  by  his  brother,  by  Generals 
Bennigsen  and  Ouvarov,  Prince  Lobanov  and 
several  aides-de-camp.  The  armies  were  ranged 
one  on  either  side  of  the  Niemen,  watching  Alex- 
ander and  Napoleon  embark  at  the  same  instant 
and  approach  the  raft.  A  loud  hurrah  greeted  the 
two  sovereigns  as  they  mounted  the  raft,  and, 
clasping  hands,  embraced  each  other.  The  two 
armies,  which  had  been  hating  each  other  for 
more  than  eight  months,  now  united  their  shouts 
of  applause.  They  were  weary  of  war,  and  in  the 
persons  of  the  monarchs  they  greeted  the  hope  for 
peace  which  made  their  hearts  beat  faster.  The 
mutual  embrace  of  the  Autocrat  of  Russia  and  the 
Son  of  the  French  Revolution  in  the  presence  of 
the  two  armies  meant  peace  and  security  for  the 
universe.*  The  two  sovereigns  disappeared  in  the 
little  tent  erected  on  the  raft  and  their  conversation 
lasted  nearly  two  hours.  The  King  of  Prussia  was 
not  admitted  to  a  conference  on  which  depended 
the  fate  of  his  dynasty.  On  horseback  on  the 
shore  he  pushed  his  steed  into  the  stream,  or  sat 
with  his  eyes  fixed  on  the  fatal  raft.'  In  the 
meantime,  what  were  the  two  sovereigns  saying  to 
each  other  in  that  tent  ?    Alexander's  first  words  are 

»  Archives  of  St.  Petersburg,  1807,  June  16-28. 

'  Vandal,  A.,  NapoUon  et  Alexandre^  1891,  i,  p.  57. 

'  Tatistcheff,  Serge,  Alexandre  I  et  NapoUon^  Paris,  p.  154. 


THE    SON   OF   THE   REVOLUTION   331 

supposed  to  have  been :  "I  hate  the  English  as 
much  as  you  do,  and  I  shall  assist  in  everything  you 
intend  to  undertake  against  them."  "  In  that  case," 
replied  Napoleon,  "everything  can  be  settled  and 
peace  shall  be  concluded."*  Alexander,  with  his 
charming  manner  and  kindly  smile,  and  his  fas- 
cinating, almost  feminine  grace  produced  a  very 
favourable  impression  upon  Napoleon.  Their  liking 
was,  in  fact,  mutual.  But  every  alliance  arises  out 
of  a  hatred  shared  by  two  parties  for  a  third.  It 
did  not  take  Napoleon  long  to  become  aware  that 
the  sentiment  uppermost  in  Alexander's  mind  was 
hatred,  not  only  against  England,  but  also  against 
Austria.  It  was  easy  for  the  French  Emperor  to 
persuade  the  Russian  Tsar  to  accept  the  secret 
conditions  of  the  treaty  and  to  divide  the  world 
with  France.  "yW  souvent  couchi  d  deux"  said 
Napoleon,  '* jamais  d  trois'^  By  the  third  party 
he  meant  Austria.^  Napoleon  further  heaped  ex- 
travagant praises  on  the  Russian  soldiers,  adding, 
that  if  the  French  and  Russian  armies  were  to 
combine,  something  really  great  might  at  last  be 
achieved,  further  pointing  out  that  Russia  would 
only  bring  ruin  on  her  forces  if  she  continued  to 
fight  France ;  whereas  if  they  were  to  join  hands, 
she  would  share  the  fame  and  fortune  which  France 
would  acquire. 

Alexander  made  answer  that  he  had  a  certain 
duty  to  perform  towards  Prussia  and  that  his 
honour  forbade  him  to  leave  the  latter  in  the  lurch. 

Napoleon  assured  him  that  he  would  give  back 

^  Vandal,  /.f.,  p.  58  ;  Tatistcheff,  /.^.,  p.  152  ;  Lefebvre,  K,^Histoire 
des  CcUfinets  de  P Europe^  Paris,  1847,  vol.  iii,  p.  102. 
'  Vandal,  /.r.,  p.  59,  and  Archives  de  St.  Petersburg. 


332     THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

as  much  of  Prussia's  territories  as  was  neces- 
sary to  satisfy  Russia's  interest  and  honour,  and 
Alexander  was  partly  won  over  by  the  thought  of 
the  advantage  to  himself.  Napoleon,  however, 
wished  to  carry  out  his  aims  without  reserve, 
and  to  that  end  he  first  flattered  the  sovereign 
and  then  flattered  the  man. 

**We  shall  understand  each  other  better,"  he 
said,  ''  if  we  can  transact  business  directly  with 
each  other,  instead  of  through  our  Ministers, 
who  so  often  misunderstand  us,  and  we  should 
get  further  with  our  negotiations  in  an  hour  than 
those  under  us  would  in  several  days." 

Napoleon  proposed  to  Alexander  that  he  should 
take  up  his  abode  at  Tilsit,  which  was  declared 
neutral  ground,  as  there  they  could  personally 
discuss  matters. 

This  proposal  was  acceded  to,  and  Lobanov 
was  despatched  the  same  day  to  make  the  neces- 
sary preparations.  The  two  sovereigns  then  left 
the  tent.  Napoleon  said  a  few  pleasant  words  to 
the  Grand  Duke  Constantine  and  to  General  Ben- 
nigsen,  and  Alexander  wished  Murat  and  Berthier 
good  fortune,  telling  them  that  they  were  the 
worthiest  followers  of  the  greatest  commander  of 
modern  times.  There  were  further  exchanges 
of  friendly  words  before  the  final  farewell,  and 
Alexander  and  Napoleon  parted  from  each  other 
amid  the  universal  acclamation  of  the  numerous 
onlookers. 

Towards  evening  Prince  Lobanov  arrived  at 
the  headquarters  of  the  Russian  army  to  order  the 
transfer  of  such  things  as  would  be  required  by 
Alexander  at  Tilsit     It  was  arranged  that  Alex- 


THE   SON   OF   THE    REVOLUTION    333 

ander  should  occupy  one-half  of  the  town,  and 
Napoleon  the  other,  that  the  Russian  Imperial 
Guards  should  be  transferred  to  the  left  bank,  so 
as  no  longer  to  act  as  guard  to  their  sovereign, 
and  that  the  removal  should  take  place  the  fol- 
lowing day  after  Napoleon  had  received  the  King 
of  Prussia,  who  was  also  invited  to  Tilsit. 

The  following  day  Alexander  crossed  the 
Niemen ;  Napoleon  was  awaiting  him  on  the 
opposite  shore,  and  conducted  him  to  the  house 
prepared  for  him.  He  also  invited  him  to  dinner, 
and  as  Alexander  had  no  Court  equipage  with  him 
it  was  agreed  that  he  should  take  all  his  meals 
with  Napoleon.  They  spent  the  evening  together 
in  amicable  and  confidential  conversation. 

The  French  Guards  were  paraded  before 
Alexander,  and  these  old  soldiers  of  the  Revolu- 
tion were  proud  to  display  themselves  in  sight  of 
the  sovereign  whom  they  had  beaten.  The  men 
composing  the  Guard  were  not  of  such  high  stature, 
nor  did  they  march  with  the  same  machine-like 
regularity  as  the  northern  soldiers  to  whom  Alex- 
ander was  accustomed,  but  the  ease  of  their  move- 
ments, the  firmness  of  their  bearing,  the  quick 
intelligence  of  their  eyes,  were  sufficient  explana- 
tion of  their  victories  and  of  their  superiority  over 
all  the  other  armies  of  Europe.  They  greeted 
Alexander's  flattering  praises  with  the  repeated  cry, 
"Long  live  Alexander!  Long  live  Napoleon!" 
These  two,  though  only  personally  known  to  each 
other  for  so  short  a  time,  were  already  sworn 
friends.  Napoleon  now  declared  to  the  astonished 
Alexander  the  stupendous  plan  for  which  he  desired 
his  co-operation. 


334    THE   CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

Contemporary  writers  have  left  us  some  in- 
teresting particulars  concerning  this  entente  cordiaU 
between  the  two  sovereigns.  At  the  time  of  their 
second  meeting  at  Erfurt,  in  September  1808, 
Napoleon  having  sent  for  his  actors  from  Paris,  the 
two  Emperors  sat  together  in  the  stalls  reserved 
for  Royalties  and  engaged  in  confidential  conversa- 
tion. When  the  renowned  Talma  uttered  Comeille's 
line,  ^^  Vamitie  nTun  grand  komme  est  un  prisent 
des  Dieux^^  Alexander  bowed  to  the  Emperor 
beside  him,  repeating  these  words.*  On  another 
occasion,  when  conversing  of  their  several  states 
and  their  administration,  Alexander  explained  the 
method  of  government  in  Russia,  and  complained 
to  Napoleon  of  the  opposition  he  met  with  from 
his  Senate  whenever  he  endeavoured  to  introduce 
any  kind  of  reform.  Napoleon  in  response  seized 
his  hand  and,  pressing  it,  said :  ''  However  large 
a  realm  may  be,  it  is  never  large  enough  to  hold 
two  masters."  Alexander,  however,  had  only  in- 
tended to  convey  the  fact  that,  notwithstanding  his 
unlimited  power,  he  could  not  always  carry  through 
the  good  and  useful  measures  which  he  desired  to 
bring  into  effect 

The  result  of  this  friendship  between  Napoleon 
and  Alexander  was  that  Prussia  became  the  sacrifice, 
in  spite  of  the  last-named  Emperor's  sworn  protesta- 
tions of  friendship  and  of  his  former  relations  with 
the  good  Queen  Louisa.  Forgotten  was  the  night 
in  which  she  with  two  others  had,  by  torch-light, 
visited  the  vault  at  Potsdam,  where  the  ashes  of 
Frederick  the  Great  reposed ;  forgotten  also  was 
the  oath  of  friendship  and  loyalty  sworn  by  the 

^  Vandal,  /.^.,  i,  p.  441. 


THE    SON   OF   THE    REVOLUTION    335 

two  monarchs  to  each  other  as  they  knelt  within 
the  vault.  The  fall  of  Prussia  was  consummated. 
Napoleon  deprived  her  of  all  her  possessions 
between  the  Rhine  and  the  Elbe,  together  with 
Magdeburg,  and  confiscated  the  whole  of  Poland. 
He  broke  the  two  wings  of  the  Prussian  Eagle, 
and  Alexander  made  little  resistance  to  save  his 
former  ally.  Even  the  personal  graces  of  the 
Queen  of  Prussia  were  of  no  avail.*  Napoleon 
invited  this  unhappy  Queen  to  dinner.  Before 
sitting  down  to  table  Napoleon,  approaching  a 
vase,  took  a  very  beautiful  rose  and  offered  it  to 
her  Majesty.  Her  first  movement  was  that  of 
refusal,  but  she  soon  thought  better  of  it,  and, 
looking  at  Napoleon,  said:  "Yes,  Sire,  but  I 
wish  Magdeburg  with  it."  *'  I  must  call  your 
Majesty's  attention  to  the  fact,"  replied  the  hero 
of  Jena,  **that  I  am  the  giver  and  that  your 
Majesty  is  the  receiver  of  the  rose."^ 

When  the  King  of  Prussia,  whom  Napoleon 
invariably  treated  with  the  utmost  contempt,  after- 
wards tried  to  make  some  representation  as  to 
the  necessity  of  retaining  Magdeburg,  Napoleon 
answered  with  a  sneer:  '*You  forget.  Sire,  that 
you  are  no  longer  in  a  position  to  negotiate.  I 
must  keep  Magdeburg  so  as  to  be  able  to  enter 
Berlin,  whenever  I  choose  to  do  so."* 

Prussia  and  Sweden,  who  had  fought  for  the 
common  cause,  were  sacrificed  without  a  thought, 
and  both  were  left  inconsiderately  in  the  lurch. 
The  King  of  Prussia  was   to  withdraw  from  the 

*  Lefebvre,  Lc,  pp.  105-106.  •  JHd,f  p.  106. 

•  Cf.  Sir  George  Jackson,  "Diaries  and  Letters,"  London,  1872, 
voL  ii,  p.  166. 


336     THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

**BiaIystock"  frontier,  in  favour  of  his  august 
northern  neighbour,  in  order,  as  it  was  said,  to 
"settle  the  natural  boundaries  on  the  Polish 
side." 

Alexander,  who,  like  his  predecessors,  had  a 
longing  after  Finland,  also  undertook  to  force  the 
King  of  Sweden,  Napoleon's  most  obstinate  enemy, 
not  only  to  lay  down  his  arms,  but  also  to  submit 
himself  to  the  continental  programme,  to  which 
Alexander,  much  to  the  disadvantage  of  his  realm, 
had  himself  given  his  adherence.  This  alone  was 
of  more  ruinous  consequences  to  Russia  than  a  lost 
campaign,  for  commerce  with  England  was  indis- 
pensable for  its  welfare,  and  the  Tsar  must  have 
had  very  weighty  reasons  to  induce  him  to  put  a 
stop  to  it.^ 

Vain  by  nature,  and  flattered  by  Napoleon's 
behaviour  and  promises  towards  him,  Alexander 
eagerly  consented  to  all  the  secret  conditions  im- 
posed in  their  treaty  of  friendship ;  these,  however, 
embraced  no  less  vast  a  scheme  than  the  division 
of  Europe  between  France  and  Russia.  While  at 
Tilsit  Alexander  gave  his  consent  to  everything  to 
which  his  position  did  not  absolutely  forbid  him  to 
accede.  Was  his  own  state  then  in  such  a  perilous 
position  ?  He  had  as  yet  seen  no  enemy  within  the 
borders  of  his  realm,  and  the  campaign  of  1 8 1 2  had 
shown  the  danger  of  attacking  it.  The  general  in- 
terpretation of  his  action  is,  therefore,  that  in  this 
treaty  with  Napoleon  the  Tsar  only  sought  a  means 
of  getting  Swedish  Finland  under  his  protection, 
this  being  a  necessary  step  for  the  rounding  off 
of  Russia,  and   for  the   better   protection  of  the 

^  Cf.  Choiseul-Gouffier,  Mitnoires, 


THE   SON   OF   THE    REVOLUTION    337 

towns  on  the  frontier.  It  was  also  his  intention  to 
remain  no  longer  at  enmity  with  England.^ 

The  Treaty  of  Tilsit,  which  was  concluded  the 
7th  of  July,  1807,  and  which  put  an  end  to  the  war 
between  France  and  Russia,  was  followed  by  a 
compact  between  the  two  Empires,  and  a  secret 
treaty  which  was  tantamount  to  a  division  of  the 
world  between  the  two  Emperors.  *'  I  often  saw 
the  two  sovereigns,"  writes  M.  de  M^neval,  **  bend- 
ing over  a  map  of  European  Turkey,  and  after 
examining  it  attentively,  walk  on  again,  continu- 
ing their  conversation.  In  their  plans  of  partition 
Constantinople  was  a  point  upon  which  they  could 
evidently  not  agree.  "  Constantinople,"  said  Napo- 
leon, "means  the  dominion  of  the  world."* 

The  peace  of  the  world  had  been  concluded, 
and  Alexander — who  in  signing  the  Treaty  of  Tilsit 
was  actuated  by  selfish  motives,  and  gave  an  open 
denial  to  all  the  noble  sentiments  which  he  had 
formerly  professed — expected  great  advantages  for 
Russia.  Everything,  however,  depended  upon  the 
mutual  fidelity  and  loyalty  of  the  two  Emperors 
who  had  sworn  friendship  at  Tilsit.* 

But  Alexander's  private  intentions  were  no  more 
actually  loyal  towards  Napoleon  than  Napoleon's 
were  to  Alexander;  each  was  intent  on  deceiving 
the  other,  until  a  breach  between  them  became 
inevitable.  While  lavishing  amiabilities,  they  were 
both  at  the  same  time  making  colossal  preparations 
for  war.     Those   immediately  around   Alexander 

^  Schnitzler,  J.  H.,  Histoire  intime  de  la  Russie^  1S47,  vol.  i,  pp. 
60-61. 

■  Baron  de  M^neval,  Mimoires^  Paris,  1894,  vol.  ii,  p.  105. 
»  Cf.  Tatistcheff,  /.^.,  p.  183. 

Y 


338     THE   CURSE   OF   THE    ROMANOVS 

clamoured  for  a  fresh  declaration  of  hostilities 
against  France;  Napoleon  was  equally  ready  for 
warfare,  dissatisfied  that  there  should  be  one  realm, 
one  capital,  into  which  he  had  not  yet  made  a 
triumphal  entry.  '*  Sincere  as  a  man  in  all  that 
concerned  humanity,"  said  a  contemporary,  "  Alex- 
ander was  cunning  as  a  demi-Greek  in  all  that 
related  to  politics."  Alexander's  friendship  began 
to  cool  after  the  meeting  at  Erfurt.  During  the 
previous  period  of  their  intimate  relations  with  each 
other  it  was  with  difficulty  that  the  Dowager  Em- 
press had  been  able  to  prevent  Alexander  giving 
his  sister,  the  Grand  Duchess  Catherine,  in  mar- 
riage to  the  French  Emperor.  Alexander's  sister, 
Catherine  Pavlovna,  was  very  beautiful,  and  Joseph 
de  Maistre  wrote  of  her :  ''If  I  were  a  painter  I 
would  have  sent  you  one  of  her  eyes,  that  you 
might  see  how  much  intelligence  dame  Nature 
has  enclosed  in  it  This  princess  is  spoken  of  as 
the  future  Empress  of  France."  ^  It  was  not  until 
the  Erfurt  Conference  that  each  of  the  rival  mon- 
archs  began  to  doubt  the  sincerity  of  the  other. 

Napoleon  was  quick  in  discovering  Alexanders 
growing  suspicions;  he  found  him  "different  from 
what  he  was  at  Tilsit."*  One  of  Napoleons 
ministers,  in  whom  he  placed  the  greatest  con- 
fidence, openly  declared  that  the  Russian  potentate 
among  other  demands  had  urged  the  partition  of 
the  Ottoman  Empire.  ''  I  must,"  he  said  to  the 
Duke  of  Vicenza,  **have  the  key  which  opens  the 
door  of  my  house."  He  had  already  gained  pos- 
session of  a  key  to  the  Baltic,  having,  with  Napo- 

*  Cf.  Vandal,  Z.^.,  p.  463 ;  Tatistcheff,  /.c,  i,  p.  52a 

*  Vandal,  /.r.,  i,  p.  424. 


THE    SON   OF   THE   REVOLUTION    339 

leon's  consent,  seized,  in  the  most  disloyal  manner, 
his  own  brother-in-law's  realm  of  Finland. 

Alexander's  plan  as  regarded  Turkey  had  to 
wait  for  realisation ;  Napoleon  continued,  however, 
to  carry  his  own  into  effect.  Disappointed  in  his 
resolve  to  drive  England  out  of  the  Continent, 
he  gradually  extended  the  boundaries  of  his  own 
dominions  as  far  as  Trave  in  Mecklenburg,  without 
sparing  the  duchy  of  Oldenburg,  the  sovereign 
house  of  which  was  closely  allied  to  that  of  Russia. 
On  the  other  hand,  he  enormously  enlarged  the 
boundaries  of  the  dukedom  of  Warsaw,  maintained 
a  large  garrison  at  Dantzig,  and  finally  intended  to 
reinstate  the  ancient  Polish  kingdom.  This  last 
possibility  was  a  constantly  threatening  spectre 
before  Alexander's  eyes.^  The  Tsar  demanded 
the  solemn  promise  that  France  would  never  make 
any  attempt  at  this  re-establishment.  But  Napoleon 
absolutely  refused  to  ratify  the  Polish  Convention. 

In  the  meantime,  perceiving  the  opposition 
which  Maria  F^odorovna  evinced  to  an  alliance 
between  her  daughter  and  the  crowned  son  of 
Laetitia  Ramolini,  the  French  Emperor  decided 
to  marry  the  daughter  of  Francis,  Emperor  of 
Austria.  The  simultaneous  news  of  Napoleon's 
marriage  with  the  Austrian  Princess  and  his  refusal 
to  ratify  the  Polish  Convention  was  considered  in 
St.  Petersburg  as  a  double  insult^  All  these  facts 
hastened  to  bring  about  a  coolness  between  the 
allies  of  Tilsit  and  Erfurt.  Alexander's  patience 
was  tired  out  and  his  pride  was  hurt.  He  altered 
his  line  of  policy  and  found  the  moment  the  more 

*  Mdneval,  Lc.^  p.  500. 

'  Tatistcheff,  l.c,^  pp.  524-528. 


340    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

opportune  for  a  rupture  with  France  since  the 
heroic  resistance  of  Spain  was  holding  her  arms 
in  check.  The  customs-tariff  of  December  31, 
1 8 10,  which  fell  heavily  on  the  French  goods  im- 
ported, was  the  herald  of  the  coming  change  in 
Russian  diplomacy.  Moreover,  Napoleon  began 
to  complain  of  the  privileges  accorded  to  English 
vessels  in  the  Russian  harbours,  these  sailing  at 
first  under  Portuguese  flags,  but  soon  throwing  oflF 
their  disguise.  All  these  circumstances  combined 
made  a  rupture  unavoidable,  and  the  Russian  Am- 
bassador, Prince  Alexander  Kourakin,  left  Paris, 
although  Napoleon  had  refused  for  some  time  to 
grant  him  his  passports.^ 

The  two  giants,  France  and  Russia,  were  now 
to  measure  their  strength  against  each  other,  and 
the  whole  of  1 8 1 1  was  devoted  to  the  preparations 
for  the  coming  Titanic  conflict  Russia  suggested 
to  Austria  and  Prussia  an  alliance  with  herself 
in  case  of  attack,  and  she  obtained  immediate 
help  from  England  in  the  shape  of  money. 
Napoleon  was  able  by  promises,  however,  to  win 
Austria  and  Prussia  over  to  his  side,  and  to  keep 
them  from  forming  a  coalition  with  Russia.  Poland 
also  stood  by  Napoleon,  in  hopes  of  recovering 
through  him  her  old  regal  power.  Everything 
indicated  that  the  object  of  France  was  to  re- 
generate Poland.*  But  Poland's  hopes  were  never 
fulfilled.  The  sons  of  Poland  shed  their  lifes 
blood    on    Napoleon's    fields    of    battle,    only    to 

^  Cf,  Vandal,  /.^.,  iii,  pp.  399  and  411  ;  M^neval,  /.^.,  p.  533,  also 
Archives  des  Affaires  iltranglres^  Russie^  p.  154. 

^  Cf,^*'  Memoirs  of  the  Duke  of  Rovigo  "  (M.  Savary),  vol  iii,  Pt.  I, 
p.  140. 


THE    SON   OF   THE    REVOLUTION    341 

be  left  by  him  unsupported  in  their  struggle  for 
freedom.  Meanwhile  the  Russian  Ambassador, 
through  the  agency  of  one  of  Marshal  Berthier's 
secretaries,  had  obtained  possession  of  all  the 
particulars  concerning  the  campaign  against  Russia, 
and  when  he  started  for  St.  Petersburg  he  carried 
with  him  the  whole  plan  of  operation. 

On  May  9th  Napoleon  started  to  join  his 
army.  At  Dresden  he  called  an  assembly  of 
all  the  Princes  of  the  Rhine  Confederacy,  and 
for  the  first  and  last  time  set  this  machine  of  his 
own  construction  in  motion.^  At  an  entertainment 
given  in  the  castle  of  this*  city.  Napoleon  walked 
in  front  of  the  other  sovereigns  with  his  hat  on ; 
he  was  followed  by  the  Emperor  of  Austria,  with 
uncovered  head,  the  latter  being  accompanied  by 
his  daughters  and  the  Empress  Maria- Louisa ; 
behind  these  came  a  crowd  of  kings  and  princes 
walking  in  awe-stricken  silence.  The  Empress 
of  Austria  had  excused  herself  from  being  present, 
under  the  pretext  of  indisposition;  she  was  not 
ill,  however,  but  only  determined  to  avoid  the 
necessity  of  taking  the  arm  of  Napoleon,  whom 
she  hated.^ 

Napoleon  left  Dresden  on  May  4th,  181 2, 
and  marched  on  to  Posen  and  Thorn,  stopping 
at  various  places  to  review  his  troops.  The 
appearance  of  Napoleon  on  Polish  soil  was  the 
signal  for  a  display  of  enthusiasm  which  spread 
throughout  the  country,  giving  it  the  semblance  of 
a  resuscitated  fatherland.  The  Emperor  of  France 
was  greeted  by  the  entire  population  of  Posen  as 

^  Vandal,  vol.  iii,  p.  405.  ^  l,c,t  p.  4i5< 


i 


342    THE   CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

the  liberator  of  Poland.^  He  talked  with  his  old 
soldiers  of  the  Pyramids,  of  Marengo,  of  Austerlitz, 
of  Jena,  and  Friedland  ;  with  the  young  he  inquired 
into  their  clothing,  their  pay,  and  their  officers. 
When  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Russian  frontier 
Napoleon  made  a  last  diplomatic  move  and  sent 
Count  Lauriston,  the  former  Ambassador  at  St 
Petersburg,  to  the  Emperor  Alexander.  But  things 
had  gone  too  far  now  for  war  to  be  avoided,  and 
Napoleon  remarked  in  his  usual  manner,  *'The 
conquered  assume  the  tone  of  victors.  Fate  draws 
them  on.     Let  their  doom  be  fulfilled." 

On  June  24th,  181 2,  Napoleon  crossed  the 
Niemen ;  at  that  time  half  Europe  was  at  his 
feet,  and  his  enormous  army  surpassed  in  numbers 
the  combined  armies  of  western  Europe. 

On  June  22nd,  Napoleon,  then  at  his  head- 
quarters at  Wilkowiski,  addressed  his  soldiers  in 
the  following  words  :  "  Soldiers !  the  second  Polish 
war  is  about  to  begin.  The  first  was  closed  at  Tilsit ; 
Russia  wishes  for  her  own  ruin  ;  let  her  have  it." 

"The  close  of  Napoleon's  career,  however," 
says  Madame  Choiseul-Goufiier,  *'had  already 
been  decreed ;  it  was  in  the  wilds  of  Russia,  it 
was  by  the  light  from  the  flames  of  Moscow,  in 
the  midst  of  the  snows  and  frosts  of  the  North, 
that  misfortune  was  to  seize  its  illustrious  prey, 
to  pour  upon  his  own  head  the  evils  which  his 
selfish  ambition  had  inflicted  upon  the  world,  and 
to  force  to  submit  to  a  slow  and  cruel  death  upon 
a  rock  in  the  midst  of  the  ocean,  the  man  who  had 
complained  that  he  suffocated  in  old  Europe!' 

»  Ibid,^  p.  415. 

*  Madame  Choiseul-Gouffier,  M/moires,  p.  53. 


2 


THE   SON   OF   THE   REVOLUTION   343 

• 

After  the  terrible  fate  which  befell  Napoleon 
in  Russia,  the  Emperor  Alexander  undertook  to 
act  as  sovereign  over  the  rich  inheritance  of  the 
French  Emperor,  so  far  as  it  was  agreeable  to 
those  concerned.  On  March  25th,  18 13,  he  sent 
out,  in  his  own  name  and  that  of  his  allies,  a 
proclamation  from  Kalish  to  the  Germans,  as  their 
liberator,  promising  them  freedom,  security,  and 
well-being.  He  was  hailed  with  acclamations,  the 
princes  gathered  round  him,  and  the  Russians 
overspread  the  fields  of  Germany  with  a  view  to 
reorganising  the  world  of  Europe. 

Alexander  entered  upon  an  entirely  new  phase 
of  life  after  the  burning  of  Moscow,  which  appears 
to  have  been  due  as  much  to  a  half-fanatical  as 
to  a  patriotic  enthusiasm  among  the  people ;  the 
deed  brought  little  honour  to  any  one  ;  the  richer 
inhabitants  shamefully    forsook    the    poorer    ones, 
only  giving  up  their  houses  because   it   was   im- 
possible to  carry  them  away.     The  Russian  Em- 
peror assumed   an   attitude   of  modest  discretion, 
when,  having  been  assisted  in  his  victory  by  the 
northern  winter,  he  decided  to  follow  a  policy  which 
was  little  agreeable  to   the   interests   of  his   own 
country,  feeling  that  he  had  had  a  more  suitable 
personal   rdle   assigned   to   him   than  that  of  the 
Autocrat  of  Russia.     He  became  the  soul  of  the 
princely  coalition  which  hurled  Napoleon  from  his 
height ;  his  presence  electrified  the  exhausted  men 
in  camp  and  in  council,  and  sent  indifference  and 
private  ill-will  into  banishment. 

This  period  was  unquestionably  the  most  bril- 
liant of  Alexander's  reign,  and  Russia  at  no  time 
reached  a  higher  pitch  of  glory  and  renown,  so  that 


4 


344    THE   CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

many  might  justly  have  subscribed  to  the  haughty 
proclamation  published  in  one  of  the  official  jour- 
nals of  St.  Petersburg :  "  Russia  has  done  what  it 
desired  for  the  well-being  of  Europe;  it  has  pro- 
cured universal  freedom,  and  delivered  the  Con- 
tinental powers  from  their  dependent  position ;  it 
has  restored  the  integrity  of  the  German  realm  and 
re-established  its  rightful  powers." 

Napoleons  legions  having  been  scattered  or 
destroyed  by  cold  and  want,  and  the  remnant  of 
them  driven  out  of  Russia,  Alexander  seized  this 
favourable  opportunity  to  conclude  a  separate 
peace.  His  policy  now  partook  of  a  higher  and 
more  religious  character,  and  included  the  whole  of 
Europe,  for  he  wished  the  other  nations,  most  of 
whom  were  still  groaning  under  the  oppression 
of  the  foreign  tyrant,  to  have  their  share  in  his 
triumph.  He  proclaimed  himself  their  avenger, 
promising  to  deliver  them  from  bondage ;  he  urg^ 
them  to  throw  off  their  yoke,  and  even  reproached 
them  for  their  abased  condition.  He  understood 
the  spirit  of  the  age  and  knew  the  right  way  to 
address  the  people — openly,  clearly,  and  firmly  ; 
and,  mingling  his  European  and  Christian  ideas 
with  the  lofty  style  of  the  East,  he  even  went  so 
far  as  to  exhort  the  people  to  rebel  against  their 
governments,  a  proceeding  which  was  likely  later 
on  to  prove  but  little  agreeable  to  himself,  and 
which  his  successors  seem  to  have  forgotten. 

For  the  first  time  Germany,  too,  now  turned 
her  eyes  in  the  direction  of  Alexander,  whose 
figure  stood  out  conspicuously  amid  all  others.  H  is 
histoi^y  had  been  a  sad  one.  The  crime-stained  cir- 
cumstances of  his  accession,  the  continual  expiation 


THE   SON   OF  THE   REVOLUTION   345 

at  the  foot  of  the  altar  in  order  to  appease  the 
anger  of  Heaven,  the  exalted  piety  which  led  him 
to  join  the  names  of  church  and  empire  in  his 
invocations,  the  ancient  crown  of  the  Tsars,  and  the 
sapphire  cross  of  the  priest,  the  mystic  mildness  of 
his  speech  and  the  energy  with  which  he  carried 
out  his  resolves,  everything  combined  to  shed  a 
halo  round  Alexander.  The  Tsar  had  his  approach 
heralded  by  proclamations  which  were  of  a  nature 
to  please  the  religious  spirit  of  Germany.  "The 
ills  of  the  human  race  have  reached  a  climax,"  were 
his  words ;  "we  have  but  to  look  around  to  see  the 
miseries  of  war  and  the  cruelties  of  ambition  in 
their  full  horror,  but  we  are  ready  to  face  these  on 
behalf  of  the  cause  of  liberty  and  in  the  interests 
of  mankind.  We  shall  enjoy  the  consciousness 
of  having  performed  a  good  deed,  and  immortal 
honour  will  be  the  reward  of  that  nation,  which, 
submitting  to  the  sufferings  of  a  cruel  war  and 
patiently  and  unflinchingly  offering  resistance  to  the 
one  who  is  carrying  it  into  every  quarter,  shall 
finally  obtain  lasting  peace  not  only  for  itself  but 
for  the  other  unfortunate  nations  who  have  been 
forced  by  the  tyrant  to  fight  on  his  side.  It  is  a 
noble  thing  and  worthy  of  a  great  people  to  return 
good  for  evil.  O  all-powerful  God!  is  not  the 
cause  for  which  we  fight  a  just  one  ?  Look  down 
in  Thy  mercy  on  Thy  holy  Church !  strengthen  this 
people  in  their  courage  and  constancy !  Give  them 
victory  over  their  enemy  and  Thine !  Let  them  be 
the  instrument  in  Thy  hand  of  his  destruction,  and, 
in  delivering  themselves,  grant  that  they  may 
restore  liberty  and  independence  to  nations  and 
kings ! " 


346    THE   CURSE  OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

Having  thus  addressed  his  subjects,  Alexander 
now  sent  out  proclamations  to  the  different  German 
states  that  he   wished   to  draw   into   his   system. 
"  Austrians,  for  what  advantage  do  you  look  from 
your  alliance  with  France?     You  are  giving  your 
finest  provinces  in  pay  for  the  prospect  of  some  day 
meeting  your  death   from  Spanish   swords,   while 
fighting  for  an   unjust   and   unholy   cause.     Your 
commerce    destroyed,   your    honour    sullied,  your 
ensigns,  formerly  decorated  with  victory,  lowered 
in   homage   to  the    French   eagle — these  are  the 
trophies   you   may   hope   to   win   by   this  alliance 
which  can  never  be  anything  else  than  shameful! 
Flattery  and  intrigue  are  the  weapons  of  weakness, 
as  such  we  disdain  to  employ  them  ;  but  rather  by 
reminding   rulers   of  their   faults,  and   subjects  of 
their  pusillanimity,  we  desire  to  recall  both  to  their 
allegiance  to  a  system  which  will  enable  Europe  to 
recover  her  glory  and  her  peace.     Need  we  remind 
Prussia  of  the  terrible  misfortunes  which  have  be- 
fallen her  ?     Such  a  recollection  may  well  add  to 
her  anger,  but  not  to  her  courage ;  men  are  flying 
to  arms  on  all  sides ;  the  spirit  of  Frederick  is  alive 
again   throughout  the   towns  and   villages   of  his 
realm,  promising  success  worthy  of  their  devotion. 
Hessians,  you  still  remember  the  prince  who  was 
your   father ;    the   campaign    of    1 809,    when  the 
exploit  of  the  Duke  of  Brunswick  compelled  you 
to  leave   your  families  and  follow  in   the  train  of 
this  modern  Arminius,  sufficed  to  show  with  what 
impatience  you  bore  your  shackles." 

With  consummate  skill,  Alexander  stirred  the 
hearts  of  the  Germans  by  flattering  reminders  of 
the  past.      '*  Saxons,   Dutch,   Bavarians,   what  we 


THE    SON   OF  THE   REVOLUTION    347 

say  to  one  we  say  to  all ;  think  of  our  words,  and  it 
will  not  be  long  before  the  numbers  of  your  legions 
will  be  swelled  by  all  those  who,  in  the  midst  of  the 
degradation  of  your  present  corruption,  have  pre- 
served some  shadow  of  honour  and  manhood ;  fear 
may  be  holding  the  memory  of  your  past  in  its 
bonds,  but  let  not  a  fatal  subjection  to  it  hold  you 
back ;  as  unhappy  as  yourselves,  the  Russians  too 
loathe  the  power  of  which  they  stand  in  dread, 
and  your  generous  efforts,  that  will  unfailingly  be 
crowned  with  honour  and  liberty,  will  meet  with  their 
applause.  Our  victorious  troops  will  continue  their 
march  to  the  very  frontiers  of  the  enemy — then,  if 
you  prove  yourselves  worthy  to  march  side  by  side 
with  the  heroic  Russians,  if  your  hearts  are  touched 
with  the  misery  of  your  own  country,  if  the  North 
will  follow  the  lofty  example  set  it  by  the  proud 
Castilians,  the  world  will  cease  to  mourn  ;  our  brave 
battalions  will  enter  into  possession  of  the  Empire, 
of  which  the  pride  and  power  have  been  crushed  by 
a  single  victory." 

In  a  declaration  issued  on  the  22nd  (loth) 
February  181 3,  to  the  people  of  Europe,  Alexander 
expressed  himself  as  follows:  "Your  rulers  may 
even  still  be  held  back  by  fear,  but  do  not  let  that 
hinder  you !  They  are  in  as  miserable  a  condition 
as  yourselves,  they  equally  abhor  the  power  of 
which  they  stand  in  dread,  and,  finally,  they  will 
not  fail  to  acknowledge  with  gratitude  all  the 
noble  efforts  you  make  for  their  welfare  as  well 
as  for  your  own ! 

•*  If,  through  a  pitiable  pusillanimity,  your  rulers 
continue  to  submit  to  their  disastrous  condition  of 
subjection,  then  it  will  be  time  for  their  subjects  to 


348    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

make  themselves  heard,  and  the  princes  who  are 
holding  their  subjects  in  the  degrading  thralls  of 
servitude  must  be  forced  by  the  latter  to  give 
them  back  their  freedom  and  honour."* 

It  was  the  first  time  that  any  one  had  dared 
to  pronounce  such  words  or  to  preach  such  a 
doctrine.  But  in  this  proud  moment  Alexander, 
conscious  of  the  importance  of  the  part  he  was 
playing,  knew  neither  hesitation  or  circumlocution ; 
he  had  a  high  aim  in  view  and  was  determined  to 
reach  it  at  all  costs ;  the  idea  to  him  was  every- 
thing, the  external  conditions  nothing.  In  this 
lofty  tone  of  spirit,  and  in  order  to  forestall  all 
jealousy,  he  conferred  the  highest  commands,  to 
which  he  might  with  justice  have  laid  claim  him- 
self, on  other  men.  He  had  won  Sweden  over  to 
the  coalition,  and  he  now  offered  the  command  of 
the  allied  armies  of  Russia,  Prussia,  and  Sweden, 
to  the  Crown  Prince  of  Sweden.  Nevertheless, 
the  Tsar  himself  was  always  to  be  found  in  the 
front  ranks  of  the  combatants ;  he  did  not  shrink 
from  exposing  his  own  person  to  danger,  and 
wherever  fighting  was  going  on,  before  Dresden, 
near  Leipsic,  or  elsewhere,  he  encouraged  the 
men  by  his  own  brave  daring.  Moreau  was  shot 
down  as  he  was  fighting  side  by  side  with 
Alexander,  thus  ending  the  pleasant  intercourse 
which  had  been  established  between  the  former 
and  the  chivalrous-hearted,  simple-minded,  and 
benevolent  Emperor.* 

Alexander's  personality  was  undoubtedly^  an 
influential  factor  in  directing  the  course  of  the 
war   in    France.     His   candour   won   for  him  the 

^  Schnitzler,  Lc.  *  Crasenstolpe,  Lcy  voL  iv,  p.  8$. 


THE   SON   OF   THE   REVOLUTION    349 

confidence  of  the  French  people  as  a  whole.     One 
party  within  the  walls,  tired  of  Napoleon  s  tyranny, 
left    Paris  and  made  their   way   to   Alexander  in 
order  to  represent  to  him  that  the  leading  tone 
of  the  city   was   inimical   to   Napoleon,  and  that 
it  could  easily  be  mastered.     Baron  de  Vitrolles, 
the    agent    of    Talleyrand,    visited    Alexander    at 
Troyes  and   had   a  long   conversation   with   him. 
De    Vitrolles    was    a    staunch    supporter    of    the 
Bourbons  and  pleaded  their  cause.      To  his  utter 
dismay,  however,  he  found  the  Tsar  unsympathetic 
towards  the  restoration  of  the  Bourbon  dynasty ; 
the    Autocrat   of  all   the   Kussias  was  of  opinion 
that,  in  the  case  of  Napoleon's  deposition,  a  republi- 
can government  would  be  more  in  accordance  with 
the  French  spirit.^     "  If  you  knew  the  Bourbons," 
said   the    former  pupil   of   Laharpe,    '*you   would 
understand  that  the  burden  of  such  a  crown  will 
be   too  heavy    for   them ;    it   is  not   in   vain   that 
the    revolutionary    ideas    have    germinated    for    a 
considerable  time  in  a  country  like  yours."*     De 
Vitrolles    was    amazed.      **What    have    we    come 
to ! "    he    exclaimed ;    "  the    Tsar    of    Tsars,    the 
Emperor  Alexander  is  talking  of  Republics."  * 

When  a  little  later  the  alternative  of  either 
attacking  Napoleon  or  marching  upon  Paris  was 
being  discussed.  General  Diebitsh  observed  to 
Alexander :  •'  If  your  Majesty  wishes  to  reinstate 
the  Bourbons,  it  will  naturally  be  advisable  to 
march  at  once  upon  Paris."  "  There  is  no  question 
of  the  Bourbons,"  replied  the  Tsar,  "but  of  the 
deposition  of  Napoleon." 

^  Baron  de  Vitrolles,  Memoires,  Paris,  1884,  vol.  i,  p.  11 8. 
■  U^  p.  119.  •  Ibid. 


350    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

He  decided  to  march  upon  the  capital  of 
France.  France,  according  to  the  dictum  of  his 
teacher  Laharpe,  could  only  be  conquered  in 
Paris.*  When  Schwarzenberg  was  still  hesitating 
to  march  on  the  capital,  to  which  step  he  was  urged 
by  the  Corsican  Pozzo  di  Borgo,  who  bore  an  in- 
vincible hatred  towards  his  crowned  compatriot/  it 
was  Alexander  who  pointed  out  to  him  not  only  the 
possibility,  but  the  necessity  of  the  step.  In  short, 
it  was  the  Tsar  who  finally  determined  him  to  make 
the  attack.  To  the  success  of  his  persuasions  was 
due  the  termination  of  the  war.  The  generosity  with 
which  Alexander  treated  Paris  and  Parisians  greatly 
mitigated  the  feeling  of  humiliation  which  the  latter 
must  have  experienced  on  being  conquered  by  the 
Allies.  "A  motley  crowd,"  writes  Count  Nessel- 
rode,  "thronged  the  boulevards,  but  the  popula- 
tion of  Paris  seemed  to  have  come  out  to  enjoy  a 
holiday  rather  than  to  witness  the  entry  of  the  con- 
quering enemy."  Alexander  declared  that  he  was 
determined  to  depose  Napoleon ;  but  as  for  the 
future  government  of  France,  this  question  he  would 
only  solve  in  conjunction  with  representatives  of 
the  French. 

•*  I  have  only  one  enemy  in  France,"  said  Alex- 
ander ;  *'  it  is  the  man  who  has  deceived  me  in  a 
most  treacherous  manner,  who  has  abused  my  con- 
fidence, broken  his  oath  of  friendship  and  waged 
war  upon  me  in  a  most  odious  fashion.  Any  re- 
conciliation between  him  and  myself  is  henceforth 
impossible.     But,  apart  from  this  my  sole  enemy, 

^  Schneider,  L.,  A  us  dem  Ltben  Kaiser  Wilhelms  Illy  p.  225. 
'  Pasquier,  Mkmoires  du  Chancelier^  Paris,  1893,  ^^l* "« P-  ^^  also 
Mettemicb,  Mimoires^  vol.  i,  p.  191. 


THE   SON    OF   THE   REVOLUTION    351 

I  feel  nothing  but  sympathy  for  France  and  the 
French,  whose  courage  and  valour  I  greatly  ad- 
mire. Tell  the  Parisians  that  I  am  entering  Paris 
as  a  friend  and  not  as  an  enemy,  and  that  it  will 
only  depend  upon  them  to  make  me  their  constant 
ally."^  Alexander  was  received  with  enthusiastic 
acclamations  by  the  population  of  the  French  capital. 
One  Frenchman  having  exclaimed,  "We  expected 
you  long  ago.  Sire,"  Alexander's  graceful  reply  was  : 
**  If  I  arrive  late,  accuse  only  French  valour  and 
the  courage  of  your  troops."  *  This  reply,  flattering 
as  it  was  to  the  French  nation,  electrified  the  crowd. 
The  conquered  were  not  only  grateful  for  the 
moderation  of  the  conqueror  in  the  moment  of 
victory,  they  marvelled  to  find  in  the  sovereign  of 
a  barbarous  people  such  a  finished  education  com- 
bined with  such  rare  native  qualities.  '•  Our  entry 
into  Paris,"  the  Tsar  told  Prince  Golytzin,  "  was 
magnificent;  the  people  were  anxious  to  embrace 
my  knees,  to  kiss  my  hands  and  feet." ' 

Having  at  last  convinced  himself  that  no  one 
but  Louis  XVIII  could  take  the  place  of  Napoleon, 
and  that  the  wishes  of  the  majority  of  the  French 
nation  tended  in  that  direction,  he  employed  his 
influence  with  the  Allies  to  have  the  Bourbons  re- 
called. The  Tsar  nevertheless  treated  the  deposed 
Emperor  with  every  mark  of  respect 

Alexander  also  visited  the  ex-Empress  Jose- 
phine and  dined  with  her  in  Malmaison.  His 
triumph,  he  said,  consisted  in  having  brought  peace 
to    Europe,   happiness  to   France,  and   in   having 

^  Pasquier,  /.r.,  p.  246,  and  Choiseul-Gouffier,  /.^.,  p.  185. 
■  Cf,  Henry  Houssaye,  1814,  Paris,  1889,  pp.  555-557. 
'  Russian  Archives,  1886,  vol.  ii,  pp.  97-100. 


352     THE   CURSE   OF   THE    ROMANOVS 

gained  the  friendship  of  the  French  nation.     It  was 
the  brightest  epoch  in  his  reign. 

The  Court  of  the  Tuileries  looked  askance  at 
these  visits  of  Alexander,  which  took  place  very 
frequently.  The  Tsar  did  not  hesitate  to  speak 
unceremoniously  of  the  Bourbons.  In  the  presence 
of  Josephine  and  Queen  Hortense  he  is  reported  to 
have  referred  to  the  Bourbons  in  the  following 
words:  ^^Ces  gens^ld  ne  se  soutiendront  jamais ^^ 
Louis  XVIII  was  also  jealous  of  the  Tsar's  popu- 
larity, and  on  one  occasion,  having  invited  Alexander 
and  the  King  of  Prussia  to  dinner,  he  sat  down  him- 
self in  the  place  of  honour.  A  servant  having 
offered  a  dish  first  to  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  Louis 
XVI 1 1  angrily  cried :  "  A  mot,  iilvausplaUr  "  We 
northern  barbarians,"  said  Alexander  afterwards, 
•'are  much  more  polite  to  our  guests.  Louis  XIV 
on  the  pinnacle  of  power  would  have  received  me 
otherwise  in  Versailles;  one  would  have  thought 
that  it  was  Louis  XVIII  who  was  reinstating  me  on 
my  lost  throne ;  his  conduct  had  the  effect  of  a  cold 
douche  on  my  head." ' 

On  the  1st  June  1814,  Alexander  left  France 
for  England ;  here  he  met  with  an  enthusiastic 
reception,  but  does  not  seem  to  have  carried 
away  an  entirely  agreeable  impression  of  the 
latter  country.  The  national  pride  of  old 
England  was  flattered  by  the  Emperor,  who,  at 
the  banquet  given  in  his  honour  at  the  Guildhall, 
rose  from  his  seat  on  hearing  **  Rule  Britannia " 
struck  up  by  the  musicians.  The  University  of 
Oxford    offered    him    the    degree    of    Doctor    of 

1  Pasquier,  /.^.,  p.  433. 

*  Vill^le,  CQupt  de,  MHnaires^  Paris,  1888,  vol.  i,  p.  234. 


THE    SON   OF   THE    REVOLUTION    353 

Law.  "How  can  I  accept  the  diploma?"  asked 
Alexander ;  "  I  have  passed  no  examination/' 
"Your  Majesty  has  brilliantly  won  a  case  against 
the  oppressor  of  nations,  a  test  which  is  more 
than  any  jurisconsult  has  ever  achieved." 

He  left  England  on  the  28th  June  and  entered 
St.  Petersburg  on  the  25th  July,  where  he 
declined  the  title  of  "the  Blessed,"  offered  him 
by  the  Senate,  saying  that  to  God  alone  was 
honour  due. 

Alexander  was  present  in  person  at  the 
brilliant  assemblage  of  sovereigns  and  ministers 
which  took  place  in  Vienna  on  November  i,  18 14. 
The  power  of  the  Revolution  was  broken  by  the 
fall  of  its  great  champion,  and  every  one  was 
wishing,  as  far  as  it  was  possible,  to  bring  back 
the  old  regime.  The  first  diplomatists  of  Europe 
were  busy  over  this  matter,  but,  however  much 
one  may  respect  their  good  intentions,  it  is 
allowable  to  doubt  if  they  were  fitted  by  their 
abilities  for  the  task.  The  whole  tone  of  the 
nation  had  undergone  a  radical  change  since  the 
French  Revolution ;  it  was  still,  however,  held 
possible  in  Vienna  to  eliminate  from  the  memory 
of  the  people  the  terrible  trials  and  bitter  ex- 
periences which  they  had  undergone  during  the 
course  of  a  quarter  of  a  century.  The  liberal- 
minded  Emperor  of  Russia  played  an  exceptional 
part,  therefore,  at  the  Vienna  Congress.  With 
his  imposing  stature,  his  knightly  and  cultured 
bearing,  he  was  the  central  figure  among  the 
imperial  and  royal  guests  whom  the  Emperor 
Francis  hospitably  entertained  within  the  walls 
of  his  capital.     At  the   public  festivities  all  eyes 

z 


354    THE   CURSE   OF   THE    ROMANOVS 

were  turned  to  Alexander,  and  he  was  the  object 
of  universal  admiration,  while  to  the  ladies  he 
was  to  a  high  degree  interesting  on  account  of 
the  melancholy  that  was  a  prominent  feature  of 
his  whole  being.  It  has  seldom  been  the  fate 
of  any  man  to  receive  such  universal  homage, 
and  he  cleverly  made  use  of  this  circumstance 
to  persuade  the  people  that  there  was  promise 
of  peace  in  the  future. 

In  the  meantime,  Napoleon  left  Elba  and 
marched  on  Paris.  Louis  XVIII  fled  from  the 
capital,  and  the  Son  of  the  Revolution  entered  the 
Tuileries.  All  the  endeavours  of  Napoleon  to 
bring  about  a  reconciliation  between  himself  and 
Alexander  proved  futile.  At  his  request  Queen 
Hortense  wrote  a  letter  to  the  Tsar  in  which 
she  expressed  the  hope  that  he  would  now 
conclude  peace  with  France  and  Napoleon,  who, 
tired  of  war  and  taught  by  experience,  was  de- 
termined to  enter  upon  a  peaceful  policy.*  Her 
entreaties  were  in  vain.  A  new  Coalition  was 
formed  and  war  was  declared  against  Napoleon,  "  U 
tracassier  universal  de  rEurope^  *  The  Emperor 
of  France  was  declared  the  common  enemy  of 
Europe  and  placed  outside  the  civil  and  social  law. 
It  does  not  speak  very  favourably  for  Alexander's 
generosity  that,  notwithstanding  the  friendship  that 
had  existed  between  himself  and  Napoleon,  he 
not  only  wished  to  eliminate  Napoleon,  but  also 
to  exclude  his  son  from  the  French  succession, 
and  this  in  spite  of  his  scant  sympathy  with  the 
Bourbons. 

>  Shilder,  /.r.,  vol  iii,  pp.  549-5  5a 

*  Revue  tPhistoire  {UplomoHque^  1895,  ^o-  4- 


THE   SON   OF   THE    REVOLUTION    355 

Thus  actuated  by  hostile  sentiment,  Alexander, 
shortly  after  his  second  entry  into  Paris,  relying 
on  the  Proscription  of  the  13th  March  1815,  and 
on  the  renewed  alliance  between  Austria,  Russia, 
Great  Britain,  and  Prussia,  proclaimed  Napoleon 
and  his  whole  family,  as  well  as  the  daughter  of 
the  Emperor  of  Austria  and  her  son,  to  have 
forfeited  all  right  to  the  French  throne.  The 
Declaration  to  this  effect  only  received  the  signa- 
tures of  Alexander  and  of  his  Chancellor,  Count 
Nesselrode,  Europe,  as  a  whole,  was  so  far  undis- 
guisedly  in  agreement  with  Alexander,  that  none 
of  the  Powers  wished  to  have  anything  more  to 
do  with  Napoleon,  but  that  Alexander  was  not 
entirely  assured  of  the  Emperor  of  Austria's  readi- 
ness to  agree  to  his  arbitrary  declaration  may  be 
gathered  from  words  which  passed  between  Nessel- 
rode  and  Talleyrand  on  the  morning  of  the  entry : — 

*'The  Emperor  Alexander  is  of  opinion  that 
a  Regency  would  simply  mean  an  Empire  with 
the  Emperor  behind  the  curtain.  We  must,  there- 
fore, seize  the  opportunity,  when  Maria  Louisas 
father  is  away,  to  reinstate  the  Bourbon  family 
on  the  throne." 

The  battle  of  Waterloo  decided  the  fate  of 
the  Corsican  giant,  and  it  was  owing  to  Alexander's 
influence  that  the  right  of  the  grandson  of  the 
Emperor  of  Austria  to  the  French  throne  was 
put  aside  in  favour  of  the  Bourbons.  That  the 
Tsar  did  not  reduce  France  to  a  political  nullity 
was  perhaps  not  so  much  due  to  his  friendship 
for  the  French  nation  as  to  his  interest  in  estab- 
lishing a  counterpoise  to  the  power  of  Austria  and, 
even  more,  to  that  of  England. 


CHAPTER  XVI 

THE  MYSTICISM  OF  CAESAR 

The  Holy  Alliance — Alexander's  conversation  with  Dr.  £ylert— Laharpe's 
apology  of  the  Holy  Alliance — Madame  Kruedener — Meeting  between 
Alexander  and  Madame  Kruedener^Text  of  treaty  of  the  Holy  Alliance. 

The  re-establishment  of  European  peace  ought 
to  have  given  the  Tsar  great  satisfaction.  But 
the  melancholy  spirit  of  Alexander  gave  birth 
to  terrorising  phantoms  and  directed  his  attention 
to  the  irreligiosity  of  the  nations  as  the  source 
of  many  evils.  He,  therefore,  conceived  the  idea 
of  reviving  religious  fervour  in  the  peoples  and 
thus  re-establishing  a  patriarchal  regime,  purity 
of  family  life,  and  obedience  to  law  and  authority. 
But  the  rulers  should  give  the  example  and 
serve  as  models  to  their  subjects.  The  sovereigns 
of  Europe  must  carry  out  their  mission  as  rulers 
of  empires  and  kingdoms  in  the  spirit  of  the 
Founder  of  Christianity.  Christianity  should  be 
the  link  uniting  the  sovereigns  to  their  peoples 
and  among  themselves. 

The  great  events  of  the  two  last  years  had  pro- 
duced an  exalted  enthusiasm  in  the  impressionable, 
sentimental  mind  of  the  Tsar,  with  its  natural 
inclination  to  mysticism.  He  felt  sure  that  if  he 
had  triumphed  over  the  man,  whose  superior 
genius  seemed  invincible,   it  was  because  he  had 

never  gloried   in  his  success.     Henceforward  the 

356 


THE   MYSTICISM   OF   CAESAR       357 

sovereigns  of  Europe,  said  the  former  pupil  of 
Laharpe,  must  place  their  confidence  not  in  the 
strength  of  their  armies,  but  in  the  strength 
of  faith  and  religion.  But  besides  this  external 
spiritual  policy,  the  melancholy  and  sadness  which 
had  drawn  their  veil  over  the  Tsar  ever  since  the 
terrible  night  of  his  fathers  assassination,  made 
him  likewise  turn  to  religion  for  personal  conso- 
lation. The  growing  power  of  remorse  weighed 
heavily  on  him,  awakening  in  him  a  deep  anxiety 
to  make  his  peace  with  God.^  Alexander,  there- 
fore, placing  himself  at  the  head  of  the  Euro- 
pean sovereigns,  concluded  a  treaty  by  which  the 
rulers  solemnly  vowed  to  govern  their  subjects 
in  the  spirit  of  Christianity,  and  to  be  guided 
solely  by  the  principles  of  justice,  love,  and  peace. 
This  treaty,  signed  on  the  26th  of  September 
18 1 5,  by  Alexander,  the  King  of  Prussia,  and 
Francis  I,  Emperor  of  Austria,  is  known  as  the 
Holy  Alliance. 

In  a  conversation  with  Dr.  Eylert,  evangelical 
bishop  of  Prussia,  in  18 18,  Alexander  gave  the 
following  explanation  of  the  origin  of  the  Holy 
Alliance. 

"In  the  days  of  Lutzen,  Dresden,  and  Bautzen, 
after  so  many  useless  efforts,  when,  in  spite  of  the 
heroism  of  our  soldiers,  your  king  and  I  were 
obliged  to  retreat,  we  were  unable  to  rid  our- 
selves of  the  conviction  that  the  power  of  man 
could  achieve  but  little,  and  that  without  the 
assistance  and  special  blessing  of  Providence, 
Germany  was  lost.  Your  king  and  I  rode  to- 
gether unattended.     We  were  both  serious,  deep 

*  Capefigue,  Histoire  de  la  Restaurafiort,  ii,  p.  300. 


358    THE  CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

in  thought;  not  a  word  passed  between  us.  At 
length  my  dearest  of  friends  broke  the  silence 
and  said :  *  Things  cannot  go  on  so ;  we  must 
pray  and  fight,  and  with  the  help  of  God  we 
shall  conquer,  and  if,  as  I  trust,  God  will  bless 
our  united  efforts,  then  we  will  proclaim  in  the 
face  of  the  whole  world  our  conviction  that  to 
Him  alone  the  honour  is  due/  We  both  sincerely 
promised  to  do  so,  clasping  hands  in  witness. 
Then  came  the  victories  of  Kulm,  of  Hotzbach, 
Grosbieren,  Dennewitz,  and  Leipsic ;  and  when 
we  arrived  in  Paris,  your  king  reminded  me  of 
our  holy  resolution,  and  the  Emperor  Francis  I 
of  Austria,  who  shared  our  views  and  sentiments, 
willingly  became  a  third  in  our  Alliance.  The 
first  idea  of  the  Holy  Alliance  thus  originated  in 
a  moment  of  melancholy  and  misfortune ;  it  was 
realised  in  a  moment  of  gratitude  and  happiness. 
The  Holy  Alliance  is  not  our  work,  but  that  of 
God.  Christ  Himself  has  inspired  us  with  every 
thought  comprised  in  the  Alliance,  and  with  every 
principle  it  announces.  Whoever  does  not  feel 
and  recognise  this,  whoever,  confounding  sacred 
and  profane  things,  views  the  Alliance  as  a  mask 
for  hidden  thoughts  and  secret  political  designs, 
cannot  join  our  association  or  have  a  voice  in 
our  deliberations."* 

Laharpe,  the  tutor  of  the  Tsar,  wrote  an  apology 
of  the  Holy  Alliance — ^and  explained  the  act  of  his 
pupil  in  the  following  words  : — 

**  Although  intrepid  in  the  midst  of  danger, 
Alexander  had  a  horror  of  war  and  a  hope  that 

•  Eylert,  Ckaractersiif^e  und  historische  Fragnunte  aus  dem  Ltben 
Fridrich  Wilhelm  Illy  vol.  ii,  pp.  246-248. 


THE   MYSTICISM   OF   CiESAR       359 

during  a  lengthened  peace  the  governments  of 
Europe,  recognising  the  necessity  of  introducing 
such  reforms  as  were  called  for  by  the  age,  would 
seriously  apply  themselves  to  that  work.  A  state 
of  profound  tranquillity  was  indispensable  for  this 
purpose;  and  as  the  confusion  of  the  past  thirty 
years  had  greatly  weakened  the  old  ideas  of  order 
and  subordination,  Alexander  thought  he  should  be 
able  to  remedy  that  by  making  a  solemn  appeal  to 
religion.  So  far  at  least  as  this  monarch  is  con- 
cerned, no  doubt  such  an  appeal  was  an  emanation 
proceeding  from  his  own  noble  heart ;  but  the 
genius  of  evil  took  possession  of  these  philanthropic 
conceptions,  and  turned  them  against  himself."  * 

In  any  case — whatever  the  explanation  —  the 
Holy  Alliance  was  a  manifestation  of  Alexanders 
mystic  propensities  and  the  beginning  of  his  en- 
deavour to  find  peace  and  consolation  in  religion. 
Christianity  always  produced  in  his  heart  a  cer- 
tain warmth,  and  imparted  a  wholesome  tension 
to  his  nerves.  In  his  early  days  the  Bishop 
Platon  had  been  his  instructor,  but  it  was  a  Pro- 
testant woman  who,  in  later  days,  impressed  him 
more  deeply,  more  convincingly  with  the  senti- 
ments of  Christianity.  This  Protestant  woman 
was  Madame  Kruedener.*  Juliane  de  Vietinghoff, 
Baroness  Kruedener,  born  in  1764,  belonged  to  a 
noble  Livonian  family  and  was  the  daughter  of  a 
Russian  Privy  Councillor  and  Senator.  She  was 
carefully  educated  in  the  house  of  her  father  and 
afterwards  in  Paris.  She  was  of  a  singularly 
romantic  character,  and  was  early  remarkable  as 
much   for   her   intelligence   as   for   a   tendency   to 

1  The  Globe,  July  25,  1829.  «  Cf.  Schnitzler,  U, 


36o    THE   CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

reverie  and  melancholy.  Before  she  was  eighteen 
she  was  married  to  Baron  Kruedener,  a  diplomatist, 
who  died  in  1802.  The  marriage  was  not  a  happy 
one.  Her  unbndled  imagination  and  her  romantic 
character  led  her  to  commit  indiscretions  which 
compelled  her  husband  to  send  her  back  to  her 
family.  From  that  time  Baroness  Kruedener  led 
a  wandering  life.  In  1803  she  published  a  romance 
called  **  Valeria/*  which  created  a  sensation  in  Park 
Long  occupied  with  the  allurements  and  pleasures 
of  the  world,  she  gradually  began  to  listen  to  the 
voice  of  religion,  and,  obeying  her  tendency  to 
mysticism,  decided  to  change  her  manner  of  life 
and  devote  herself  to  the  conversion  of  sinners  and 
the  consolation  of  the  wretched.  At  Carlsruhe  in 
1 813  she  met  Jung  Stilling,  the  celebrated  visionary, 
who  completed  her  conversion.  From  that  time 
Baroness  Kruedener  believed  that  she  had  a  mission 
to  preach  the  Gospel  to  the  poor.  Her  spiritual 
exaltation  gradually  assumed  the  character  of  pro- 
phesying, and  in  a  letter  addressed  to  Mademoiselle 
Stourdza,  in  18 14,  she  foretold  in  vague  terms  the 
escape  and  return  of  Napoleon  from  Elba.  This 
letter  was  communicated  to  the  Tsar,  and  inspired 
him  with  a  wish  to  see  the  Baroness.  She  met  him 
at  Heilbron  in  June  18 15,  accompanied  him  to 
Heidelberg,  and  after  Waterloo  to  Paris.  Madame 
Kruedener  had  predicted  the  defeat  of  the  Black 
Eagle  in  the  northern  snows  and  the  triumph  of  the 
White  Eagle ;  the  Black  Eagle  was  Napoleon, 
the  White  was  Alexander.  After  Napoleon  s  dis- 
aster Madame  Kruedener's  prophecies  gained  great 
credence  in  Germany,  and  all  eyes  were  turned 
towards  Alexander. 


THE   MYSTICISM   OF   CiESAR       361 

He  had  been  hailed  as  the  liberator  of  Germany 
by  the  chiefs  of  the  illuminati.  Mme.  de  Krue- 
dener,  who  as  a  native  of  Courland  was  among  his 
subjects,  had  a  cordial  reception  given  her  by  the 
Emperor  in  the  castle  of  Potsdam.  The  latter  was 
struck  and  deeply  impressed  by  her  expression  of 
inspired  ecstasy,  as  that  of  one  wandering  on  this 
earth  awhile  on  her  way  to  the  celestial  regions; 
he  had  heard  of  her  passionate  prayers,  of  her 
devotions  in  mysterious  chapels  on  behalf  of  the 
success  of  his  arms,  and  his  nature  was  in  sympathy 
with  hers.  Those  who  were  intimately  acquainted 
with  the  Tsar  could  tell  how  he  would  occasionally, 
in  the  midst  of  a  brilliant  reception,  suddenly  absent 
himself,  in  order  to  retire  to  his  private  oratory, 
there  to  pray  and  weep.  This  condition  of  soul 
rendered  him  an  easy  victim  to  the  influence  of  the 
Baroness  de  Kruedener. 

The  campaign  in  Germany  of  181 3  may  be 
especially  noted  as  securing  the  triumph  of  the 
mystics ;  in  the  patriotic  songs  sung  by  the  students 
could  be  detected  the  spirit  of  profound  faith  in  the 
final  victory  of  what  Mme.  de  Kruedener  styled  the 
great  and  holy  cause. 

Events  had  followed  each  other  in  quick  suc- 
cession ;  Napoleon's  genius  struggled  in  vain  against 
his  evil  fortune*  Mme.  de  Kruedener  had,  for  some 
time  past,  been  prophesying  the  fall  of  the  dark 
angel  of  battles,  and  the  advent  of  the  fair  angel 
destined  by  God  to  be  the  saviour  of  the  world,  and 
every  one  knew  to  whom  she  alluded.  Alexander 
was  unquestionably  an  ambitious  man ;  the  will  of 
Peter  I,  that  patrician  of  the  world,  was  a  family 
tradition  with  the   Romanovs;   but  the  Tsar  had 


362     THE   CURSE   OF   THE    ROMANOVS 

shown  himself  extremely  generous  during  this  cam- 
paign between  Germany  and  France ;  all  his  pro- 
clamations had  been  full  of  a  religious  spirit,  and 
might  have  been  pages  torn  from  Mme.  de  Krue- 
dener  s  books.  Alexander,  in  common  with  many 
great  minds,  believed  in  the  possibility  of  strange, 
remorseless  happenings — in  a  word,  in  destiny.  Of 
a  gentle  and  melancholy  character,  he  loved  the 
occult  sciences  which  revealed  to  him  a  future  apart 
from  the  misery  of  this  world.  Napoleon,  in  the 
might  of  his  Caesarian  temper,  believed  in  his  star ; 
he  would  point  it  out  to  the  incredulous  to  convince 
them  that  he  was  forced  to  walk  in  the  ways  that 
were  appointed  for  him  by  destiny :  might  not  Alex- 
ander also  be  providentially  guided  by  destiny  to 
restore  peace  and  happiness  to  the  world?  At 
least  so  Mme.  de  Kruedener  reasoned  out  in  her 
preaching  to  her  followers,  as  she  sat  surrounded 
by  ancient  tomes  of  divination,  full  of  the  wood 
engravings  of  the  fifteenth  century.^ 

I  n  the  meantime  the  sadness  and  melancholy  of 
Alexander  increased,  and  the  once  ardent  champion 
of  republics  began  to  fear  the  spirit  of  revolution, 
which  was  everywhere  undermining  authority  and 
religion.  The  new  spirit  developed  in  the  nations 
by  the  wars  of  1813  and  18 15,  must,  Mme.  de 
Kruedener  urged,  be  taken  into  consideration. 
Bergasse  wrote  pointing  out  the  danger  of  an 
inactive  peace,  and  the  necessity  for  opening  out 
some  new  road  for  human  activity.  The  ten- 
dencies, at  that  time  uppermost,  which  inclined 
to    unlimited    independence,    must,    he    said,    be 

1  C/*.  Capefigue,  M.,  La  Baronne  de  Kruedener^  Paris,  1866,  pp. 
63-69. 


THE   MYSTICISM   OF  CiESAR       363 

opposed  by  an  association  of  rulers,  founded  on 
the  eternal  laws  of  religion  and  morality,  as  a 
strong  defence  against  the  fresh  dangers  with 
which  society  was  threatened.  It  was  no  longer 
one  man,  a  single  conqueror,  who  had  to  be  feared, 
but  a  disorganised  force  of  ardent-minded  men,  who 
were  beginning  to  trouble  the  peace  of  social  life. 
Alexander,  according  to  Mme.  de  Kruedener,  was 
the  man  appointed  by  God  to  form  this  Holy 
Alliance,  based  on  evangelistic  principles,  which 
should  aid  the  oppressed  and  secure  the  triumph 
of  the  Cross.  Bergasse's  plan  was  developed  by 
Mme.  de  Kruedener  in  words  full  of  fascination  and 
with  peculiar  tenderness  of  expression. 

To  draw  up  an  actual  alliance  on  such  grounds 
as  these  was  impossible ;  such  reveries  were  more 
fitted  for  the  subject  of  the  homilies  of  the  illumi- 
naii  than  for  that  of  diplomatic  treaties.  The 
Emperor  Alexander,  however,  fully  concurred  in 
the  ideas  of  Mme.  de  Kruedener  and  of  Bergasse, 
and  he  of  his  own  accord  developed  them  in  a  kind 
of  declaration  which  he  sent  to  the  King  of  Prussia 
and  to  the  Emperor  of  Austria,  who  were  then  both 
under  the  spell  of  the  gentle  and  dreamy  Tsar. 
Surely  he  who  had  given  so  much  help  towards 
delivering  Europe  had  a  right  to  be  heard ! 

The  King  of  Prussia  was,  in  any  case,  too 
intimately  allied  with  Russia  to  be  indifferent  to 
the  Tsar*s  influence  ;  more  than  any  other  monarch, 
he  had  need  to  keep  an  eye  on  the  growing  ten- 
dencies of  his  universities.  Prince  Metternich, 
however,  looked  at  the  matter  in  a  more  practical 
light,  and  gravely  considered  what  could  be  the 
meaning  of  this  proposed  treaty.     He  himself  con- 


364    THE   CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

sidered  it  less  as  a  whim  of  the  Emperor  than  a 
deep-laid  political  undertaking  to  prepare  the  way 
for  the  presidency  of  Russia  and  to  secure  the 
protectorate  of  the  East.  In  this  proposed  pro- 
clamation of  the  sovereignty  of  Christ  and  the 
Cross,  was  there  not  also  in  view  the  emancipation 
of  Greece  and  the  dismemberment  of  the  Ottoman 
Empire  ? 

But  Austria  had  come  off  too  well  in  the  treaties 
of  181 5  to  refuse  her  signature  to  a  convention  of 
so  vague  a  sort  that  it  would  be  easy  to  retreat 
from  it. 

The  preamble  to  this  declaration  or  treaty,  which 
was  drawn  up  by  Mme.  de  Kruedener  and  Bergasse 
and  revised  by  the  Emperor,  is  too  curious  a  docu- 
ment to  be  left  unquoted : 

''In  the  name  of  the  All-holy  and  indivisible 
Trinity,  Their  Majesties  the  Emperor  of  Austria, 
the  King  of  Prussia,  and  the  Emperor  of  Russia,  in 
consideration  of  the  great  events  which  have  taken 
place  in  Europe  during  the  last  three  years,  and 
more  especially  of  the  benefits  which  it  has  pleased 
divine  Providence  to  shower  upon  those  States  that 
have  placed  their  confidence  and  hope  in  it  alone, 
having  come  to  the  conviction  that  the  policy  which 
the  powers  shall  in  future  pursue  with  regard  to 
their  mutual  relations  must  be  founded  on  those 
sublime  truths  which  are  taught  us  by  the  eternal 
religion  of  our  God  and  Saviour,  here  declare 
solemnly  that  by  this  act,  they  desire  only  to  make 
known  to  the  whole  world  their  steadfast  deter- 
mination to  take  for  their  sole  guidance,  both  in  the 
administration  of  their  own  government  and  in  the 
matter  of  their  political  relations  with  other  nations, 


THE    MYSTICISM   OF   CiESAR       365 

the  precepts  of  holy  religion,  precepts  of  justice,  of 
charity,  and  of  peace ;  for,  far  from  these  being 
fitted  merely  for  application  to  private  life,  it  is 
they  which  should  directly  influence  the  decisions 
of  princes  and  should  be  their  guide  in  every  pro- 
ceeding ;  hereby  alone  can  a  sure  foundation  be 
secured  for  human  institutions,  or  a  remedy  found 
for  their  imperfections." 

But  how  was  this  policy,  which  based  itself  on 
the  fraternity  of  kings  and  the  teaching  of  the 
Gospel,  to  be  put  into  practice?  It  presupposed  a 
state  of  perpetual  peace,  but  experience  had  taught 
that  every  thirty  years  some  concern  touching  the 
self-interest  of  one  or  more  nations  brought  war  and 
desolation  into  the  states  of  Europe.  Nevertheless 
Alexander  set  forth  his  ideas  on  the  subject  in  the 
form  of  a  treaty.  The  declaration  went  on  to  state 
as  follows : — 

"  Their  Majesties  have  therefore  agreed  to  the 
following  Articles : — 

'^Article  I.  Agreeably  to  the  words  of  Holy 
Scripture,  which  commands  all  men  to  look  upon 
their  fellow-creatures  as  brothers,  the  three  contract- 
ing monarchs  will  henceforth  be  closely  united  by 
the  bonds  of  a  true  and  indissoluble  fraternity,  and, 
each  considering  the  others  as  his  compatriots,  they 
will  on  all  occasions  and  in  all  places  afford  one 
another  help  and  succour ;  as  regards  their  subjects 
and  their  armies,  they  will  hold  towards  these 
the  position  of  a  father,  and  in  their  treatment  of 
the  same  will  be  animated  by  the  same  spirit  of 
brotherhood,  whereby  they  are  inspired  to  be  the 
protectors  of  religion,  peace  and  justice. 


366    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

•'  Article  IL  Their  sole  guiding  principle,  there- 
fore, whether  as  regards  their  relationship  with  each 
other  or  with  their  subjects,  will  be  that  of  rendering 
reciprocal  service,  of  testifying  to  their  mutual  affec- 
tion by  an  unfailing  goodwill,  of  looking  upon  them- 
selves as  members  of  the  same  Christian  nation, 
and  as  the  delegates  of  a  higher  power,  who  has 
given  into  their  hands  the  government  of  three 
branches  of  one  family,  namely:  Austria,  Prussia, 
and  Russia.  At  the  same  time  they  will  be  prepared 
to  acknowledge  that  the  whole  Christian  nation,  of 
which  they  and  their  subjects  form  part,  has  one 
true  and  only  Sovereign,  to  whom  alone  all  power 
by  right  belongs,  since  in  Him  alone  are  to  be  found 
all  the  treasures  of  love,  of  science  and  of  infinite 
wisdom,  namely,  God,  our  divine  Saviour,  Jesus 
Christ,  the  Word  of  the  Most  High,  the  Word  of 
Life.  Their  Majesties,  therefore,  full  of  solicitude  to- 
wards their  subjects,  earnestly  recommend  them,  as 
the  only  means  of  obtaining  the  peace  which  is  bora 
of  a  good  conscience,  and  alone  is  lasting,  to  exercise 
themselves  daily  more  and  more  in  those  duties  and 
according  to  those  principles  which  have  been 
taught  by  the  divine  Saviour  to  man. 

**  Article  III.  All  those  powers,  who  are  willing 
solemnly  to  confess  the  divine  principles  which 
have  prompted  the  present  act,  and  to  acknow- 
ledge how  important  it  is,  as  bearing  on  the 
happiness  of  the  nations  which  have  long  been 
distracted  with  warfare,  that  these  truths  should 
henceforth  be  allowed  to  exercise  all  the  power 
inherent  in  them  on  the  destiny  of  Mankind, 
will  be  admitted  with^  readiness  and  affection 
into  this  Holy  Alliance. 


THE   MYSTICISM   OF   CiESAR       367 

"  Made  triple  and  signed  at  Paris,  in  the  year 
of  Grace  1815,  the  26  (14)  September. 

"Francis,  Frederick  William,  Alexander." ^ 

This  vague  statement  of  principle  was  the 
outcome  of  a  reaction  against  the  spirit  of 
egoism  which  had  so  seriously  compromised  the 
crowned  heads  during  the  French  Revolution. 
This  Holy  Alliance  was  not  only  an  exhortation 
to  sovereigns  to  exercise  their  power  with 
mildness  and  in  conformity  with  Gospel  teaching, 
but  also  a  menace  of  firm  repression.  At  the 
least  sign  of  disturbance  the  kings  were  to  rise 
in  a  body  in  defence  of  the  community  at  large, 
to  form,  as  it  were,  a  league  for  the  public  weal. 
When  there  is  a  danger  continually  threatening, 
a  law  of  repression  becomes  indispensable  for 
the  general  peace. 

The  declaration  was  not  communicated  to  the 
Powers  through  the  ordinary  medium  of  diplomatic 
agents,  but  by  autograph  letters  from  the  three 
sovereigns.  The  treaties  of  181 5  having  placed 
France  under  obligations  to  Alexander,  Louis 
XVIII  found  it  difficult  to  criticise  from  his  point 
of  view  the  exact  aim  and  sense  of  the  Holy 
Alliance ;  he  therefore  put  his  signature  to  it  in 
remembrance  of  the  service  rendered  him  by  Alex- 
ander at  the  time  of  the  Treaty  of  Paris.  Matters 
were,  however,  on  a  different  footing  in  London, 
and  when  the  Tsar  wrote  to  the  Prince  Regent 
inviting  him  to  join  the  Alliance,  Lord  Castlereagh 
sent  a  somewhat  brusque  answer,  stating  that  "  he 
could  not  advise  his  Royal   Highness  to  consent 

^  Empaytaz,  H.  L.,  Notice  sur  Alexandre^  Geneve,  1840,  pp.  42-46. 


368     THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

to  an  act  which  was  opposed  to  all  the  constitu- 
tional laws  of  England;  according  to  which  the 
responsibility  of  signing  treaties  rested  with  the 
Ministry,  and  no  diplomatic  treaty  could  be  entered 
into  unless  for  some  precise  and  explicit  purpose." 
The  chief  diplomatists  in  England,  moreover,  de- 
tected, as  they  thought,  a  subtle  project  on  Alex- 
ender  s  part  for  obtaining  the  supreme  power 
and  becoming  a  king  of  kings.  This  invocation 
to  God — was  there  not  an  encouragement  in  it 
to  the  Greeks,  who  were  meditating  an  insurrec- 
tion against  the  Porte  ?  The  Count  Capo  d'Istria, 
who  held  a  strong  influence  over  the  Tsar,  being 
impressed  with  the  idea  of  the  regeneration  of 
Greece,  and  being,  moreover,  a  fervent .  follower 
of  the  mystics,  was  in  the  habit  of  comparing 
Turkey  to  a  blood-sucking  vampire.  The  Hellenic 
spirit  was  deeply  imbued  with  the  belief  in  a 
living  God ;  Alexander's  brother  was  named 
Constantine,  and  the  marvellous  cross  was  to 
appear  in  the  sky,  as  of  old,  with  its  promise 
of  victory. 

It  has  been  maintained  by  some  that  the  idea 
of  the  Holy  Alliance  had  not  been  suggested  by 
Madame  Kruedener  to  the  Tsar.  It  cannot,  how- 
ever, be  denied  that  this  remarkable  woman  of 
sensibility,  formerly  given  up  to  sin,  who  had 
gained  a  great  ascendency  over  the  mind  of  Alex- 
ander, had  a  share  in  drawing  up  the  body  as 
well  as  the  preamble  of  the  act,  which  was  to 
enshrine  the  idea  of  the  Holy  Alliance.  In  fact, 
before  submitting  the  act  of  the  Holy  Alliance 
to  the  sovereigns,  Alexander  addressed  himself  as 
follows  to  Madame  Kruedener :   ''  I  am  about  to 


I 


THE   MYSTICISM   OF   CiESAR      369 

quit  France;  but  before  my  departure,  I  wish  to 
render  a  public  act  of  thanksgiving  to  God  the 
Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  for  the  protection 
He  has  accorded  us,  and  to  invite  the  people  to 
act  in  obedience  to  the  Gospel.  I  bring  you  a 
draft  of  the  act,  and  wish  you  to  examine  it  atten- 
tively, and  if  there  be  any  expression  you  dis- 
approve of,  be  pleased  to  let  me  know  it.  I  wish 
the  Emperor  of  Austria  and  the  King  of  Prussia 
to  join  me  in  this  act  of  adoration,  that  the  people 
may  see  us,  like  the  wise  men  of  the  East,  ac- 
knowledging the  superior  authority  of  God  the 
Saviour.  Join  me  in  prayer  to  God  that  He  may 
dispose  my  allies  to  sign  it."  * 

After  the  departure  of  the  allies  from  Paris, 
Madame  Kruedener,  who  had  ceased  to  attract 
attention,  also  left  France.  She  preached  publicly 
in  Switzerland,  and  her  doctrines  created  a  great 
sensation.  At  last,  however,  the  clergy  denounced 
her  from  their  pulpits,  and  magistrates  desired  her 
to  leave.  No  government  would  in  the  end  tolerate 
her  presence.  She  returned  to  Russia  in  18 18, 
where  Alexander  still  continued  to  take  an  interest 
in  her  views.  But  he,  too,  forbade  her  to  preach 
publicly.  It  seems  that  the  enthusiasm  with  which 
she  had  pleaded  the  cause  of  the  Greeks  had  dis- 
pleased Alexander.  Madame  Kruedener  eventually 
retired  to  her  estates  in  Livonia,  where  she  led  an 
obscure  life.  She  died  in  1824  on  her  way  to  the 
Crimea,  whither  she  was  accompanying  her  friend, 
the  Princess  Golytzin. 

^  Empaytaz,  Notice  sur  Alexandre  /,  p.  4a 


2  A 


A 


CHAPTER  XVII 

FINITA  LA  COMMEDIA— THE  MYSTERIOUS  END 

Alexander*!  friends^Michael  Speiansky — ^Araktsheev,  the  PoUedonostzev  of 
the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century — Alexander's  reactionuy 
tendencies — Spread  of  liberalism  in  Russia — Secret  societies— The 
assassination  of  Kotzebue — Mutiny  of  the  Semeonovsky  regiment— 
Magnitzky — Alexander's  private  life — His  world-weariness — ^Domestic 
life — The  Empress  Elizabeth— Madame  Narishkin — Alexander's  danghts 
Sophia — Illness  of  Empress  Elizabeth— Journey  to  Taganrog^Iilness  of 
Alexander  and  death — Letter  of  Elizabeth  to  Maria  F^odorovna— RoiDoar 
relating  to  Alexander's  death — Feodor  Kousmitsh — ^Alexander's  character: 
"a  lucky  accident." 

We  have  seen  that  the  early  years  of  Alexanders 
reign  had  been  a  period  of  liberal  reforms  and 
generous  ideas.  The  pupil  of  Laharpe  had  sur- 
rounded himself  with  die  ministers  of  his  grand- 
mother, and  with  young  men  like  Prince  Adam 
Czartorysky,  Novsyltzov,  Strogonov,  and  Kotshou- 
bey.  They  were  full  of  hopes  and  schemes  for 
regeneration.  And,  in  fact,  not  only  were  the 
tyrannical  laws  of  the  preceding  reign  abolished, 
but  a  constitutional  scheme  was  actually  brought 
into  discussion.  The  privileges  and  obligations  of 
the  supreme  power  and  the  rights  of  the  subject 
were  defined.  The  emancipation  of  the  serfs  was 
taken  into  serious  consideration.  On  one  occasion, 
during  his  stay  in  Paris,  the  Tsar  visited  Madame 
de  Stael ;  the  slavery  of  the  negroes  was  being  dis- 
cussed, and  Alexander  emphatically  denounced  it 
•*  But  there  are  serfs  in  your  own  country.  Sire," 

some  one  observed.   Alexander  looked  embarrassed, 

370 


FINITA   LA  COMMEDIA  371 

but  he  immediately  replied,  **  I  know,  but  it  is  my 
firm  intention  to  bring  about  their  emancipation."  ^ 

The  ideal  of  these  young  men,  under  whose 
influence  Alexander  for  a  time  remained,  was  to 
establish  a  national  and  representative  government. 
The  Senate  was,  therefore,  to  be  deprived  of  its 
executive  powers,  and,  having  left  to  it  only  those 
of  a  Supreme  Court  of  Justice,  was  to  be  gradually 
converted  into  a  sort  of  Upper  Chamber.  But  these 
plans  were  never  carried  out,  and  autocracy  abdi- 
cated none  of  its  rights.*  After  1806  the  circle  of 
friends  with  whom  Alexander  had  shared  his  plans 
and  hopes  was  gradually  dissolved.  Prince  Adam 
Czartorysky,  who  was  Minister  for  Foreign  Affairs, 
resigned  his  post  In  a  memorandum  addressed 
to  the  Tsar  he  pointed  out  that  the  unity  among 
the  various  departments  of  the  government  was 
not  sufficiently  established.  "  I  have  been  greatly 
surprised,"  writes  Czartorysky,  "to  see  that  you 
assume  the  sole  responsibility  not  only  of  every 
measure,  but  of  every  detail  in  its  execution  ;  while 
the  object  of  the  establishment  of  your  Ministry  was 
to  guarantee  you  against  such  responsibility.'  Alex- 
ander, however,  did  not  abandon  his  dreams  and 
aspirations  of  reform  and  of  a  more  liberal  constitu- 
tion. They  occupied  the  Tsar  till  the  very  end  of  his 
reign,^  and  it  is  due  to  his  fickle  and  weak  character 
that  his  theories  were  never  put  into  practice. 

From  1806  to  181 2  the  man  who  exercised 
the  most  preponderating  influence  over  Alexander 

*  Cf.  Capefigue,  Ix.  ■  Cf,  Czartorysky,  /.r.,  voL  i. 

*  Czartorysky,  MSmoires^  vol.  ii. 

*  Cf.  Puipin,  Die  f^esUgen  Brwegungen  in  Russlafid,  Berlin^  1894, 
p.  164. 


i 
J 


372     THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

was  Michael  Speransky.  This  son  of  a  village 
priest  was  educated  at  a  seminary,  became 
professor  of  mathematics  and  philosophy  at  the 
school  of  Alexander  Nevsky,  and  later  secretary  to 
Trokhtshinsky,  Chancellor  of  the  Imperial  Council 
Speransky,  having  succeeded  to  the  post  of  Secre- 
tary of  State,  enjoyed  the  absolute  confidence  of 
the  Emperor,  who  was  still  planning  the  realisation 
of  the  ideas  which  had  inspired  the  measures  of 
the  first  years  of  his  reign.*  Speransky  presented 
to  the  Tsar  a  plan  of  reforms  extending  to  the 
legislative,  administrative,  and  judicial  powers  of 
Russia.  Whilst,  however,  the  friends  of  Alexander 
during  the  earlier  part  of  his  reign  were  imbued 
with  ideas  borrowed  from  England,  Speransky 
had  a  decided  preference  for  French  institutions.* 
But  his  reforms  were  not  understood,  and  his 
enemies  succeeded  in  denouncing  him  as  a  traitor. 
His  admiration  for  French  institutions  furnished 
his  opponents  with  an  opportunity  to  accuse  him 
of  complicity  with  France,  at  a  moment  when 
Russia  was  on  the  eve  of  a  war  with  that  country. 
He  was,  therefore,  suddenly  arrested  in  March 
1812  and  sent  to  Nizhny-Novgorod.  In  18 16  he 
was,  however,  reinstated  in  favour  and  appointed 
Governor  of  Pensa,  and  in  18 19  Governor-General 
of  Siberia.  He  returned  to  St  Petersburg  in  1821, 
and  was  nominated  member  of  the  Imperial  Council, 
without,  however,  recovering  his  former  position. 
The  fall  of  Speransky  on  the  one  hand,  and  the 
war  with  Napoleon  on  the  other,  put  a  stop  to  all 
endeavours  of  reform.  The  enemies  of  Speransky 
were   in   power;    Karamzin,   the   great    historian, 

^  Puipin,  iM.  *  Cf,  Puipin,  Ix.^  pp.  170^  171. 


FINITA   LA  COMMEDIA  373 

made    himself    the    champion    of    autocracy,     of 
ancient    institutions    and    serfdom.^      Araktsheev, 
who  had   played    such    an   important   r6le   under 
Paul  I,  became  for  the  moment  the  Tsar's  favourite. 
He  was  the  Pobiedonostzev  of  the  beginning  of 
the  nineteenth  century.     He  was  a  sworn  enemy  of 
all  reforms  and  new  ideas,  a  champion  of  absolutism 
and  passive  obedience.     It  has  been  pointed   out 
above  that,  thanks  to  the  influence  of  Araktsheev, 
many   rigorous   regulations    long    abandoned   and 
forgotten   were   again   revived.     After  the  return 
of  the  Emperor  from  France,  Araktsheev  advised 
him  to  try  the  experiment  of  the  military  colonies. 
It   consisted  in  the  settlement  of  soldiers  among 
the  peasants  in  a  certain  number  of  districts.     If 
the   soldiers  were   married   their  wives  were  also 
brought  to  the  village  ;  if  they  were  not,  they  were 
married  to  the  daughters  of  the  peasants,  and  their 
children  were  destined  for  military  service.     This 
system  was   borrowed  from  Austria,   where  simi- 
lar establishments  had  existed  for  a  century.     It 
secured,  Araktsheev  said,  regular  recruits,  lightened 
the  burden  on  the  rest  of  the  population,  restored 
to  agriculture  the  labour  of  which  the  army  had 
deprived   it,   and   also   raised   the   morals   of   the 
soldier  by  keeping  him  with  his  family.     But  as 
the  peasants  did   not   understand   the  advantages 
of  Araktsheev  s  ingenious  idea,  revolts  broke  out, 
which  were  repressed  with  unmitigated  severity. 

In  the  meantime,  the  Emperor's  character 
underwent  a  sad  change.  He  grew  gloomy  and 
suspicious.  The  following  episode  shows  the  ex- 
tent  of  Alexander's    sensitiveness.     One    day   his 

^  Cf,  Puipin,  /.r.,  p.  306. 


374    THE  CURSE  OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

general  adjutantSi  Kisselev»  Orlov,  and  Koutousov, 
were  standing  at  one  of  the  palace  windows  tell- 
ing anecdotes  and  laughing  heartily,  when  sud- 
denly the  Emperor  appeared.  They  grew  silent, 
but  he  caught  the  signs  of  their  recent  mirth. 
A  few  minutes  afterwards  the  Tsar  sent  for 
Kisselev.  The  latter  found  the  Emperor  stand- 
ing in  front  of  a  looking-glass  and  examinii^ 
himself  most  attentively.  "Tell  me,"  said  Alex- 
ander to  his  adjutant,  ''what  is  it  that  you  and 
your  comrades  found  so  laughable  in  my  ap- 
pearance? I  am  sure  you  were  laughing  at  me." 
Only  with  difficulty  did  the  adjutant  succeed  in 
convincing  his  sovereign  that  the  merry  stories 
they  had  been  telling  one  another  were  the  sole 
cause  of  their  amusement.^ 

Some  attributed  the  Emperor's  behaviour  to 
his  deafness,  which  increased  as  years  advanced. 
But  there  were  deeper  causes  for  his  sensitive- 
ness, and  especially  for  his  feeling  of  melancholy 
and  world-weariness.  They  were  his  sense  of  re- 
morse at  the  events  of  March  1801,  which  had 
never  left  him,  and  his  growing  conviction  that 
he  had  failed  in  his  internal  policy.  In  Europe 
he  had  been  greeted  as  the  "  liberator  of  nations," 
as  the  ''restorer  of  peace,"  but  his  liberal  ideas 
were  now  dissipated  and  his  illusions  were  flown. 
Napoleon,  and  afterwards  Metternich,  had  en- 
deavoured to  convince  him  of  the  futility  of  his 
generous  ideas,  and  had  shaken  his  belief  in  their 
possible  realisation.  It  is  of  course  questionable 
whether  Alexander  himself  ever  really  was  so 
sincerely   liberal    as   he    pretended    to    be.     It  is 

^  Sbilder,  /.r.,  vol.  iv,  p.  219. 


FINITA   LA  COMMEDIA  375 

certain  that  he  was  never  consistent,  that  none 
of  his  plans  and  ideas  were  durable,  that  he 
was  in  a  continual  state  of  fluctuation,  and 
that  he  was  always  governed  by  others  and  by 
suggestions  made  to  him.^  ''Alexander's  taste 
for  constitutional  governments,"  says  Bogdano- 
vitsh,  "resembled  that  of  a  dilettante  who  goes 
into  ecstasies  over  a  beautiful  picture."  In  any 
case,  after  his  second  visit  to  Paris,  his  reac- 
tionary policy  became  more  and  more  manifest. 
Even  when  planning  the  Holy  Alliance,  Alex- 
ander's mind  was  not  quite  free  from  dynastic 
and  autocratic  designs.  The  Holy  Alliance  was 
concluded,  as  Laharpe  had  pointed  out,  to  defend 
the  kings  against  secret  societies.  In  Russia  the 
number  and  influence  of  such  associations  increased 
very  rapidly,  and  Alexander  s  autocratic  instincts 
were  alarmed.  Not  only  did  Freemasonry,  for- 
bidden under  Catherine  and  Paul,  organise  itself 
and  spread  all  over  Russia,  but  secret  societies 
were  formed  with  a  view  to  discussing  and  devising 
plans  of  regeneration.  The  seed  of  liberal  ideas 
sown  by  the  Emperor  himself  had  taken  root. 
People  at  first,  and  especially  the  young  officers 
and  members  of  the  intelligentia,  felt  sure  that 
they  would  please  the  Emperor  and  act  in  a 
manner  agreeable  to  him  by  taking  the  direction 
of  liberalism.  They  were  so  convinced  of  it  that 
when  first  establishing  the  secret  societies  for  the 
discussion  and  realisation  of  the  ideas  of  reform 
the  organisers  intended  to  ask  the  support  of  the 
Government,*     The  officers  especially  had  become 

1  Cf.  Schnitzler,  /.a,  p.  78. 

2  Tourgenev,  La  Russie  et  les  RusseSy  vol.  i,  pp.  94,  95. 


376    THE   CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

more  closely  acquainted  with  liberal  ideas  and 
institutions  during  their  long  residence  on  German 
and  French  soil  from  i8 13-15.  *'The  march 
of  the  Russian  army  through  Germany  and  on 
Paris/'  said  Alexander  himself,  when  still  liberally 
inclined,  "will  be  profitable  to  all  Russia.  There 
is  a  new  epoch  in  history  about  to  commence 
for  us  also,  and  my  projects  are  multifarious."^ 
A  fever  of  liberalism  seized  young  Russia;  the 
revolutionary  and  liberal  principles  realised  m 
the  West  attracted  the  Russian  youth.  A  trans- 
formation took  place.  "Since  the  return  of  the 
Russian  armies  from  the  West/'  writes  Nicholas 
Tourgenev,  "liberal  ideas  are  beginning  to  pro- 
pagate themselves  in  Russia  very  rapidly."* 

The  great  events  of  181 2,  the  expulsion  from 
Russia  of  the  hitherto  invincible  Emperor  of  the 
French,  the  campaigns  of  1813  and  18 14,  and 
the  entry  of  the  Russian  army  into  Paris,  where  it 
had  been  so  active  and  so  glorious,  could  not  fail  to 
raise  the  enthusiasm  of  the  officers.  In  the  course 
of  three  years  they  had  also  grown  accustomed  to 
dangers  and  excitement ;  and  strong  sensations— 
as  opposed  to  the  usual  apathy  of  the  Slav- 
became  a  necessity  to  them.  The  majority  of  the 
officers  of  the  guards  and  of  the  general  staff  re- 
turned to  St  Petersburg  full  of  love  for  their 
fatherland  and  with  a  high  sense  of  their  own 
personal  dignity.  They  had  made  acquaintance 
with  European  civilisation,  and  they  compared  all 
they  had  seen  abroad  with  the  state  of  affairs  at 
home.      Here   they  found   an   absolute  despotism 

1  Eylert,  /.^.,  ii,  p.  255. 
■  C/*.  Tourgenev,  ibid. 


FINITA   LA  COMMEDIA  377 

holding  its  sway  through  all  the  classes  of  Russian 
society.  Instead  of  politeness,  of  the  spirit  of 
justice,  and  of  respect  of  person,  they  saw  only 
severity  of  conduct  in  the  relations  of  the  govern- 
ment with  the  nation,  of  the  officials  with  the 
citizens,  and  of  the  officers  with  the  soldiers.  The 
majority  of  the  Russian  people  was  still  dishonoured 
by  the  yoke  of  serfdom;  legislation  was  in  a  state 
of  chaos,  the  law  devoid  of  sanction,  and  its  exact 
application  compromised  by  the  arbitrariness  and 
venality  of  the  functionaries.^ 

"The  officers  and  other  militiamen,"  says 
Tourgenev,  "  who  had  visited  foreign  places, 
related  what  they  had  seen  abroad — and  attracted 
public  attention  by  their  freedom  of  manner  in 
speech  and  behaviour."  *  But  not  only  the  officers, 
even  the  ordinary  soldiers  had  come  into  contact 
with  other  troops  who  were  used  to  a  different  kind 
of  discipline — and  they  also  began  to  feel  that  reforms 
were  required  in  Russia.  And  thus  it  happened 
that  in  measure  as  the  propaganda  of  liberalism 
spread  and  liberal  ideas  began  to  ferment  in  every 
youthful  brain,  the  government  more  and  more 
supported  the  policy  of  reaction.  As  Russia,  still 
intoxicated  with  victory,  grew  enthusiastic  for  those 
very  liberal  ideas  which  Alexander  had  advocated 
during  the  early  years  of  his  reign,  the  Tsar  himself 
became  indifferent  and  even  cold.  The  Liberals, 
therefore,  gathered  to  discuss  plans  for  reforms  and 
devise  means  how  to  carry  them  out.  In  Germany 
the  officers  had  made  the  acquaintance  of  secret 
societies.     But  not  only  in  Germany,  in  the  West 

^  Cf.  Rousskaya  Starina^  1884,  vol.  xlii,  p-  31,  &c. 
•  Tourgenev,  /.^.,  i,  pp.  81-84. 


378    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

generally,  liberal  ideas,  whether  in  religion  or  in 
politics,  remained  for  a  long  time  confined  to  a 
circle  of  adepts  who  were  in  the  habit  of  meeting 
in  secret,  and  thus  were  able  to  prepare  their  plans 
without  being  exposed  to  the  vulgar  contempt  of 
a  populace  too  ignorant  to  comprehend  them.  The 
example  was  imitated  in  Russia,  and  secret  societies 
were  established.  In  Russia,  where  progress  was 
so  slow,  where  the  gulf  between  the  few  intellectuals 
and  the  populace  was  so  wide,  the  need  for  such 
associations  was  even  greater  than  in  any  other 
country.  The  societies  became  very  numerous,  but 
the  majority  were  at  first  very  inoffensive.  They 
were  secret  only  in  name,  since  they  were  not 
hostile  to  the  supreme  authority.^  But  soon  the 
leading  spirits  saw  themselves  disappointed  in 
their  hopes  of  support  from  the  government,  and, 
irritated  at  the  backsliding  spirit  shown  thereby, 
they  formed  new  organisations  of  a  more  warlike 
character.*  A  few  men  of  more  defined  and 
determined  views  now  assembled  together.  They 
were  decidedly  republican  in  their  tendencies, 
and  ultimately  the  extermination  of  the  Romanov 
dynasty  was  decided  upon  by  one  of  their  leaders, 
Colonel  PesteL  The  most  noteworthy  of  these 
secret  associations  were  the  Society  of  Virtue, 
an  imitation  of  the  German  Tugendbund,  the 
Society  of  the  North,  and  the  Society  of  the 
South.  And  thus  whilst  the  patriarchal  principles 
and  mystic  tendencies  of  the  Holy  Alliance,  which 
— it  was  feared — would  readily  lead  to  reaction  and 
despotism,  had  given  rise  to  discontent,  the  Holy 

*  Cf.  Puipin,  Ar.,  pp.  51 1-5 14. 
s  Ibid,y  p.  511. 


FINITA   LA  COMMEDIA  379 

Alliance  itself  soon  became  a  league  of  the  rulers 
against  the  nations.^ 

The  Tsar  was  now  not  only  influenced  by 
Araktsheev,  by  Austria  and  Metternich,  but  also  by 
the  general  spirit  of  reaction  which  at  that  time  was 
animating  the  governments  of  Europe.  In  Europe, 
especially  in  Germany,  an  agitation  was  observable 
which  raised  the  alarm  of  the  sovereigns,  anxious 
to  preserve  their  former  power.  Their  uneasiness 
was  communicated  to  the  Tsar.  It  was  Austria 
especially  which  initiated  the  re-establishment  of 
the  ancient  regime  of  absolute  monarchy.  The 
aristocratic  reactionaries,  planning  and  scheming 
how  to  crush  the  hydra-head  of  democracy,  had 
established  their  headquarters  in  Vienna.  Metter- 
nich and  Gentz,  his  right  hand,  were  elaborating  a 
theory  of  reaction,  and  the  house  of  the  Russian 
ambassador,  Razoumovsky,  was  the  meeting-place 
of  the  partisans  of  autocratic  principles.^  Alexander 
now  opposed  every  effort  made  towards  the  propa- 
gation of  liberalism,  and  even  treated  as  criminal 
those  enterprises  which  he  himself  had  suggested. 
It  was  evident  that  his  liberalism  had  only  been 
superficial.  It  was  the  result  of  a  half-sentimental 
education,  his  instincts  being  autocratic.  These 
manifested  themselves  under  the  influence  of  his 
reactionary  entourage,  as  soon  as  the  friends  of 
liberty  began  to  clamour  in  good  earnest  for  re- 
forms. He  abandoned  his  former  policy  and  prin- 
ciples, and  appeared  as  the  champion  of  absolute 
monarchy  and  autocracy.  Forgotten  were  his 
promises,  forgotten  were  the  dreams  of  his  youth. 
He  had  granted  a  constitution  to  Poland,  but  the 

^  Puipin,  p.  543.  '  y^V/,  Lcy  pp.  619-619. 


38o    THE  CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

Poles  soon  perceived  that  they  could  not  rely  on 
the  promises  of  the  Autocrat  of  Russia,  who  readily 
assented  to  the  oppressive  mode  of  government 
established  by  his  brother  Constantine,  as  Viceroy 
of  Poland.  In  the  European  congresses  at  Aix-la- 
Chapelle  in  1818,  at  Troppau,  Laybach,  and  Verona, 
the  growing  reactionary  tendencies  of  the  former 
pupil  of  Laharpe  were  noticeable  to  all.  He  hesi- 
tated between  the  freedom  of  Greece  and  die 
legitimate  right  of  the  Sultan,  and  ultimately,  to 
please  European  diplomacy,  abandoned  the  cause 
of  Greece.*  **  It  was  expected,"  writes  Alexander's 
admirer,  Madame  Choiseul-Gouffier,  "  that  the  Em- 
peror, as  the  head  of  the  Greek  Church  in  Russia, 
would  declare  himself  the  protector  of  his  brothers 
in  religion,  and  that  he  would  not  resist  the  appeal 
to  succour  them  and  expel  the  Turks  from  Europe." 
But,  adds  the  authoress,  the  European  governments 
saw  in  the  effort  of  the  Greeks  to  recover  inde- 
pendence a  .dangerous  revolutionary  spirit — a  spirit 
which,  for  forty  years,  had  been  working  to  under- 
mine the  thrones  of  Europe  and  "  to  overthrow  the 
powers  established  by  law  and  by  divine  sanction."* 
Alexander,  who  had  formerly  considered  hereditary 
sovereignty  an  injustice,  sacrificed  the  independence 
of  Greece  for  the  sake  of  that  divine  sanction. 

"  I  cannot  and  will  not  favour  the  insurrection  of 
the  Greeks,"  said  Alexander,  *'  because  such  a  step 
would  be  contrary  to  the  system  I  have  adopted, 
and  it  would  certainly  destroy  that  peace  which  I 
have  tried  so  hard  to  establish,  a  peace  so  necessary 
to  Europe."  *     He  became  the  leader  of  European 

^  Puipin,  /.A,  p.  625. 

*  Choiseul-Gouffier,  /.r.,  pp.  300,  501,  307,  308.  '  Ibid, 


FINITA   LA   COMMEDIA  381 

reaction,  and  not  only  did  he  show  himself  the 
enemy  of  the  liberal  aspirations  of  the  Italians  and 
Spaniards,  but  Russian  troops  played  the  r61e  of 
gendarmes  in  the  service  of  the  absolute  monarchies 
of  Europe.^ 

Two  events  seemed  to  have  hastened  the  re- 
actionary evolution  in  the  mind  of  the  Tsar.  His 
agent  Kotzebue  was  assassinated  by  Maurice  Sand, 
ajid  his  favourite  regiment  of  the  Semeonovsky 
guard  was  driven  to  mutiny  by  the  cruel  treatment 
it  met  at  the  hands  of  its  colonel,  a  German 
named  Schwartz.  The  Tsar  was  at  Troppau  at 
the  moment,  and  Metternich,  who  had  received 
information  of  the  mutiny,  announced  the  news  to 
him,  and  cleverly  availed  himself  of  this  incident  to 
shake  Alexander's  liberalism,  proving  to  him  that 
he  was  continually  the  dupe  of  his  generous  ideas. 
The  reaction  and  repression  already  inaugurated 
by  Araktsheev  was  continued  with  more  vigour. 
Magnitzky,  the  rector  {papetshitef)  of  the  Uni- 
versity of  Kazan,  organised  the  teaching  there  in 
accordance  with  the  "act  of  the  Holy  Alliance." 
Eleven  professors  were  dismissed,  independent 
thought  was  stifled,  and  suspicious  books  excluded 
from  the  library.  The  science  of  medicine  was 
almost  suppressed  ;  it  was  to  be  a  Christian  science, 
and  dissection  was  forbidden.*  Thus  the  dreamer 
of  republics,  the  man  who  had  considered  hereditary 
sovereignty  a  gross  injustice,  had  turned  a  leader  of 
reaction,  an  upholder  of  autocracy,  and  an  enemy 
of  free  and  independent  thought 

To  say,  however,  that  Alexander  felt  quite  con- 
vinced of  the  justice  and  necessity  of  his  reactionary 

*  Puipin,  ibid,  "  /<feV/.,  /.^.,  pp.  633,  626. 


382     THE   CURSE   OF   THE    ROMANOVS 

policy  would  be  wrong.  That  dualism  which  was 
noticeable  in  his  character  and  caused  nothing  about 
him  to  appear  durable,  never  left  him.  ''  People  may 
say  of  me  what  they  like/'  he  declared  in  1825,  *'  but 
I  have  lived  and  shall  die  a  republican."  This 
wavering  state  of  mind  increased  his  melancholy. 
His  policy  was  marked  by  weakness,  inconsis- 
tency»  and  sadness,  more  than  by  severity,  and 
his  tone  of  mind  was  reflected  in  the  inhabitants 
of  St.  Petersburg.^  A  change  had  also  taken  place 
in  the  Tsar's  private  life,  and  troubles  of  a  more 
intimate  nature  tended  to  increase  his  mysticism 
and  his  feeling  of  boredom  and  world-weariness,  all 
of  which  could  not  escape  the  vigilant  eyes  of  hb 
friends.  *'  Russia  has  had  sufficient  glory  abroad," 
said  the  Tsar  to  Lobyanovsky,  Governor  of  Pensa, 
in  1824,  ''but  when  I  think  how  little  has  been 
done  in  the  interior  of  the  country,  I  feel  a  heavy 
load  on  my  breast.  It  makes  me  tired."  *  He  felt 
the  heavy  burden  of  his  vocation  and  maintained 
that  he  had  given  up  all  terrestrial  joys  and  had 
found  consolation  in  religion  only.  "It  is  only 
by  calling  religion  to  my  aid  that  I  have  gained 
that  tranquillity  of  soul  and  that  peace  of  mind 
which  are  more  valua'ble  than  all  the  fleeting  happi- 
ness of  our  terrestrial  life.  Were  it  not  for  this 
religion,  so  holy,  so  simple,  and  so  pure,  I  should 
scarcely  have  had  the  force  to  carry  the  burden  of 
my  position.  And  how  plain  are  the  precepts  of  this 
sublime  religion,  appealing  alike  to  the  most  simple 
and  the  most  enlightened  spirits.  Only  resdess 
minds   will  endeavour  to  discover  and  dwell  on 

*  Vigcl,  "  Reminiscences,"  Moscow,  vol.  vi,  p.  66. 

*  Lobyanovsky,  Zt^ki^  Moscow,  1872,  p.  297. 


FINITA   LA   COMMEDIA  383 

subtleties  which  they  scarcely  understand  them- 
selves. Thus,  for  instance,  Madame  Kruedener 
has  perhaps  good  intentions,  but  she  has  caused 
irreparable  evil."* 

His  life  became  that  of  a  man  weary  of  the 
world,  yearning  for  solitude  and  shunning  gaiety 
and  pleasure.  In  a  conversation  with  Madame 
ChoiseuI-Gouf5fier  in  1822,  the  Tsar  expressed  his 
astonishment  at  the  partiality  of  the  King  of  France 
for  a  certain  lady  at  his  Court,  Z06  Victoire  Talon, 
Countess  of  Cay  la.  **  How  can  Louis  XV  HI  care 
for  mistresses  at  the  age  of  sixty -seven  ?  "  asked  the 
Tsar.  And  when  Madame  Gouffier  observed  that 
it  was  only  a  Platonic  affection,  Alexander  replied : 
"  I  do  not  admit  even  that ;  I  am  forty-five,  while 
Louis  XVI 1 1  is  sixty -seven,  and  I  have  long  given 
up  that  sort  of  thing."*  "The  Tsar's  private  life 
during  the  past  few  years,"  writes  a  contemporary 
author,  "  has  undergone  a  great  change ;  it  differs 
in  every  respect  from  that  led  by  him  during  the 
early  years  of  his  reign,  and  this  alteration  shows 
him  to  be  naturally  of  a  deeply  melancholy  tem- 
perament. While  still  under  middle  age,  and  in 
possession  of  full  life  and  strength,  he  withdrew 
himself  from  companionship,  and  entered  into  a 
sad  and  lonely  manner  of  living.  At  all  times  of 
the  year  he  rises  at  six  o'clock  in  the  morning, 
and  works  till  eight  o'clock ;  he  then  takes  a  short 
walk,  and  on  his  return  has  a  light  breakfast.  At 
noon,  accompanied  only  by  a  few  attendants,  he 
starts  in  his  carriage  to  drive  from  Tsarsko^-S61o, 
where  as  a  rule  he  resides,  to  Pavlovski,  a  charming 

*  Russian  Archives,  1867,  p.  1037. 

'  Madame  Choiseul- Gouffier,  l.c.y  p.  308. 


384    THE   CURSE   OF   THE    ROMANOVS 

country  residence  in  the  neighbourhood,  in  order 
to  visit  the  dowager  -  empress  and  the  grand 
duchesses.  On  his  return  home  he  either  drives 
alone  or  with  the  Empress,  after  which  he  takes 
another  walk  of  an  hour;  he  then  retires  to  his 
private  rooms,  from  which  he  frequendy  does  not 
emerge  during  the  whole  evening.  The  time  which 
others  in  his  position  give  to  familiar  intercourse  with 
their  families,  or  spend  among  their  intimate  friends 
or  with  distinguished  personages,  he  devotes  en- 
tirely to  serious  work,  and  to  the  contemplation 
of  visionary  realms  in  which  his  spirit  loves  to 
wander.  This  is  the  usual  routine  of  his  life  at 
Tsarsko6-S^lo,  where  he  spends  the  summer ;  and 
there  is  little  more  variety  in  the  daily  round  of 
occupation  during  his  sojourn  in  the  Winter  Palace. 
The  courtyard  of  the  latter  has  been  turned  into 
a  drilling  ground,  and  thither  punctually  at  nine 
o'clock  in  the  morning,  he  repairs  to  see  the  guard 
appointed  for  the  day  parade  before  him.  He 
seems  to  have  originally  imposed  this  upon  himself 
as  a  duty,  but  it  has  become  a  source  of  pleasure  to 
him,  although  it  must  be  an  exceedingly  mono- 
tonous kind  of  amusement  According  to  the 
weather,  he  either  drives  out  towards  midday  in 
an  open  carriage,  or  in  a  one-horse  sleigh,  for  his 
usual  visit  to  the  grand  duchesses ;  not  infrequently 
he  goes  on  foot,  and  under  any  circumstances  he 
is  unaccompanied  by  attendants.  He  returns  be- 
tween two  and  three  o'clock,  dines,  everything 
being  ordered  in  the  same  way  as  at  Tsarskoe- 
Sdlo,  and  here  as  there  the  day  now  practically 
comes  to  an  end."^ 

^  Cf.  Dupr6  de  Saint-Maure,  VHermiU  en  Russie, 


FINITA   LA   COMMEDIA  385 

In  former  years  Alexander  was  fond  of  attend- 
ing the  public  theatres,  but  he  entirely  gave  up 
this  amusement  in  later  days  and  also  abolished 
the  performances  which  had,  since  Catherine's  time, 
been  given  at  the  Hermitage. 

M.  Dupr6  de  St.  Maure  tells  us  further  that 
Alexander  was  extremely  particular  as  to  the 
cleanliness  of  any  table  or  writing-desk  at  which 
he  worked ;  he  could  not  bear  the  least  untidiness, 
or  the  least  speck  of  dust,  or  the  least  little  piece 
of  paper  that  was  not  necessary  for  his  work ;  he 
dusted  everything  himself  a  second  time  before 
using  it,  and  then  carefully  put  it  back  in  the 
right  place.  On  each  of  his  tables  and  writing- 
desks  were  regularly  to  be  seen  a  folded  duster 
and  ten  newly-cut  quill  pens ;  not  one  of  the 
pens  was  ever  used  more  than  once,  even  if 
it  had  only  served  to  sign  a  name.  One  of 
the  Court  attendants  was  charged  with  the 
duty  of  supplying  the  pens,  and  for  this  he 
received  an  annual  payment  of  30CX)  roubles. 
This  love  of  order,  even  in  the  smallest  matters, 
is  a  trait  of  character  which  must  not  be  over- 
looked. 

The  change  which  came  over  Alexander  subse- 
quent to  the  great  period  of  political  commotion 
was  most  remarkable.  He  appeared  to  enter  on 
an  entirely  new  phase  of  existence,  and,  according 
to  his  own  words,  the  event  which  led  to  this 
transformation  was  the  burning  of  Moscow,  his 
mind  being  thereby  more  alienated  from  earthly 
affairs.  "Certain  men,"  says  M.  Dupr6  de  St. 
Maure,  "exhibit  no  striking  change  in  character 
between   their  youthful   days  and   those   of  riper 

2  B 


386    THE  CURSE   OF   THE    ROMANOVS 

age.  Alexander  in  his  youth  was  noted  for  the 
simplicity  of  his  tastes  and  love  of  quiet  amuse- 
ments, but  from  the  moment  he  mounted  the 
throne  he  seemed  possessed  with  a  perpetual 
desire  to  relieve  the  strain  entailed  upon  him  by 
the  duties  of  his  high  position,  by  seeking  dis- 
traction in  society.  Above  all,  he  took  delight  in 
the  French  theatre,  and  found  pleasure  also  in  the 
company  of  the  French  actors.  He  treated  them 
with  a  kindness  which  they  occasionally  abused  by 
an  unbecoming  familiarity  of  address,  and  which 
would  certainly  have  offended  a  less  kindly 
disposed  and  indulgent  sovereign.  "  Now," 
continues  this  author,  "he  never  exchanges 
a  word  with  any  actor,  nor  does  he  ever  enter 
a  theatre.  A  complete  revolution  has  taken 
place  both  in  his  tastes  and  in  his  manner  of 
behaviour." 

In  his  domestic  life  Alexander  was  not  happy. 
His  grandmother  married  him  off  very  young. 
Catherine  had  chosen  a  wife  for  her  darling 
grandson,  and  was  sure  that  the  union  between 
the  boy  of  seventeen  and  the  girl  of  fifteen 
could  not  fail  to  be  a  happy  one.  But  she  was 
mistaken.  In  spite  of  all  her  qualities  the 
Grand  Duchess  Elizabeth  was  unable  to  rivet 
her  boy-husband's  real  affections.  It  has  been 
pointed  out  above  that  Alexander  was  a  ladies' 
man,  and  Elizabeth,  who  not  only  possessed  ail 
the  German  domestic  virtues,  but  was  elegant, 
beautiful,  talented,  gentle,  and  amiable,  lacked 
that  brilliant  frivolity,  that  beauts  du  diable  which 
attracted  Alexander.  It  was  that  dme  de  demi- 
mondaine  which   the  Grand   Duchess  lacked,  and 


FINITA    LA  COMMEDIA  387 

which  alone  could  make  the  affections  of  an 
inconstant  temperament,  such  as  that  of  Alexander, 
somewhat  durable.  In  spite,  therefore,  of  all  her 
attainments  she  failed  to  complete  Alexander's 
happiness.  ''She  was  lacking  in  the  respon- 
siveness which  his  own  excitable  nature  required, 
and  perhaps  even  in  that  touch  of  coquetry 
and  of  gay  frivolity  which  in  Russia — a  country 
where,  above  all  others,  appearance  counted 
for  more  than  actual  character — were  so  highly 
prized.  Moreover,  Catherine  had  spoilt  the  young 
couple  by  her  exaggerated  motherly  precautions. 
The  Grand  Duke  was  so  young  when  she  married 
him,  and  she  herself  had  so  little  respect  for  the 
bond  which  she  had  hastened  to  impose  upon  her 
grandson,  that  she  allowed  herself  to  encroach 
upon  and  to  place  restrictions  on  the  inviolable 
and  mysterious  freedom  of  marriage.  The  two 
daughters  who  were  bom  during  the  first  years  of 
this  marriage  died  in  infancy,  and  thus  a  link,  more 
lasting  than  that  of  passion,  was  severed  be- 
tween the  parents.  The  want  of  stability  in  his 
character  and  his  longing  for  love  led  Alex- 
ander into  liaisons  with  other  women,  and 
among  them  one  held  him  in  her  thrall  for  eleven 
years.  The  secrecy  maintained  in  connection  with 
this  attachment  lent  it  an  additional  charm ;  three 
children  were  the  fruit  of  this  union,  of  whom 
two  died  young.  Elizabeth  possibly  was  mistaken 
in  allowing  herself  to  listen  to  her  wounded  pride ; 
she  made  no  effort  to  win  back  her  husband's 
affection,  but,  on  the  contrary,  refused  any  further 
meeting  with  him.  She  sought  consolation  in 
study,  which  she  pursued  with  even  greater  ardour 


388    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

than  formerly,  and  found  pleasure  only  in  doing 
good." ' 

Nevertheless  Elizabeth,  with  that  truly  feminine 
nature  which  makes  a  woman  cling  to  a  man  the 
more  passionately  the  less  he  cares  for  her,  con- 
tinued at  heart  to  love  her  faithless  husband  ;  she 
could  never  look  at  the  portrait  of  the  fickle  Alex- 
ander without  shedding  a  flood  of  tears.  But  it 
was  only  during  the  last  year  of  his  reign  that  the 
Tsar  grew  really  attached  to  his  wife.  The  two 
daughters,  as  stated  above,  that  his  wife  had  borne 
him  died  early,  and  of  his  three  illegitimate  children 
one  alone  was  alive,  a  girl  beautiful  as  her  mother 
and  of  a  charming  disposition.     She  was  the  pride 

and  joy  of  her  father ;  but  Sophia  N 's  health 

was  delicate^  and  Alexander  was  forced  to  send  her 
away  to  the  south  of  France.  His  illicit  connec- 
tion with  the  girl's  mother  had  by  this  time  been 
brought  to  a  close.  The  latter,  a  married  woman, 
was  as  faithless  to  her  lover  as  she  had  been  to  her 
husband,  and  nothing  remained  to  Alexander  of 
their  short  period  of  bliss  together  but  the  one 
beloved  child,  on  whom  he  lavished  the  tenderest 
affection,  suffering  doubtless  certain  g^awings  of 
conscience  from  which  a  man  of  his  spiritual  out- 
look could  hardly  escape.  He  sought  to  fill  the 
void  in  his  heart,  made  by  his  daughter  s  absence, 
by  frequenting  private  houses  and  joining  in  the 
family  circle  round  the  hearth,  choosing  by  pre- 
ference the  homes  of  cultured  German  housewives, 
— who  excel  in  all  domestic  virtues, — where  he 
passed  many  a  pleasant  evening  in  free  and  lively 
converse.     Alexander  desired  to  be  received  only 

^  Dupr^  de  St.  Maure. 


FINITA   LA   COMMEDIA  389 

as  a  friend  and  ordinary  guest,  and  forbade  all 
approach  to  ceremony ;  he  looked  with  delight 
on  the  order,  cleanliness,  and  quiet  peace  which 
reigned  in  many  of  these  households,  where,  by  the 
help  of  simple  means  and  often  of  very  limited 
funds,  they  obtained  results  which,  as  he  asserted, 
he  failed  to  achieve  even  with  the  help  of  a  legion 
of  servants  and  of  immense  sums  of  money.  The 
pleasure  he  enjoyed  in  these  homely  circles  was, 
however,  spoilt  for  him  when  he  became  aware  that 
many  worthy  men,  old  friends  of  these  houses, 
abstained  from  coming,  fearing  that  their  pre- 
sence might  be  irksome  to  him,  while  a  crew  of 
flatterers  and  parasites  insinuated  themselves  into 
his  company,  anxious  for  intimacy  with  the  Em- 
peror (who  was  always  ready  to  be  friendly),  in 
order  to  serve  their  own  selfish  and  ambitious  plans. 
Distressed  in  the  end  at  this  invasion,  since  his  one 
wish  was  to  be  nothing  more  than  a  man  among 
men,  he  shut  himself  up  more  closely  than  ever  in 
his  palace,  and  the  longing,  which  dated  from  the 
burning  of  Moscow  and  the  indecisive  campaign  of 
the  early  months  of  18 13,  to  detach  himself  from 
earthly  affairs  and  to  seek  healing  for  his  troubled 
spirit  by  entering  upon  a  religious  life,  gradually 
took  a  stronger  hold  upon  him. 

Meanwhile  the  young  daughter  of  the  Emperor, 
although  still  in  delicate  health  and  showing  signs 
of  consumption,  had,  contrary  to  the  doctor  s  advice, 
left  Paris  and  started  on  her  long  journey  back  to 
St.  Petersburg  and  the  cruel  climate  of  the  North. 
She  was  now  seventeen  years  of  age,  and  had 
already  won  the  love  —  which  she  returned  —  of 
the  grandson  of  a  man  whose  whole  life  had  been 


390    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

devoted  to  the  service  of  the  State.  Alexander 
willingly  gave  his  consent  to  their  betrothal,  and 
everything  was  being  prepared  for  the  forthcoming 
marriage  ;  but  his  young  daughter  was  doomed 
never  to  enjoy  the  magnificent  trousseau  which 
had  been  ordered  from  the  leading  artistes  in  Paris, 
for  she  arrived  in  St.  Petersburg  only  to  die.  The 
direful  news  of  her  death  was  brought  to  the 
Emperor  while  reviewing  his  Guards;  one  of  the 
adjutant  -  generals  approached  him  and  asked  to 
speak  with  him  in  private.  Hardly  were  the  first 
words  out  of  his  mouth  before  the  Emperor  began 
to  tremble  violently  while  a  deathlike  pallor  over- 
spread his  face.  He  had,  however,  sufiicient  self- 
control  to  allow  his  Guards  to  continue  their  parade, 
but  he  was  overheard  to  exclaim,  "  The  punishment 
of  my  sins  has  now  fallen  upon  me." 

Sophia  N was  buried  in  the  churchyard  of 

the  Convent  of  the  Holy  Trinity,  not  far  from 
Strelna  on  the  highroad  between  Riga  and  the 
Gulf  of  Finland.  Here  reposed  the  remains  of 
many  members  of  the  more  noted  families,  among^ 
them  Count  Zoubov,  who  gained  notoriety  through 
his  connection  with  Paul's  tragic  end ;  another  of 
the  chief  monuments  commemorated  a  Princess 
Golytzin. 

The  words  uttered  by  Alexander  on  receiving 
the  news  of  his  daughter's  death  are  noteworthy, 
as  an  indication  of  the  condition  of  his  mind  at  that 
time.  The  cruel  blow  which  had  fallen  upon  him 
appeared  to  Alexander  as  the  judgment  of  God. 
It  brought  home  to  his  conscience  the  sin  he  had 
committed  against  his  wife,  and  he  now  recognised 
the  fact  that  only  a  genuine  repentance  and   an 


FINITA   LA   COMMEDIA  391 

entire  change  of  conduct  could  ever  lead  to  their 
reconciliation.  The  generosity  and  natural  grati- 
tude of  his  disposition  helped  forward  the  work  of 
religion,  for  Elizabeth  herself  had  wept  tears  for 
her  rival's  daughter,  and  no  one  had  shown  more 
sympathy  with  the  sorrow  of  the  father.  Now  at 
last  his  eyes  were  opened  to  the  angelic  goodness 
and  patience  of  his  wife.  He  sought  her  forgive- 
ness, which  was  quickly  and  freely  given,  and  from 
this  time  onward  they  were  inseparable,  the 
Emperor  endeavouring  by  the  tenderness  of  his 
care,  by  his  consideration  and  respect,  to  erase  the 
past  from  her  memory.  Sorrow  and  anxiety  had, 
however,  for  long  past  been  undermining  the  health 
of  the  Empress,  and  a  slight  chest  affection  had  by 
degrees  become  a  chronic  disease.  At  last  her 
doctors,  seeing  that  their  skill  was  of  no  avail  to 
check  the  progress  of  the  evil,  decided  that  she  must 
seek  a  warmer  climate,  and  advised  her  to  go  to 
Baden,  her  native  place.  But  Elizabeth  refused  to 
listen  to  their  advice,  and  could  not  be  induced  to 
leave  Russia.  "  The  wife  of  an  Emperor  of  Russia 
should  die  nowhere  but  in  Russia,"  she  declared. 
She  was  allowed  to  follow  her  own  will,  but  as  it 
was  then  thought  that  she  might  suffer  less  in 
the  southern  provinces,  it  was  suggested  that  she 
should  go  to  the  Crimea.  Alexander,  however, 
finally   decided   upon   Taganrog. 

The  Empress  Elizabeth's  health  having  grown 
steadily  worse,  it  became  necessary  for  her  to  leave 
St.  Petersburg  without  delay.  Alexander  was 
anxious  to  accompany  her,  that  he  might  himself 
superintend  all  the  preparations  for  her  comfort, 
and  make  the  journey  as  easy  for  her  as  possible. 


392     THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

A  journey  of  nineteen  hundred  versts  was  no  light 
undertaking,  and  Alexander  had  already,  early  in 
this  same  year,  travelled  over  the  same  distance; 
he  had,  however,  so  accustomed  himself  to  seek  dis- 
traction in  these  endless  journeys,  that  a  thousand 
versts  or  so,  more  or  less,  did  not  make  much  differ- 
ence to  him,  and,  in  this  case,  it  was  a  matter  which 
concerned  his  peace  of  mind,  for  by  fulfilling  this 
duty  to  his  wife  he  sought  to  quiet  his  conscience. 
It  had  been  his  custom,  when  setting  out  on  one  of 
his  long  journeys,  to  make  the  Church  of  Our  Lady 
of  Kazan,  which  had  been  built  and  consecrated 
during  his  reign,  his  starting-point  Alexander  had 
fixed  the  1 3th  September  as  the  day  for  his  departure. 
The  day  previous  was  a  Feast  Day  in  the  Russian 
Church,  held  in  honour  of  the  hero,  Alexander 
Nevsky,  whose  remains  had  been  brought  that 
day  from  Vladimir  to  the  banks  of  the  Neva. 
On  this  occasion  the  clergy,  high  and  low,  passed 
in  lordly  procession  from  the  above-named  Church 
of  Our  Lady  of  Kazan  to  the  Convent  of  St. 
Alexander  Nevsky ;  the  latter  had  been  erected 
by  Peter  the  Great,  and  thither  he  had  had  the 
relics  of  the  saint  conveyed,  in  order  to  consecrate 
the  ground,  which  for  long  had  been  in  the 
possession  of  a  neighbouring  heretical  race.  Ac- 
cording to  a  time-honoured  custom  the  whole 
Imperial  family  attended  High  Mass  that  day  in 
the  convent  church,  and  Alexander  did  not  fail 
to  perform  his  devotions  here  on  this  particular 
Feast  Day.  Before  leaving  the  church  he  informed 
the  Metropolitan  and  the  Archimandrite  that  he 
should  return  there  the  following  day,  which  was  the 
one  arranged  for  starting  on   his  journey.     This 


FINITA   LA  COMMEDIA  393 

announcement  was  unexpected,  for,  as  stated  above, 
Alexander  s  usual  custom  was  to  make  the  Church 
of  Our  Lady  of  Kazan  his  starting-point,  but  the 
prelates  were  even  more  surprised  when  the 
Emperor  begged  them  and  the  whole  brother- 
hood to  be  there  to  receive  him  at  four  o'clock 
the  following  morning,  in  order  to  celebrate  a  Te 
Deum  service — at  least,  so  ran  the  official  report, 
but  it  was  generally  asserted  that  a  funeral  service 
was  performed.  At  any  rate,  Alexander  gave  the 
Metropolitan  to  understand  that  it  was  not  neces- 
sary for  any  one  to  be  informed  of  his  visit. 

Alexander's  mind  was  at  that  time  much 
occupied  with  thoughts  of  death,  and  he  had 
chosen  the  Convent  of  Saint  Alexander  Nevsky 
as  his  burial-place.  No  crowned  head  had  hitherto 
been  interred  there;  Catherine  had  deposited  the 
body  of  her  unfortunate  husband  in  the  vaults  of 
this  convent  merely  for  the  purpose  of  having 
it  secretly  conveyed  away,  as  she  refused  him 
an  Imperial  funeral,  and  the  body  had  remained 
there  until  removed  by  his  son  Paul  L  By  what- 
ever reason  he  may  have  been  urged  to  this 
departure  from  his  established  habit,  Alexander, 
on  the  appointed  day  and  at  the  fixed  hour,  arrived 
at  the  convent  where  the  Priest  Seraphim  stood 
awaiting  him  at  the  head  of  his  monks,  who  were 
all  in  mourning  garments ;  as  the  aged  prince  of 
the  Church  had  not  thought  it  becoming  that 
they  should  put  on  festal  robes  on  the  day  when 
they  were  to  bid  farewell  to  their  sovereign. 

The  Emperor  drove  up  in  his  travelling 
carriage,  accompanied  only  by  his  faithful  coach- 
man.    He  was  clad  in   a  plain  military  overcoat 


394    THE    CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

with  an  ordinary  field-cap,  known  as  a  "  Furazhka/* 
on  his  head,  and  his  officer's  cloak  over  his 
shoulders.  On  reaching  the  gates  of  the  convent 
he  leaped  from  the  carriage  and  fervently  kissed 
the  cross  held  out  to  him  by  the  Metropolitan; 
the  latter,  after  blessing  him,  led  him  across  the 
convent  square  to  the  Cathedral,  the  monks  fol- 
lowing, as  they  sang  the  hymn  "  May  the  Lord 
deliver  thee  and  thy  people."  As  soon  as  the  Em- 
peror had  crossed  the  threshold  of  the  Cathedral 
the  outer  gates  were  carefully  relocked.  The 
procession  made  its  way  through  the  lofty  vaults 
till  it  reached  the  splendid  monument  to  the  hero 
saint,  in  front  of  which  was  the  reliquary  contain- 
ing his  remains.  Here  the  Metropolitan  paused 
and  offered  up  the  usual  prayer  for  travellers  which 
it  was  customary  to  address  to  this  saint.  Mass 
was  then  served,  and,  while  the  Gospel  was  being 
read,  Alexander  walked  up  to  the  open  doors  of 
the  Ikonostas  (a  partition  painted  with  figures  of 
saints  which  conceals  the  altar  from  the  uncon- 
secrated  worshippers)  and,  kneeling  in  front  of  the 
altar,  commanded  the  Metropolitan  to  rest  the 
volumes  of  the  Holy  Scriptures  on  his  head.  At 
the  close  of  the  service  the  Metropolitan  presented 
Alexander  with  a  picture  of  the  Saviour,  which 
he  was  to  carry  with  him  on  his  journey.  The 
Emperor  kissed  the  sacred  talisman,  and  after 
performing  further  devotions  before  the  saints 
reliquary,  he  returned  to  his  carriage,  accompanied 
by  the  monks  singing  as  before.^ 

Alexander  started  a  few  days  before  the  Em- 

»  Cf,  Zaikin,  T.,  "  The  Last  Days  of  Alexander  I,''  St.  Petersburg:, 
1827,  pp.  5-9. 


FINITA   LA   COMMEDIA  395 

press,  who  left  St.  Petersburg  on  the   15th  Sep- 
tember 1825,  and,  accompanied  by  Prince  Volkonsky, 
reached  Taganrog  after  travelling  for  twenty  days. 
The  Tsar  met  her  at  the  last  station  before  reach- 
ing the  town,  which  they  entered  together  on  the 
5th   October.     They  drove   to   the   Castle,  where 
he  had  personally  superintended  the  arrangement 
of  her  rooms,  and  in  which,  in  spite  of  the  limited 
space  it  afforded,  he  also  took  up  his  abode.     Alex- 
ander, who  was  now  trying  to  make  up  for  the 
neglect  of  his  wife  in  the  past,   was  unceasingly 
occupied  in  providing  for  her  comfort,  and  devoted 
all   his  time  to  her  after  her  arrival.     Her  health 
visibly  improved.    Alexander  left  her  for  a  short  time, 
visited  the  shores  of  the  Sea  of  Azov,  and  repaired 
to  Novo-Tsherkask,  the  capital  of  the  Don  Cossacks. 
On  the  20th  of  October  he  went  to  the  Crimea, 
a  journey  of  seventeen  days,  at  the  invitation  of 
Count  Voronzov,  Governor-General  of  New  Russia, 
to  visit  his  magnificent  castle  at  Aloupka  on   the 
sea  coast  of  the  south.     Having  visited  the  domain 
of    Orianda,   which    he   had   bought   from    Count 
Koushelev-Besborodko,  he  went  to   the  estate   of 
Princess  Golytzin,   where  an  epidemic  fever  was 
then   raging.     Altogether   he   exposed   himself  to 
great  fatigues,  rode  thirty-five  versts  on  horseback 
in  one  day,  walked  a  great  deal  and  ate  much  of 
many  kinds  of  fruit  that  were  offered  to  him,  with 
the  result  that  a  disorder  of  the  stomach  was  pro- 
duced.    In  spite  of  his  indisposition  he  continued 
his  excursions.     He  wished  to  see  everything,  and 
mingled  with  Christians,  Moslems,  and  Jews.     At 
Balaclava  he  reviewed   the  Greek   battalion   with 
Diebitsh.     He  visited  Bakhtshi-Sarai,  the  ancient 


396     THE   CURSE  OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

residence  of  the  Khans  of  the  Crimea,  and  repaired 
to  the  colony  of  the  Caraite  Jews  at  Djoufout 
Kaiek,  where  he  inspected  the  Synagogue,^  He 
went  to  Eupatoria  and  thence  to  MariopoL  His 
illness  had  in  the  meantime  increased ;  he  was 
a  prey  to  fever,  and  either  slept  much  in  his 
carriage  or  was  for  hours  sunk  in  abstraction.' 
He  returned  to  Taganrog  in  a  poor  state  of 
health.  But,  in  spite  of  the  settled  character 
of  his  illness,  he  refused  to  listen  to  medical  ad- 
vice, and  could  only  with  difficulty  be  prevailed 
upon  to  take  some  medicine.'  He  remained  for 
long  intervals  silent  and  apparently  unconscious. 
He  now  learned  of  the  existence  of  a  conspiracy 
which  had  been  formed  for  the  purpose  of 
assassinating  him,  and  painful  recollections  of  the 
violent  death  of  his  father  came  back  to  him. 

Many  incidents  occurring  about  this  time  be- 
trayed the  condition  of  the  Emperor  s  mind.  On 
the  26th,  being  in  an  excited  state  bordering  on 
delirium,  he  called  out  to  his  doctor,  Sir  James 
Wylie,  his  face  contorted  with  distress,  "Oh,  my 
friend!  what  a  hideous  and  disloyal  thing  to  have 
done!  What  monsters,  what  ungrateful  wretches! 
And  I  did  so  genuinely  desire  their  welfare!" 
Conscious  of  his  own  benevolent  intentions,  it  was 
doubly  wounding  to  him  to  feel  that  he  was  mis- 
understood. "It  was  a  cruel  fate,"  writes  Schnitz- 
ler,  "which  ordained  that  his  last  hours  should 
have  been  so  embittered,  and  that  he  was  pre- 
vented from  yielding  up  his  soul  to  God  in  peace.*' 
The  Emperors  illness,  which  was  declared  to  be 

^  Zaikin,  /.^.,  p.  20.  '  /.r.,  p.  17. 

•  Lc.<,  p.  21. 


FINITA   LA   COMMEDIA  397 

of  a  typhoid  character,  grew  rapidly  worse,  and 
the  doctors,  having  no  further  hope  of  saving  his 
life,  made  known  the  danger  of  Alexanders  con- 
dition to  Prince  Peter  Volkonsky,  Meanwhile  the 
Emperor,  tired  of  the  various  remedies  to  which 
he  had  been  submitted,  obstinately  refused  to 
follow  any  further  advice  from  his  doctors.  Prince 
Volkonsky,  in  the  belief  that  religious  persuasion 
would  have  more  effect  on  the  Emperor  than  that 
of  the  doctors,  begged  the  Empress  to  speak  with 
her  husband  and  remind  him  of  the  last  duties 
which  he  owed  as  a  Christian.  Much  troubled 
at  heart  at  being  forced  to  perform  this  painful 
office,  but  convinced  that  it  was  the  only  means 
of  saving  her  husband,  the  Empress  accordingly 
went  to  him,  and,  taking  him  by  the  hand,  gently 
and  kindly  spoke  to  him  as  desired. 

"  Am  I,  then,  so  very  ill  ?  *'  asked  Alexander. 

•'No,  dear  friend,"  answered  Elizabeth;  ''but 
you  refuse  all  earthly  means,  therefore  I  beg  you 
to  try  a  divine  cure." 

"  Willingly ! "  replied  the  Emperor,  and  ordered 
Wylie  to  come  to  him.  He  looked  keenly  and 
inquiringly  at  the  latter,  and  said:  **They  are 
talking  to  me  about  confession  and  the  last  sacra- 
ment.    Has  it  gone  as  far  as  that  ?  " 

"Yes,  Sire,"  answered  the  faithful  attendant, 
his  voice  choked  with  tears.  "Your  Majesty  has 
given  a  deaf  ear  to  all  my  advice,  and  I  now  speak 
to  you,  not  as  a  physician,  but  simply  as  one  plain 
man  to  another.  It  is  my  duty  to  tell  you  that  you 
have  not  a  moment  to  lose." 

The  Emperor  seized  the  doctor's  hands,  and 
pressed  them  in  his  own  with  what  little  strength 


398     THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

remained  to  him.*  The  increase  of  the  Emperors 
fever  necessitated  the  postponement  of  the  rel^us 
service,  but  early  the  following  morning,  the  27th, 
his  condition  had  become  so  alarming  that  the 
Empress  sent  in  haste  for  his  confessor.  At  six 
o'clock  the  Court  chaplain,  Feodotov,  arrived.  Alex- 
ander, raising  himself  with  difficulty,  told  the  Em- 
press he  would  like  to  be  alone  with  him,  and  then 
said  to  Feodotov  :  "  Forget  who  I  am,  and  speak 
to  me  as  you  would  to  an  ordinary  sinner."  His 
confession  did  not  take  long,  and  Alexander  then 
sent  for  his  wife  that  he  might  receive  the  sacra- 
ment in  her  presence.  She  and  his  confessor  then 
joined  in  their  petitions  to  him  to  follow  the  doctors* 
instructions,  and  to  allow  leeches  to  be  applied. 
All  opposition  on  Alexander's  part  now  ceased,  and 
from  this  time  forth  he  willingly  acceded  to  every- 
thing that  was  proposed.  Turning  to  Elizabeth  he 
said :  "  I  have  never  experienced  such  a  sense  of 
inward  peace  as  I  feel  at  this  moment ;  I  thank  you 
from  the  bottom  of  my  heart." 

Noting  that  the  red  swelling  on  his  leg  had 
disappeared,  he  exclaimed :  "  I  shall  die  like  my 
sister,"  referring  to  the  Grand  Duchess  Catherine, 
Queen  of  Wurtemberg,  who  died  in  18 19.  This 
Princess,  who  was  originally  engaged  to  the  Prince 
of  Oldenburg,  had  the  opportunity,  during  the 
Congress  at  Erfurt,  of  becoming  the  Empress  of 
France,  but  her  mother,  less  dazzled  than  Alex- 
ander by  Napoleon's  state  and  position,  resolutely 
set  her  face  against  this  alliance. 

During  the  28th  the  Emperor  lay  nearly  the 
whole  day  in  a  state  of  unconsciousness,  his  lethargy 

^  Zaildn,  Ix^  pp.  27-28. 


II 


FINITA   LA   COMMEDIA  399 

only  being  momentarily  interrupted  by  nervous  con- 
vulsions. Though  the  pulse  was  abnormally  high, 
he  hardly  gave*  a  sign  of  life,  and  in  this  desperate 
condition  he  continued  until  the  following  morning. 
At  nine  o'clock  of  the  29th,  however,  a  visible 
change  for  the  better  occurred ;  by  aid  of  the 
strongest  restoratives  he  had  been  awakened  from 
his  stupor ;  he  opened  his  eyes,  looked  towards  his 
wife,  and,  taking  hold  of  her  hands,  he  pressed  them 
to  his  lips  and  heart.  He  recognised  Prince  Peter 
Volkonsky,  and  greeted  him  with  a  faint  smile; 
the  latter,  deeply  moved,  seized  Alexander  s  hand 
preparatory  to  kissing  it,  but  the  Emperor  pre- 
vented him  by  a  sign,  for  this  mark  of  slavish 
homage,  which  had  become  customary  under  Ivan 
the  Third  for  those  who  had  received  special 
tokens  of  favour  from  him,  was  unbearable  to 
Alexander.  He  had  extracted  a  promise  from 
Volkonsky  not  to  leave  the  Empress  until  he  had 
seen  her  safely  given  back  to  her  own  family.  The 
dying  man  gathered  his  forces  together  sufficiently 
to  stammer  out  the  words :  "  What  a  beautiful 
day!"  and  as  he  felt  his  wife's  arms  flung  round 
him,  he  added  almost  in  a  loud  voice :  "  Ah,  how 
tired  you  must  be ! "  At  that  moment  the  doctor 
whispered  to  her :  "  Take  courage,  all  hope  is  not 
yet  over!"  Beside  herself  with  joy,  she  imme- 
diately sent  a  messenger  to  St.  Petersburg,  where, 
as  she  said,  "A  mother  was  waiting  in  anxious 
suspense  for  news  of  her  son."  The  message  had 
no  sooner  reached  St.  Petersburg  than  the  whole 
town  became  aware  of  the  better  news,  and  the 
people  went  wild  with  delight. 

The  sick  man  had  sunk  into  a  quiet  and  re- 


400    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

freshing  slumber,  and  his  wife  trusted  that  the 
crisis  was  now  past,  and  that  Alexander  s  good 
constitution  would  help  him  to  recover.  But  her 
hopes  were  unhappily  ill-founded. 

The  Emperor  fell  again  into  the  same  lethargric 
condition  as  before,  with  intervals  of  nervous  con- 
vulsions, and  continued  in  this  state  till  noon  the 
following  day,  when  an  interval  of  quiet  ensued. 
It  was  feared  that  in  the  exhausted  condition  of  the 
patient  a  sudden  paroxysm  might  bring  about  the 
end.     During  the  previous  night  Prince  Volkonsky 
had  tried  to  persuade  the  Empress  to  leave   her 
husband,  but  her  only  answer  was,  "  I   am    sure 
that  you  sympathise  with  me  in  my  great  trouble. 
I  beseech  you  not  to  separate  me  from  my  hus- 
band as  long  as  he  breathes.*'     And  her  faithful 
attendant  did  not  repeat  his  persuasions.     Further 
remedies  were  tried,  but  nothing  proved  of  avail  to 
rouse  the  dying  man.     On  the  ist  of  December, 
however,  he  again  opened  his  eyes,  and  although 
unable  to  speak  he  appeared  to  recognise  those 
who  were  standing  around  his  bed.     Later  in  the 
morning  he  made  an  almost  imperceptible  sig^n  to 
the  Empress  to  draw  nearer.     He  kissed  her  hand 
as  if  in  everlasting  farewell,  again  sank  back  into 
unconsciousness;  two  deep  sighs  escaped  him,  and 
a  few  minutes  later  he  breathed  his  last.    Elizabeth, 
after  performing  the  last  tender  offices  for  her  dead 
husband  and  giving  a  farewell  embrace  to  the  life- 
less body,  retired  to  her  own  apartments,  but  only 
to  return  again  and  again  to  kneel  in  prayer  for  her 
husband's  soul,  until  at  last  she  was  persuaded  to 
leave  the  house  and  remove  to  the  one  which  had 
been  prepared  for  her  by  Prince  Volkonsky.     The 


FINITA   LA  COMMEDIA         401 

letter  which  she  wrote  shortly  after  her  husband's 
death  to  the  Empress  Maria  F^odorovna  has 
become  famous: — 

'*  Dearest  Mother, —  Our  angel  is  in  heaven ! 
— ^and    I    remain    on    earth!     Who    could    have 


believed  that  I,  weak  and  sickly  as  I  am,  would 
have  been  the  one  to  survive?  Do  not  forsake 
me,  mother,  for  now  I  stand  alone  in  the  world 
of  sorrows.  Our  beloved  one  has  regained  his 
charm  of  face  in  death ;  his  smile  tells  me  that 
he  is  happy  and  that  he  is  now  looking  on  things 
of  more  beauty  than  those  of  earth.  .  .  .  Since 
my  terrible  loss  one  thought  alone  has  had  power 
to  comfort  me,  and  that  is  that  I  cannot  long 
outlive  him.  I  cherish  the  hope  of  being  ere 
long  reunited  to  him."^ 

And  Elizabeth's  hope  was  fulfilled,  for  Alex- 
ander had  only  been  dead  five  months  when  she 
too  was  laid  to  rest. 

A  post-mortem  examination  was  made  three 
days  after  Alexander's  death,  when  it  was  dis- 
covered that  there  was  water  on  the  brain.  The 
body  was  embalmed,  and  laid  out  in  state  in  a 
temporary  chapel  which  had  been  erected  in  the 
large  hall  of  the  house  in  which  the  Emperor 
had  died.  On  the  23rd  December  the  body  was 
conveyed  in  pomp  to  the  Church  of  St.  Alex- 
ander-Nevsky,  there  to  await  further  orders  from 
St.  Petersburg.  A  regiment  of  Cossacks  together 
with  the  garrison  of  the  town  lined  the  streets, 
which  were  crowded  with  mourners ;  some  of  the 
officers  walked  ahead  of  the  bier,  carrying  the  orders 

*  Shilder,  /.^.,  p.  386. 

2  C 


i 


402     THE   CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

worn  by  the  deceased  on  cushions,  others  helped 
to  bear  the  pall,  and  the  procession  was  headed 
by  the  Bishops  of  Yekaterinoslav,  of  Kherson, 
and  of  the  Tauris.  On  arriving  at  the  church  , 
the  coffin  was  deposited  on  a  raised  stage,  sur- 
rounded by  lighted  candles,  under  a  catafalque 
of  purple  velvet,  above  which  was  placed  the  Im- 
perial crown,  and  the  funeral  service  was  then 
celebrated** 

News  having  been  received  in  St.  Petersburg 
of  the  possible  recovery  of  the  Emperor,  all  St 
Petersburg  went  in  crowds  to  the  churches  to 
offer  a  thanksgiving  prayer.  The  Empress-mother, 
Maria  F^odorovna,  was  also  in  church.  The  Te 
Deum  had  not  yet  been  finished,  however,  when 
the  Grand- Duke  Nicholas  received  the  last  and 
fatal  news.  Not  wishing  to  strike  his  mother's 
heart  with  such  a  terrible  blow,  he  first  informed 
the  priest  of  the  catastrophe.  The  latter,  covering 
the  crucifix  with  a  black  veil,  slowly  and  solemnly 
approached  the  mother,  who  thus  knew  that  her 
son  was  dead.* 

When  the  intelligence  of  Alexander's  some- 
what sudden  death  reached  Europe,  people  refused 
to  believe  the  official  accounts.  Some  maintained 
that  the  Autocrat  of  all  the  Russias  had  been 
poisoned,  and,  in  fact,  when  the  coffin  containing 
the  mortal  remains  of  Alexander  was  brought  to 
St.  Petersburg,  no  one,  with  the  exception  of  the 
Imperial  family,  was  allowed  to  see  the  face  of 
the  deceased. 

"At  11.30  P.M.,*'  writes  Tarosov,  **the  clergy- 

^  Russian  Archives,  1880,  vol.  iii,  pp.  280-282. 
'  Madame  Choiseul-Goufiier,  /.r.,  p.  379. 


^1 


FINITA   LA  COMMEDIA  403 

man  and  all  officers  on  duty  in  the  chapel  at 
Tsarsko^-S^lo,  where  the  body  of  the  Emperor 
was  deposited,  were  all  sent  away,  and  only  the 
members  of  the  Imperial  family  were  allowed  to 
kiss  the  face  and  hands.  The  Empress-mother, 
Maria  F^odorovna,  exclaimed :  *  Out^  c'esi  mon 
cher  fils^  mon  cher  Alexandre^  ah !  comme  il  a 
ntatgn  /     * 

The  closed  coffin  was  exposed  in  the  Kazan 
Cathedral  for  seven  days,  but  when  the  inhabitants 
requested  that  the  coffin  should  be  opened  and  the 
face  of  the  Emperor  shown  to  the  public,  Nicholas 
I,  the  new  Emperor,  refused  to  grant  the  necessary 
permission.  "  The  reason  for  this  refusal,"  writes  a 
contemporary  author,  "  was  the  change  in  the  face 
of  the  deceased,  which  had  turned  black  already  in 
Taganrog.  That  was  also  the  reason  why  the 
funeral  rites,  performed  over  the  body  before  the 
coffin  is  closed,  were  celebrated  in  Taganrog,  as  it 
had  been  decided  not  to  open  the  coffin  on  its 
arrival  in  the  capital.' 

The  funeral  took  place  on  March  25th,  and  at 
2  P.M.  cannon-shots  announced  to  the  inhabitants 
of  St  Petersburg  that  Alexander  I  had  been 
laid  to  his  last  sleep  in  the  fortress  of  Peter  and 
Paul. 

All  these  incidents  gave  rise  to  various  rumours  : 
Alexander  had  been  assassinated,  said  some;  he 
was  not  dead  at  all,  but  had  disappeared,  and  some 
one  else  had  been  buried  in  his  place.  '^  The  death 
of  the  Emperor  Alexander,''  wrote  Lord  Augustus 

^  Russian  Archives,  1867,  p.  1322  ;  Roussfcaya  Starina^  1872,  vol. 
vi ;  Denkwurdigkeiten  aus  dem  Leben^  Leopold  von  GerUuks^  Berlin, 
1 891,  i,  p.  20.  *  Rousskaya  Starinoy  Lc. 


404    THE   CURSE   OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

Loftus,^  "has  always  been  a  mystery  which  has 
never  been  explained,  and  has  given  rise  to  many 
false  reports  of  his  having  been  poisoned,  of  his  self- 
destruction,  and  of  assassination/'  Sir  C.  Wylie, 
the  Emperor's  physician,  told  Lord  Loftus,  "that 
nothing  could  induce  the  Emperor  to  follow  the 
advice  and  course  recommended  by  his  physician, 
and  that  it  seemed  as  if  he  courted  death,  and  would 
take  no  means  to  avert  it/''  In  the  second  half  of 
the  last  century  these  rumours  found  again  currency. 
On  the  2oth  January  1 864  there  died  in  Tomsk,  at  the 
age  of  eighty-seven,  a  hermit  of  the  name  of  Feodor 
Kousmitsh.  He  had  been  surrounded  by  the 
aureole  of  saintliness.  He  was  of  a  tall  stature  and 
imposing  demeanour.  His  manner  was  very  gentle, 
but  often  his  glance  became  severe  and  command- 
ing. Eye-witnesses,  who  had  known  Alexander  I, 
maintained  that  the  saintly  hermit  was  none  other 
than  the  Autocrat  of  Russia,  and  photographs  of 
the  celebrated  hermit  standing  in  his  cell,  clad  in  a 
long  white  garment,  showed  a  striking  resemblance 
to  the  late  Emperor. 

The  mystic  attitude  of  Alexander  towards  the 
end  of  his  reign,  the  melancholy  that  had  never  left 
him  since  the  night  of  his  father's  assassination,  and 
which  received  a  fresh  impetus  from  the  death  of  his 
daughter,  are  so  many  factors  speaking  in  favour  of 
Alexander's  abdication.  "  I  felt  the  void  in  my 
heart,"  he  said  to  Bishop  Eylert  in  181 8,'  "accom- 
panied by  a  strange  presentiment  I  went,  I  came, 
I  sought  diversions :  the  burning  of  Moscow  at  last 


1  u 


Diplomatic  Reminiscences,"  London^  1892,  vol.  i,  p.  68. 
'  Idid^f  and  James  Webster,  *'  Travels  through  Crimea,"  1830^  voL 
ii,  p.  338-  •  Eylert,  U, 


FINITA   LA  COMMEDIA  405 

illumined  my  spirit,  and  the  judgment  of  God  on 
the  frozen  field  of  battle  filled  me  with  a  warmth  of 
faith  I  had  never  felt  before.  The  resolution  to 
devote  to  God  alone  my  glory,  my  person,  and  my 
reign,  has  been  matured  and  strengthened  within 
me.  From  that  time  I  became  another  man,  and 
to  the  deliverance  of  Europe  from  ruin  I  owe 
my  own  safety  and  deliverance.  It  is  only  since 
Christianity  has  become  the  important  subject  of 
my  life,  since  faith  in  my  Redeemer  has  mani- 
fested in  me  its  strength,  that  the  peace  of  God 
—  and  I  thank  Him  for  it! — has  entered  my 
soul/'  Is  it  astonishing  that  the  man  who  spoke 
such  words  should  a  few  years  afterwards,  when 
his  melancholy  had  increased,  retire  from  the  fri- 
volous Court  life  and  devote  himself  to  the  service 
of  God  ? 

The  idea  which  Alexander  had  cherished  as 
Tsarevitsh,  namely,  to  retire  from  the  throne  into 
private  life,  took  hold  of  him  in  the  end  with 
greater  force.  The  influence  of  Madame  de  Krue- 
dener  on  the  one  hand  had  stirred  his  religious 
fervour,  while  it  confirmed  his  mysticism  and  his 
desire  of  expiating  the  sins  of  his  youth,  whilst  the 
conspiracy  which  had  been  formed  with  a  view 
to  taking  his  life  made  him  fear  the  fate  of  his 
father.  The  curse  of  the  Romanovs,  death  by  the 
hand  of  the  assassin,  stared  him  in  the  face,  and 
in  order  to  avoid  it,  and  to  expiate  his  participa- 
tion in  the  death  of  his  father,  he  probably  fled 
from  the  throne  to  lead  a  life  of  abnegation  and 
prayer. 

Alexander  had  accepted  the  Imperial  crown 
as  a  temporary  burden,  and  the  idea  of  one  day 


4o6    THE   CURSE  OF  THE   ROMANOVS 

throwing  it  off,  never  left  him.  The  thought  of 
abdication  often  occupied  him,  and  he  communi- 
cated it  sometimes  to  his  most  intimate  friends. 
During  the  Congress  of  Aix-la-Chapelle  he  took 
the  King  of  Prussia  apart  and  informed  him  of 
his  firm  intention  to  abdicate  and  retire  into  a 
cloister.  ''  He  was  tired  of  the  world/'  he  said, 
"  and  had  lost  all  illusions  and  belief  in  the  gratitude 
and  affections  of  humanity."^  In  1 8 19  he  also  in- 
formed his  brother  Nicholas  that  he  would  soon  have 
to  ascend  the  Imperial  throne  of  Russia.  "He 
felt,'*  said  Alexander,  ''  that  his  power  of  thought 
was  growing  feeble,  and  he  foresaw  the  moment 
when  he  would  be  unable  to  fulfil  the  duties  of  his 
Imperial  office.  He  was  firmly  resolved  to  lay 
down  the  sceptre  as  soon  as  he  judged  the  moment 
propitious."  *  The  Princess  Golytzin,  whom.  Alex- 
ander visited  during  his  journey  in  the  Crimea, 
must  also  have  strengthened  his  idea  of  abdication. 
She  was  passing  her  life  in  seclusion,  devoting 
herself  to  the  practices  of  a  mystic  religion.  Alex- 
ander remained  closeted  in  conversation  with  the 
Princess  for  several  hours.  They  evidently  talked 
of  Madame  Kruedener.  Alexander  then  visited 
the  tomb  of  his  former  friend,  and  remained  for 
over  an  hour  in  the  church  where  Madame  de 
Kruedener  had  been  buried,  praying  and  medi- 
tating over  her  grave.' 

But  whatever  his  death,  Alexander's  life  was  in 
any  case  a  tragedy.  Even  his  good  intentions  and 
liberalism  ended  in  utter  failure.  It  could  not 
have  been  otherwise.     So  long  as  Autocracy  will 

1  Lacroiz,  P.,  Hisicire  de  Nicholas  /,  Paris,  1864,  vol.  i,  pp.  217-21& 
'  /.f.,  p.  220.  >  Lacfoix,  /.A,  p.  309. 


FINITA   LA  COMMEDIA  407 

jealously  guard  its  prerogatives,  its  pretended 
liberalism  will  remain  either  a  farce  or  a  tragi- 
comedy. There  is  a  deep  gulf  separating  Auto- 
cracy from  the  national  spirit.  Its  destiny  is  not  to 
work  hand  in  hand  with  but  against  the  nation.  All 
pretences  of  Autocracy  to  be  liberal  are  a  contra- 
diction in  themselves  and  must  end  in  failure. 

*'  Das  aber  ist  der  Fluch  der  bdsen  That 
Dass  sie  fortzeugend  B6ses  muss  gebaren." 

Alexander  wished  to  grant  his  country  a  constitu- 
tion without,  however,  abdicating  his  autocratic 
prerogatives. 

That  he  did  not  carry  his  liberal  intentions  out 
consistently  was  due  to  his  character,  ''where  weak- 
ness was  more  conspicuous  than  strength,  and  where 
borrowed  ideas  successively  glided  over  a  radiant 
superficies."*  **The  character  of  the  Emperor 
Alexander,"  wrote  the  French  Ambassador,  Vis- 
count de  la  Ferronnays,  to  M.  de  Chateaubriand, 
-becomes  daily  more  of  an  enigma  to  me.  It 
would  not  be  possible  to  find  a  man  more  open 
and  loyal  in  speech ;  a  pleasant  and  favourable  im- 
pression is  left  behind  after  an  interview  with  him  ; 
one  leaves  his  presence  in  the  conviction  that  he 
combines  in  his  own  person  all  the  best  qualities  of 
a  truly  chivalric  and  noble-minded  monarch  with 
those  of  a  man  of  deep  feeling,  and  that  added 
to  these  he  is  endowed  with  extraordinary  energy. 
He  sets  forth  his  arguments  with  admirable  clear- 
ness, and  has  a  charming  choice  of  language  at 
command ;  he  expresses  himself  with  great  fluency, 

^  Rabbe,  A.,  Hisioire  iT Alexander  /,  vol.  i,  p.  4. 


4 


4o8    THE   CURSE  OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

and  with  the  warmth  of  enthusiastic  conviction. 
And  yet  the  whole  history  of  his  life,  and  what  we 
all  daily  see  and  hear,  make  it  impossible  and  even 
dangerous  to  put  any  trust  in  him  or  his  words. 
The  weakness  betrayed  in  so  many  of  his  actions 
shows  clearly  that  the  strength  and  energy  which 
he  puts  into  his  speech  have  never  found  a  place 
in  his  character.  Owing  to  this  weakness  of  char- 
acter he  is  quickly  excited  and  roused  to  sudden 
energy,  and  then  he  comes  to  violent  decisions,  of 
which  the  results  cannot  be  calculated.  Moreoven 
he  is  jealous  of  France ;  he  is  displeased  that  Paris 
should  continue  to  be  the  capital  of  Europe,  while 
St  Petersburg  is,  and  will  remain,  nothing,  as  if  it 
were  but  a  large  factory  in  the  middle  of  a  swamp 
which  nobody  visits  and  from  which  everybody 
escapes  whenever  the  opportunity  offers.  The 
Emperor  is  also  extremely  suspicious — ^also  a  proof 
of  his  weakness,  and  this  weakness  is  so  much  the 
more  to  be  deplored,  inasmuch  as  this  Prince  (at 
least  so  it  seems  to  me)  is,  in  the  full  acceptation  of 
the  word,  one  of  the  most  estimable  men  I  know. 
Evil  is  mingled  with  the  good  in  his  deeds,  but  his 
will  and  intentions  are  always  on  the  side  of  the 
latter." 

Napoleon,  whose  words  are  quoted  by  Las 
Cases  in  his  "  Memoirs,"  spoke  of  Alexander  as 
lacking  in  sincerity  and  frankness.  "The  King 
of  Prussia,"  said  the  exile  of  St.  Helena,  "  con- 
sidered in  the  light  of  his  character  as  a  private 
individual,  is  a  loyal,  kind,  and  honourable  man; 
but,  regarded  from  a  political  point  of  view,  he 
is  an  individual  completely  under  the  control  of 
the  law   of  necessity ;  as  long  as  a   man's   hand 


FINITA   LA  COMMEDIA  409 

is  lifted  against  him,  that  man  is  his  master.  In 
the  Russian  Emperor  we  have  a  different  per- 
sonality to  deal  with ;  of  exceeding  loftiness  of 
character,  he  possesses  both  intellect  and  charm, 
and  is  highly  accomplished ;  easily  led  astray,  it 
is  necessary  notwithstanding  to  mistrust  his  in- 
gpratiating  manners;  he  is  lacking  in  frankness, 
and,  in  short,  he  is  *  un  vrai  grec  du  Bos-Empire^ 
Moreover,  he  is  a  genuine  idealist,  or  he  plays 
his  part  well ;  but  this  is  due  solely  to  his  upbring- 
ing and  the  doctrines  instilled  into  him  by  his 
teachers.  It  will  hardly  be  believed  that  I  once 
had  to  argue  with  him  on  the  subject  of  the 
hereditariness  of  sovereignty,  which  he  asserted 
was  an  abuse,  and  it  took  an  hour  of  my  best 
eloquence  and  logic  to  prove  to  him  that  the 
peace  and  welfare  of  a  nation  was  dependent  on 
this  very  hereditariness.  Perhaps  he  was  only 
trying  to  mystify  me,  for  he  is  subtle,  clever  and 
cunning,  and  quite  an  adept  at  this  sort  of  thing. 
If  I  die  here  (St.  Helena)  he  will  probably  be 
my  successor  in  Europe.  I  alone  had  the  power 
to  keep  him  and  his  hordes  of  Tartars  in  check. 
It  will  mean  a  crisis  in  the  affairs  of  th^  European 
continent,  and  will,  above  all,  be  a  decisive  one 
for  Constantinople;  he  strove  eagerly  to  persuade 
and  flatter  me  into  furthering  his  aim  in  that 
quarter,  but  I  took  care  to  remain  deaf.  How- 
ever decrepit  the  Ottoman  Empire  may  appear  to 
be,  it  must  continue  to  be  the  point  of  separation 
between  Western  Europe  and  the  Russian  Colossus. 
With  Greece  it  is  quite  another  matter ! " 

The  severity  of  Napoleon's  verdict,   however, 
may  have  been  caused  by  the  state  of  mind  in 


4IO    THE   CURSE   OF   THE   ROMANOVS 

which    the    Prometheus    chained    on    St    Helena 
found  himself.     Alexander  was  not  so  much  lack- 
ing in  frankness  as  in  strength  of  character ;  which 
fact,  added  to  his  ardour  of  imagination,  keenness 
of  sensibility,  and,  as  already  amplified,  the  dual 
influence    exercised    over   him    by   education  and 
environment,  rendered  him  an  easy  sport  of  every 
impression.     Like  all  enthusiasts,   Alexander  was 
genuinely   religious,   since  an   enthusiasm  for  the 
ideal  is  at  the  root  of  all  religions.     Brought  up 
as  he  had  been  by  a  philosophically-minded  grand- 
mother and  an  enlightened  tutor,  he  was  yet  not 
free   from    the   superstition    which    keeps    such  a 
strong  hold  over  the  Russian  people,  even  those 
of    high   degree,   although   with    the   latter  it  is 
partially  glossed   over   by  civilisation.     Moreover, 
unhappiness    frequently    induces    superstition,    of 
which  truth  Alexander  was  a   striking  example; 
he  was  beset  by  gloomy  forebodings,  and  anything 
out  of  the  common  which   happened   during  the 
journey  to  Taganrog  was  interpreted  by  him  as 
a  presage  of  death.      Alexander  had   been  con- 
firmed in  his  religious  tendencies  by  his  acquaint- 
ance  with   the   Baroness    Kruedener,   as   well   as 
by  his  Bible  reading  and  lonely  hours  of  contemp- 
lation.    An  orthodox  Christian,  he  personally  took 
no  interest  in  the  doctrines  of  the  various  sects, 
as  he  held  that  the  fundamental  principles  of  the 
Catholic,  the  Protestant,  and   the   Greek   Church 
were  one  and  the  same ;  but  as  head  of  the  Greek 
Church  in  Russia,  he  considered  it  incumbent  upon 
him  to  remain  faithful  to  it  and  to  set  an  example 
to  his  people  of  childlike  submission  to  its  com- 
mands. 


FINITA   LA  COMMEDIA  411 

*'  I  am  a  lucky  accident/'  Alexander  once  said 
to  Madame  de  StaeL  This  statement  was  only 
partially  true.  His  amiable  character  was  an  acci- 
dent on  the  Autocratic  throne  of  Russia,  but  it 
brought  little  luck  either  to  himself  or  to  the 
Empire  over  which  he  ruled. 


/ 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


I.  WORKS  QUOTED   IN   THE   NOTES 

Archives  des  Aflfaires  ^trang^res,  Paris. 
Archives  de  la  Biblioth^que  Nationale. 
Ameth,  A.  v.,  Maria  Theresa  u.  Joseph  II,  Vienna,  1867  ;  Joseph  II 

u.  Leopold  V.  Toscana,  Vienna,  1872. 
Asseburg,  A.  F.  v.,  Denkwiirdigkeiten,  Berlin,  1842. 
Berlin  Archives,  1793. 
Bemhardi,  Th.  v.,  Geschichte  Russlands  (in  Biedermann,  C,  Staaten- 

geschichte,  1888,  &c.). 
Bilbassov,  V.  A.,  Istorya  Yekateriny  Vtoroy,  Berlin,  1900. 
Bogdanovitsh,  M.  I.,  Istorya  tsarstvovanya  Imperatora  Alexandra  I, 

1869. 
Bounce   (M.D.),    Baron    de   Corberon,    Un    Diplomate    Fran^ais 

(Journal  Intime),  Paris,  1901. 
Campan,  Mme.  J.  L.  H.,  Memoirs  of  Marie  Antoinette,  London,  1904. 
Capefigue,  J.  B.,  Histoire  de  la  Restauration,  &c.,  Paris,  1845 »  La 

baronne  de  Krudner,  TEmp^reur  Alexandre  I,  Paris,  1886. 
Castdra,  J.  H.,  Histoire  de  Catherine  II,  1800. 
Catherine  II,  M^moires  de  Plmp^ratrice,  London,  1859 ;   Histoire 

secrete  des  amours,  par  un  Ambassadeur,  Paris,  1873. 
Choiseul-Gouffier,  Mme.,  Mdmoires,  Paris,  1829. 
Crusenstolpe,  M.  J.,  Der  russische  Hof  von  Peter  I  bis  auf  Nicolaus  I, 

Hamburg,  1855-60. 
Czartorysky,  Prince  A.  F.,  Mdmoires,  Paris,  1887. 
Dimsdale,  Th.,  Tracts  on  Inoculation,  London,  1781. 
Dio  Cassius,  Historiae  Romanae. 
Edling,  Comtesse  de,  Mdmoires,  Moscow,  1888. 
Empaytaz,  H.  L.,  Notice  sur  Alexandre,  Geneve,  1840. 
Eylert,  R.  F.,  Charakterziige  und  historische  Fragmente  aus  dem 

Leben  Friedrich  Wilhelm  III,  Magdeburg,  1843-46. 
Eraser's  Magazine  for  Town  and  Country,  London,  1865. 
Gerlach,  L.  F.  L.  v.,  Denkwiirdigkeiten  aus  dem  Leben,  &c.,  Berlin, 

1891-2. 
Globe,  Le,  Paris,  1829. 

4*3 


414  BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Golovkin,  Count  Fedor,  La  Cour  et  le  R^gne  de  Paul  I,  Paris,  1905. 
Gribovsky,  A.  M.,  2^piskt  o  Yekaterinye  Velikoy,  Moscow,  1847. 
Harris,  Sir  James,  Diaries  and  Correspondence,  1844. 
Helbig,  G.  H.  W^  Biographie  Peter  des  Dritten,  1808-^. 
Historische  Zeitschrift,  Munich,  1859,  &c. 
Houssaye,  Henry,  1814,  Paris,  1889L 
Jackson,  Sir  George,  Diaries  and  Letters,  London,  1872. 
Jacoby,  Paul,  Etudes  sur  la  selection  chez  I'homme,  Paris,  1904. 
Khrapovitsky,  A.  v.,  Dnyevnik  A.  v.  Khrapovitskavo,  St  Peters- 
burg, 1874. 
Kobeko,  D.,  Der  Caesarewitsch  Paul  Petrowitsch,  Berlin,  1886. 
Kuhn,  F.  J.,  Betrachtungen  Qber  Majestaten,  &c,  Munich,  1901. 
La  Cour  de  Russie  il  y  a  cent  ans,  1 725-1 783,  Berlin,  1858. 
Lacroix,  P.,  Histoire  de  Nicholas  I,  Paris,  1864. 
Laharpe,  F.  C,  M^oires,  Bern,  1864 ;  Le  Gouvemeur  d'un  Prince 

(F.  D.  de  Laharpe  et  Alexandre  I),  Lausanne,  1902. 
Lefebvre,  A.,  Histoire  des  Cabinets  de  FEurope,  Paris,  1847. 
Lobyanvosky,  Zapiski,  Moscow,  1872. 

Loftus,  Sir  Augustus,  Diplomatic  Reminiscences,  London,  1892. 
Masson,  A.  F.  Ph.,  Mteoires  secrets  sur  la  Russie,  Paris,  1859. 
Mazade,  C.  de,  Alexandre  I  et  1^  Prince  Czartorysky,  Paris,  1865. 
M^neval,  Baron  de,  M^moires  pour  servir  k  Thistoire  de  Napol^n  I, 

Paris,  1894. 
Mettemich-Winneburg,  Prince,  M^moires,  documents,  &c^  Paris, 

1880-84. 
Nomp^re  de  Champagny,  E.  L,  Les  C^sars,  Paris,  1841-43. 
Oberkirch,  Baronne  de,  Mtooires,  Paris,  1853. 
Panin,  N.  L,  Materialy  dlya  Zhisneopisanya  grafa  N.  L  Panioa, 

ed.  A.  Brueckner,  1888. 
Pasquier,  £.  D.,  Due  de,  Histoire  de  mon  temps,  M^moires  dn 

Chancelier,  Paris,  1893. 
Politische  Correspondenz  Karl  Friedrichs  v.  Baden,  1896. 
Poroshin,  S.  A.,  Poroshina  Zapiski,  St  Petersburg,  1844. 
Puipin,  A.  N.,  Istoritsheskie  Otsherki,  St.  Petersburg,  1900. 
Revue  Britannique,  Paris,  1895. 
Revue  d'histoire  diplomatique,  Paris,  1895. 
Revue  historique  Vaudoise,  1896. 
Rousskaya  Starina,  St  Petersburg,  1872,  1873,  1882-85. 
Roussky  Archiv,  Moscow,  1864, 1866, 1867, 1869, 1878,  i88o»  1886, 1887. 
Rovigo,  Due  de  (Savary),  M^moires  pour  servir  k  Hiistoire  de 

Napol^n,  Paris,  1900. 
Sbomik  Rousskavo  Istoritsheskavo  Obshtshestva,  St   Petersburg, 

1867,  &c,  vols,  i,  ii,  V,  vii,  viiii  ix,  xii,  xiii,  xvii,  xix,  xx,  xxiii,  xxriL 


BIBLIOGRAPHY  415 

Schiemann,  Th.,  Die  £rmordung  Pauls  I,  Berlin,  1902. 

Schneider,  L.,  Aus  dem  Leben  Kaiser  Wilhelms,  Berlin,  1888. 

Schnttzler,  J.  H.,  Histoire  intime  de  la  Russie,  Paris,  1847. 

S^gur,  Comte  A.  de.  Vie  de  Rostopchine,  Paris,  1873. 

S^S^r,  Comte  L.  Ph.,  Mdmoires,  Paris,  1827. 

Shilder,  N.  K.,  Imperator  Alexander  Penryi,  St  Petersburg,  1897-98  ; 

Imperator  Pavel  Pervyi,  St.  Petersburg,  1901. 
Shoumigorsky,  £.   S.,  Yekaterina  Ivanovna  Nelidova,  St.  Peters- 
burg, 1902. 
Stockholm  Archives,  1797, 1829. 

TatistchefT,  Serge,  Alexandre  I  et  Napoleon,  Paris,  1891. 
Tourgenev,  A.  I.,  M^moires  in  Rousskaya  Storina,  1885. 
Tourgenev,  N.  I.,  La  Russie  et  les  Russes,  Paris,  1847. 
Troubetzkaya,  Princesse  Lise,  Correspondance  de  Marie  F^odorovna 

avec  Mile.  N^lidov,  Paris,  1896. 
Vandal,  A.,  Napoldon  et  Alexandre  I,  Paris,  1891. 
Vasilchikov,  A.  A.,  Les  Razoumovsky,  ed.  A.  Brueckner,  1893-94. 
Vigel,  F.  F.,  Vospominanya,  Moscow,  1864. 
Vig-id  Le  Brun,  Mme.,  Souvenirs,  Paris,  1867. 
Vill^le,  Comte  de,  M^moires  et  Correspondance,  Paris,  1888. 
VitroUes,  Baron  de,  M^moires,  Paris,,  1884. 
Voronzov,  M.  L.,  Archiv  Knyazya,  vols,  xiii,  xiv,  xv,  xvii-xxii,  xxiv, 

XXX,  xxxii. 
Vosemnadzaty  Vyek  (i8th  century),  Moscow,  1869. 
Vyazemsky,  P.  A.,  Prince,  Polnoe  sobranye,  Sotshinenyi,  St.  Peters- 
burg, 1874. 
Walther,  Ph.  A.  F.,  Briefwechsel   der  grossen    Landgrafin  ;   Die 

grosse  Landgrafin,  Darmstadt,  1873. 
Webster,  James,  Travels  through  Crimea,  London,  1830. 
Wraxall,  Sir  N.  W.,  Historical  and  Posthumous  Memoirs,  1884. 
Zaikin,  L,  Poslyednie  dni  Zhisni  Imperatora  Alexandra  I,  St.  Peters- 
burg, 1827. 


IL   WORKS  CONSULTED   BUT   NOT  QUOTED 

Brueckner,  A.,  Istorya  Yekateriny  Vtoroy,  St.  Petersburg,  1885. 

Geno  and  Tomich,  Pavel  I,  St.  Petersburg,  1907. 

Georgel,  Abb^  J.  F.,  Voyage  k  St.  Petersburg  en  1799-1800^  Paris, 

1815. 
Maistre,  Joseph  de,  Mdmoires  Politiques. 
Mikhailovsky-Danilevsky,  A.  L,  Vospominanya,  St.  Petersburg,  1831. 


J 


4i6  BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Nadler,  V.  A.,  Alexander  i  ideya  Svyashtsbennavo  Soyoaza,  St. 

Petersburg,  1886. 
Nesselrode,  C.  R.  v.,  Lettres  et  Papiers  1802-62,  Paris,  1904. 
Pingaud,  L.,  Les  Fran^ais  en  Russie  et  les   Russes  en  Fnuux, 

Paris,  1886. 
Revue  Bleue,  Paris,  September  1880. 
Revue  des  Deux  Mondes,  1876,  1878. 
Solovev,  S.  M.,  Istorya  Rossii,  Moscow,  1857-79. 


INDEX 


Adda,  river,  222 

Aepinus,  59 

Aix-la-Chapelle,  congress  at,  380, 
406 

Alembert,  d',  37,  38 

Alexander  I,  21,  32,  108,  152,  175, 
179,  183, 185,  199,  213,  231,  232, 
233>  237,  238,  240,   241,  244; 
A  B  C  of,  255,  261 ;  abdication, 
thought  of,  405,  406 ;    aspira- 
tions,  304 ;    Blessed,  declines 
title  of,  353 ;  character,  contra- 
dictory,   324,    382,    407,    410; 
children,  death  of,  387  ;  clever- 
ness of,  260 ;  confession  of,  398 ; 
Court  life,  dislike  for,  300  ;  curi- 
osity, 259;  death,  news  of  his, 
402;  education,  English,  271  ; 
funeral,   attends   ceremony  of, 
393*  394 »  funeral,  403  ;  govern- 
ment, 257,  316^  322  ;  hereditary 
monarchy,  his  opinions  on,  303; 
illness,  263,  396  ;  inconsistency 
of,  401 ;  industry  of,  264 ;  insin- 
cerity,   409 ;     kindheartedness> 
262  ;  liberalism,  feilure  of,  406  ; 
**  lucky  accident,"  411  ;    mani- 
festo of,  311  ;  melancholy,  382  ; 
mistresses  of,  387;  mystic  atti- 
tude, 404 ;    Paris,  his  success 
in,   351;    Peace,   Emperor  of) 
315  ;  reaction  of,  381  ;  religious 
tendencies,    410 ;     Republican 
government,    his    opinion    on, 
349 ;     sensitiveness    of,     373 ; 
Taganrog,    journey     to,    395 ; 

unhappiness    of,    386;    vanity 

4x7 


of  J  336 ;  weakness  of  character, 

408 
Alexander  -  Constantine     library, 

264 
Alexander  Nevsky,  253  ;  Convent 

of,  392,  393 
Alexandrine,  265,  269 
Alexis,  son  of  Peter  I,  23 
Alliance,  Holy,  375 
Aloupka,  Castle  of,  395 
Amalie,  Princess,  78 
Anna  Ivanovna,  23 
Anna  Pavlovna,  178 
Antoninus  Pius,  280 
Apraxin,  General,  197 
Araktsheev,  199, 206, 209, 323, 373, 

379,  381 
Archangel,  213 

Armenia^  317 

Asseburg,  60,  68,  69,  70,  72,  74, 

92 
Augustus,  5,  9 
Austria,  327,  331 
Autocracy,     its     opposition      to 

liberalism,  407 

Baim,  13 

Bakhtshi-Sarai,  395 

Balaclava,  395 

Bariatinsky,  131,  132,  136,  184 

Barry  E.  O'Meara,  247 

Bayle,  253 

Benkendorff,  166 

Madame,  152,  159,  174, 252 

death  of,  272 
Bennigsen,  242,  243,  320 
Bergasse,  363 

2  D 


4i8 


INDEX 


Bernhardi,  230,  331 
Benin,  Mile.,  147 
Besborodkoy  184,  235 
Betdty,  43»  93 
Bialyttock,  356 
Bibikov,  145,  146^  I47f  243 
Bible  societies,  321 
Biron,  23 

Blaise.    5>^St.-Maure 
Blessed^  the,  353 
Bogdanovitsb,  375 
Bonaparte.    See  Napoleon 
Boigo.    See  Pozzo  di  Borgo 
Boukh,  310 

Bourbons,  355  ;  Alexander's  dis- 
paraging remarks,  349.  3S2 
Brenna,  213 
Breteuil,  de,  34,  37 
Brompton,  258 

Buckinghamshire,  Earl  of,  40,  63 
Budberg,  205 
Buturlin,  32 
Byelke,  Mme.,  65,  81,  91,  106 

Cabres,  Sabathier  de,  59,  64 
Caesar,  Julius,  278 
Caesarean  insanity,  6-8,  18 
Caesars,  4,   191,   193,  205,  207; 

degeneration  of,  10 
Caligula,  8,  9,  13,  195,  207,  229, 

248,  280,  282 
Campania,  13 
Capo  d'Istria,  368 
Capreae,  island  of,  15 
Caraite  Jews,  396 
Carinae,  14 
Caroline,  Queen,  129 
Cassius  Charea,  19 
Cathcart,  Lord,  41 

Catherine  II,  13,  73,  94i  95i  97, 
98,  99,  105,  107,  115,  116,  117, 

130,  i35>  »5>,  157,  159,  178, 
179,  187,  194,  202,  208,  251, 
293,  387 ;  Alexander,  her  me- 
morandum on   his   education. 


385-288;  coronation  of,  37; 
grandchildren,  her  love  for, 
353,  367 ;  Grimm,  her  letten 
to,  353-370;  Nathalie,  her 
jealousy  of,  88,  89  ;  Paul,  her 
plan  to  exclude  him  from  the 
throne,  398 ;  St  Sergins,  pil- 
grimage to  Convent  of,  90; 
theatre,  her  interest  in,  156 

Catherine  Pavlovna,  338 

Cayla.    See  Talon 

Charles  I,  383 

Charles  V,  9 

Charles  XII,  380 

Charles  Frederick,  Duke  of  Hol- 
stein,  40 

Chateaubriand,  407 

Chevalier,  Mme.,  319 

Choiseul-Gouffier,  Mme^  395, 
373,  380,  383 

Christian  VII,  339 

Christianity,  Alexander's  views 
of,  356,  405 

Claudius,  19 

Coalition,  European,  221, 337 

Cochin  China,  320 

Colonies,  military,  373 

Commerce,  laws  relating  to,  320 

Commodus,  19 

Constantine,  109,  152,  213,  34<^ 
268,  332,  380;  birth  of,  252; 
education  of,  269,  271 

Constantinople,  Convention  of, 
316 

Corberon,  M.  de,  56 

Council,  Secret,  313 

Croix,  M.  de  la,  23 

Custom-tariff,  340 

Cybele,  the  Northern,  97 

Cyrus,  114 

Czartorysky,  Prince  Adam,  191, 
230,  233,  244,  289,  3O'-30> 
312,  370,  371  ;  on  Alexander 
remorse,  308 

Czartoriskaya,  Sophia,  67 


INDEX 


419 


Dashrov,    Princess,    28,    190; 

exile  of,  224 
£>erzhavin,  ode  of,  251 
Devi^re,  55 
Diderot,  39 
Diebitsh,  349,  395 
Dimsdale,  61 
Djoufout  Khalek,  396 
Dolgopolov,  85 
Domitian,  19 
Dorothea,  Princess  of  Wiirtem- 

berg-Montb^liard,  95 
Dresden,  assembly  at,  341 
Dupr6  de  St.  Maure,  385 

EaglE;  the  Black,  360 

Elba,  354 

Elizabeth  Petrovna,  13,  15,  109, 
251  ;  accession  of,  23 

Elizabeth,  wife  of  Alexander  1, 
291,  292,  309,  310;  Alexander, 
her  love  for,  295,  388 ;  beauty 
of,  292  ;  character  of,  386  ;  de- 
spair of,  401  ;  illness  of,  391  ; 
unhappiness  of,  290 

Embassies,  to  various  countries, 
320 

Encyclopaedists,  135 

Enghien,  Due  d',  murder  of,  320 

England,  327 

Erfurt,  398 

Esquiline,  14 

Esterhazy,  Count,  176,  277 

Etupe,  142 

Eugene,  Prince  of  Wiirtembcrg, 
213 

Eylert,  Dr.,  257 

Falkenstein,  Count,  1 1 1 

FaulcoHy  the,  71 

Faure,  J.-M.-L.,  274 

Feodozov,  398 

Ferdinand,  Prince,  102,  142 

Ferronays,  Viscount  de  la,  407 

Finland,  336 


Frederick  II,  7 f,  98,  100 
Frederick  William  III,  314 
Freemasonry,  323,  375 

Gagarin  A,   Princess,   218,  219, 

221  ;  lodged  in  the  Palace,  239 
Galatea  and  Acts,  49 
Gatshina,  73,  98,  156,  164,  176; 

acquisition    of,   155;    men    of, 

196 
Gentz,  379 
George  III,  229 
Georgia,  220,  316 
Gerebzov,  Alexius,  31 

Olga,  235,  239 

Gessler^  Mile.,  252 
Goertz,  Count,  loi 
Golovkin,  Count  Fedor,  28,  29, 

207 
Golytzin,  Prince,  351 

Princess,  369,  395,  406 

Goudovitsh,  226 

Goussoripov,  Prince,  118 

Greece,  368 ;  freedom  of,  380 

Greeks,  insurrection  of,  380 

Gribowsky,  272 

Grimm,  87,  89,  95,  103,  115,  154, 

176,  178,  252,  253 
Grodno,  208 
Grosbieren,  358 
Gunning,  Sir  Robert,  62,  66,  82, 

86 
Gustavus  IV,  200 
Gustavus  Adolphus,  317 

Hadrian,  8 

Hamel,  physician,  320 

Harris,  Sir  James,  97,  105,  107, 

120,  121,  149 

H^l^ne  Pavlovna,  270 

Henry,  Prince  of  Prussia,  91-94, 

98 
Hermitage,  the,  14,  15 

Hesse-Philipstahl,  Princes  of,  91 

Hessen-Rheinfels,  Prince  of,  204 


420 


INDEX 


Hohenstein,  Countess,  142 
Holy  Alliance,  375 
Hospitals,  under  Alexander,  322 
Hozbach,  358 

iLLUIflNATI,  351,363 

Imeritia,  316 
Ivan  III,  25 

Grozny,  205,  206 

Prince,  examination  of,  36 

James  II,  283 
Jesuits,  expulsion  of,  321 
Jews,  395 ;  Caraite,  396  ;  treat- 
ment of,  321 
Joseph  II,  114,  116,  118 
Josephine,  Empress,  351 
Julian-Claudian  house,  12 
Justice,  Supreme  Court  of,  371 

Kadishe,  MUe.,  50 

Kalish,  343 

Kamenny-Ostrov,  144 

Karl  Ulric,  24 

Khiva,  320 

Kholmogory,  213 

Khrapovitsky,  161,  162 

Kisselev,  374 

Kleinmichel,  197 

Klopstock,  Ode  of,  314 

Knowles,  Admiral,  7 1 

Korsakov,  222 

Kosmin,  49 

Kotshoubey,  186,  192,  277,  302, 

370 
Kotzebue,  224 ;  assassination  of, 

381 

Kourakin,    Prince,   56,  93,    109, 

"9,   137,   I3«»    «39i   »40»   146, 

147,  218,  340 
Koushelev-Besborodko,  395 
Kousmitsh,  Feodor,  404 
Koutayssov,  183,  206,  219,  241 
Koutshouk-Kainardji,  86 
Kraflfl,  Professor,  273 


Kruedener,  Mme,  359,  361,  368, 
3831  405,  406,  410 

death  of,  369 

Kruze,  90,  122 
Kulm,  358 

Latitia  Ramolini,  339 

Lafermi^re,  174,  210 

Laharpe,  128,  134,  266^  272, 
274,  297,  298,  299,  301,  303, 
312,  350  ;  Alexander,  plan  for 
his  instruction,  275-284 ;  Holy 
Alliance,  apology  of,  358 

Lane,  132 

Langeron,  234-236,  308 

Lapoukhin,  218 

Las  Cases,  408 

Lauriston,  Count,  342 

Laybach,  380 

Leopold  of  Tuscany,  123, 130 

Liberalism,  in  Russia,  375,  377, 

379 
Liberator  of  nations^  374 

Lieven,  General,  179 

Darya,  Princess,  310 

Lindemann,  91 

Litta,  Count,  321 

Lobanov,  330,  332 

Lobyanovsky,  382 

Loftus,  Sir  Augustus,  404 

Louis  X,  282 

XIV,  296 

XVI,  134,  176 

—  XVIII,  223, 225, 357, 383; 

Holy  Alliance,  signs  treaty, 
367 ;  jealous  of  Alexander,  352 

Louisa,  Queen,  334,  335 

Louisa,  Princess.  See  Elizabeth, 
wife  of  Alexander 

Louise,  Princess,  78 

Lun^ville,  peace  of,  325 

Macartney,  Sir  George,  41 
Mack,  General,  327 
Magdeburg,  335 


r 


INDEX 


421 


Magnitzky,  381 

Maintenon,  Mme.  de,  216 

Maistre,  Joseph  de,  338 

Malta,  221 

Maltese  Order,  221 

Mamonov,  157,  158 

Marchetti,  266 

Marcus  Aurelius,  280 

Maria  Feodorovna,  104-106,  108, 
109,  116,  120,  122,  123,  128, 
129,  130,  132,  157,  174,  179. 
184,  207,  210,  211,  216,  217, 
218,  238,  242,  252,  293,  310, 
402,  403 ;  Napoleon,  her  dis- 
like o(  339  ;  Panin,  her  hatred 
of,  230;  Paul,  her  attitude  at 
death  of,  309 

Maria    Louise,    Empress,     341, 

355 
Marie  Antoinette,  176 

Marie  Pavlovna,  270 

Markov,  von,  166,  326 

Marmontel,  39 

Massena,  222 

Masson,  185,  271 

Matoushkin,  80 

M^n^val,  M.  de,  337 

Meng,  103,  258 

Menshikov,  23 

Messalina,  16 

Mettemich,  363,  374,  379 

Military  colonies,  373 

Minerva^  the  Son  of^  22 

Mitau,  221,  223 

Mithridate^  31 

Mohilev,  118 

Mon-Bijou,  loi 

Montespan,  Mme.  de,  296 

Morea,  316 

Morkov,  226 

Moslems,  392 

Moukhanov,  241,  310 

Mile.,  216 

Mouraviev,  Michael,  274 

Moussin-Poushkin,  159,  167,  168 


Napoleon,  9, 181,  208,  222,  235, 
247>  317*  325,  326, 328, 338, 362, 
374,  408  ;  jealous  of  Alexander, 
291 ;  leaves  Elba,  3  54;  England, 
his  hatred  of,  331 

Narishkin,  Leon,  27 

Sophia.    See  Sophia 

Nathalie  Alexeevna,  74,  76,  83 ; 
ambition,  88  ;  death  of,  91 

Ndlidov,  Mile.,  175,  212,  214-218 

Nero,  8,  12,  13 

Nesselrode,  Count,  350,  355 

Neutrality,  League  of,  227 

Nevsky.    See  Alexander 

Nicholas  Pavlovitsh,  178,  402, 
406 

Novi,  222 

Novosylzov,  227,  312,  370 

Novo-Tsherkask,  395 

Oberkirch,  Mme.,  100,  loi,  105, 

132,  134 
Obulyanov,  Procurator,  319 
Odar,  Ambassador,  38 
Officers,  liberalism  of,  376 
Orianda,  395 

Orlov,  Alexis,  19,  20,  36,  50,  189 
Osterman,  220 
Ouvarov,  330 

Pahlen,  232,  234-236,  240-242, 
312 

Pallas,  Professor,  273 

Panin,  N.  J.,  35,  40,  41,  45,  60- 
62,  70,  84,  109,  114,  121,  149; 
appointed  tutor  of  Paul,  31  ; 
death  of,  1 50  ;  dismissal  of,  76 

Panin,  N.  P.,  204,  206,  210,  225, 
229,  232,  233 

Parisians,  admiration  of  Alex- 
ander, 351 

Passick,  189 

Paul,  104,  109-111,  115,  119,  120, 
122, 123, 129, 133,  137, 138, 140, 
141, 160, 183  ;  created  Admiral, 


^ 


422 


INDEX 


39  ;  birth  of,  24 ;  betrothal  of, 
74 ;  character  of,  59-61,  247  ; 
christening  of,  26  ;  coronation 
of,  209  ;  cruelties  of,  239 ;  de- 
tested universally,  297  ;  horror, 
government  of,  318;  illness  of, 
37f  63,  65;  irritability  of,  84; 
impetuosity  of,  219  ;  insanity  of, 
247 ;  in  love,  75, 100 ;  Napoleon, 
friendship  for,  223 ;  peaceful 
policy  of,  220 ;  pomp,  his  love 
of,  207 ;  assassination  of,  20, 
21  ;  Panin,  his  attachment  for, 
76 ;  paternity  of,  26 ;  Revolu- 
tion, his  abhorrence  of,  221; 
smallpox,  inoculation  for,  61 

Pavlovsk,  102,  104 

Peace ^  Emperor  of ^  315 

Perigord^  pdUs  de,  1 3 

Persana,  129 

Pestel,  Colonel,  378 

Pestsheev,  Seigius,  216 

Peter  the  Great,  41 ;  death  of, 
23  ;  will  of,  361 

Peter  II,  19,  22,  23 

Peter  III,  26,  29,  33,  36,  85,  156, 
187,  188,  211,  307;  burial  of, 
189;  death  of,  35 

Peterhof,  98 

Platon,  archbishop,  47,  91,  93, 
104,  114,  IIS,  "0,313,359 

Plestsheev,  109,  122 

Pobiedonostzev,  373 

Polish  Convention,  the,  339 

Pomcerium,  the,  14 

Poniatovsky,  Stanislaus,  29,  208 

Pope  Pius,  129 

Poroshin,  32,  42,  44,  48,  57 

Potemkin,  84,  107,  137,  145,  160, 
163,  170,  199 

Pougatshev,  85,  86 

Poizo  di  Borgo,  350 

Praetorians,  conspiracy  of;  19 

Proselytism,     under    Alexander, 

321 


Protassov,  289,  290,  294 
Prussia,  h\\  of,  335 

QUIRINAL,  14 

Rafiid^  the,  71 

Razoumovsky,  Andr^,  56,  71, 
82,  94,  98,  248  ;  his  intrigue 
with  Grand  Duchess,  88,  97 

Repnin,  Prince,  114,  117,  212 

Reval,  71 

Rhine  Confederacy,  341 

Ribas,  230 

Riga*  98,  102 

Rogerson,  91, 172,  226,  229 

Romanovs,  361  ;  curse  of,  20,  21, 

190,    405 ;     extermination    of 

dynasty,  378 
Ropsha,  19,  35,  36,  188,  189 
Rossi,  199 
Rostoptshin,  171,  183,  192,   196, 

206,  209,   211,  219,   225,    226^ 

229,  236,  276,  291,  302 
Roumyanzev,    Count,    109,    129^ 

177,  291 
Countess,  77,  103 

Sablukov,  200, 201,21a,  219, 221, 

239,  310 
Sacken,  von,  174,  269,  273 
Sagijashski,  Mme.,  224 
Saint' Marc^  the,  71,  73 
St.-Maure,  Blaise  de,  134 
St.  Maure.    See  Duprd 
St.  Michael  Palace,  209,  213,  219 
St.  Petersburg,  12 
Saint  Sergius,  Convent  of,  90 
Sans-Souci,  loi 
Santa  Maria  del  Soccorso,  15 
Sarti,  179 
Saurin,  39 
Savary,  327 

Schlusselburg,  fortress  of,  19 
Sch6nbrunn,  Napoleon  at,  327 
Schwartz,  Colonel,  381 
Schwarzenberg,  350 


INDEX 


Schivedt,  1 02 

S^g^r,  Count  de,  169,  170 

Semeon  Velikij,  68 

Sembovsky,  122 

Semeonovsky    regiment,    mutiny 

of,  381 
Senura^  49 
\  SemoHn,  103 
Senate,  executive  power  of,  371 
Serfs,  sale  of,  319 
Sherbatov,  Prince,  157 
Sheremetiev,  Count,  52 
Sievers,  Count,  54 
Siriel,  103 
Skavronsky,  31 
Smallpox,  inoculation  for,  61 
Societies,  secret,  375,  378 
Solms,  72 
Soltykov,  Nicholas,  78, 80, 84, 109, 

118,  152,   153,   154,    183,    272, 

298 

Sergius,  27,  34 

Field- Marshal,  202 

Sophia   Dorothea,  Princess,   99, 

103 
Sophia    N ,   388;    death   of, 

390 
Soumarokov,  49 
Souvarov,  General,  222 
Speransky,  Michael,  372 
Stackelberg,  326 
Stael,  Mme.  de,  320,  411 
Stedingk,  186,  191,  211 
Strogannov,  Count,  32,  312 
Suburra,  14 

Taganrog,  395,  396 

Taitzi,  98 

Talleyrand,  349 

Talma,  334 

Talon,    Countess    Zoc    Victoire 

383 
Talysin,  239 

Tatarinov,  243 

Teplov,  55 


Theatre,  Catherine's  interest  in, 

156 

Tiberius,  15,  16 ;  a  modem,  297 

Tode,  Dr.,  90 

Tourgenev,  N.,  194,  197, 198,  201, 

202,  376,  377 
Trave,  339 
Trebbia,  river,  222 
Tribunal,  secret,  319 
Tristram  Shandy^  253 
Troppau,  380,  381 
Tsarsko^-S^lo,  65,  73,  81,  84,  93, 

98,  102,  109 
Tshengis  Khan,  282 
Tshemishev,  156,  163 
Tsheshme,  189 
Tshitshagov,  245 
Tshoglokov,  Vera,  51,  54 
Tugendbund,  378 
Tuileries,  Court  of,  352 

Ulm,  327 

Ungem  Sternberg,  189 

Universities,  teaching  at,  323,  381 

F^u^,  49 
Vadkovsky,  104,  168 

Vassiltshikov,  84 
Vicenza,  Duke  of,  338 
Victor- Am^d^  III,  131 
Vienna,  Congress  of,  353 
Vietinghoff,     Juliane     de.      See 

Kruedener 
Vig^e  Lebrun,  Mme.,  190 
Virtue,  Society  of,  378 
Vishnevza,  122 
Vitrolles,  Baron  de,  349 
Volkonsky,  Prince,  198,  397, 400 
Voltaire's  works,  49 
Voronzov,  Count,  30,  41,  172, 1 86* 

205,  225,  245 

Mile,  de,  34 

Vyazemsky,  Prince,  44 

Warsaw,  duchy  of,  318 


•■#■         V 


424 


INDEX 


Whit  worth,  Sir  Charles,  194,  205, 
236,  239,  247 ;   conspiracy  of, 

235 
Wilheknina  of  Hesse-Darmstadt, 

68,69,74 
Wilkowiski,  342 

Wilyaminov  Semov,  235,  241 


Wraxall,  Sir  N.,  91 
Wylie,  Dr.,  397,  404 

Zeus,  Villa  of,  15 

Zoubov,  Platon,  20,  179,  182,  185, 

242,  243,  244,  312 
Valerian,  306 


THE    END 


Printed  by  Ballantyne,  Hanson  6*  Co. 
Edinburgh  6*  London 


f 


a 


I 

1 


This  book  should  be  returned  to 
the  Library  on  or  before  the  last  date 
stamped  below^   /  / 

A  fine  of  &re  (^ntl  a  day  is  incurred 
by  retaining  it  beyond  the  speoifled 
time. 

Please  return  promptly. 


go^«W 


-b*' 


"Bro',U- 


DUE  NOV  17  "SO 


t 


BEt-9'SO 


MbMMMISCM 


i^^'^ui 


Fc8    4'65H   / 


/ 


