
This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at http : //books . google . com/| 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 





Digitized byVjOOQlC 






Digitized byLjOOQlC 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 






Digitized byLjOOQlC 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



SOME FRENCH CONTEMPORARY 

OPINIONS OF THE RUSSIAN 

REVOLUTION OF 1905 



BY 



encarnaciOn alzona, m. a 



SUBMITTED IN PARTIAL FUUlLBfENT OF THE REQUIRIAIENTS 

FOR THE DEGREE OF DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY 

IN THE 

Faculty of Political SasNCS 
Columbia Uniyersity 



NEW YORK 
192 1 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



COPYSIGHT, I92I 
BY 

The Faculty of Political Science of 
Columbia University, New York 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 






PREFACE \ 

In the following pages an attempt has been made to prc^- 
9Cnit certain French contemporary opinions of the Russian 
revolution of 1905. 

This revolutionary movement in Russia, as French pub- 
licists have admitted, was of particular interest to France 
because Russia was her ally and she was Russia's credit or. 
Occurring at a time when the tsar's government wast . . 
weakest, the revolution brought about a critical situation 
which affected the balance of power in a way unfavorable to 
France. It retarded considerably Russia's recovery from 
her disasters in the Far East, which meant that France 
could not count on her support for some time to come. 
Already France's adversary had taken advantage of the 
paralysis of the Russian Alliance. In March, 1905, oc- 
curred the theatrical landing of the German Kaiser at 
Tangier, which precipitated the first Moroccan crisis. . 
France suffered a diplomatic defeat. As France relied on -^^^ s^\y^ ^ 
Russia in the event of a European war, she had reason to ^.^ Tic '-^ / '' 
feel uneasy at the revolutionary agitation which delayed the ^- - ^' ' ' ' 
recovery of her ally from military disorganization. What 
she ardently desired was for Russia to regain prestige and 
thus to restore the European equilibrium. 

There was another reason for the importance to France 
of the internal dissensions in Russia. She was Russia's 
creditor for a stmi estimated at twelve billion francs or 
about one-fourth of the French capital invested abroad. 
She felt under obligation to see that a reliable government 
existed in Russia to insure the protection of French in- 
terests. 

" 44tl 5 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



6 PREFACE [442 

No attempt has been made to present the views of all the 
numerous political groups in France. The variou^ opin- 
ions expressed are divided into three groups. In one group 
are the extremists or advanced thinkers, mostly Socialists 
and A narchis ts. The Radical Socialists, who are of re- 
formist tendencies, form the second group. In the third 
group are the moderates and conservatives, such as, the 
Catholics, Republicans, Republican Independents, Liberals, 
and Progressives. The term Socialists as here used includes 
Republican Socialists and Unified Socialists. 

The writer wishes to acknowledge her indebtedness to 
Professor Carlton J. H. Hayes of Columbia University for 
his valuable suggestions and kindness in reading the manu- 
script. 

Encarnacion Alzona 

New Haven, August, 1921. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



CONTENTS 



PACK 

PREFACE 5 

Inteoduction 9 

Franco-Russian Alliance 9 

French capital in Russia i6 

Sympathy of the French Socialists • • • 21 

CHAPTER I 

The Outbreak of the Revolution 24 

^'Rcd Sunday" 24 

Its significance 26 

Character and extent of the revolution 27 

CHAPTER II 

Tsar and Bureaucracy 30 

Attitude toward the tsar 30 

Socialists 30 

Anarchists 34 

Conservatives 35 

Catholics . .36 

General condemnation of the bureaucracy 2>1 

CHAPTER III 

Causes and Aims of the Revolution .... 41 

Some works on the causes of the revolution 41 

Anatole Leroy-Beaulieu 41 

La Rkfonne Sociale 42 

Le Petit Journal 43 

Paul Beauregard 43 

G. dc Molinari 44 

Rcni Millet 44 

Georges Alfassa 44 

Alfred Anspach 45 

443] 7 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



S CONTENTS [444^ 

PACK 

Pierre Giffard 4& 

Alexandre Ular 46 

Aims of the revolution 49 

CHAPTER IV 

Tme Pkogrbss of the RsvoLUTiGir 52^ 

The case of the KnioM-Potemkin 52 

Assassination of Grand Duke Serge 55 

The General Strike 56 

Methods of the revolutionaries 60 

Role of the Socialists 64 

Continuation of the revolution . . . . • 65 

CHAPTER V 

Reforms foe Russia 6t 

The tsar and reforms 67 

The Congress of Zemstvos 69^ 

Preparedness for democratic government y2 

Universal suffrage 75. 

Constitution 76 

Suggested reforms . 79 

August Manifesto S4 

October Manifesto 88 

Reforms in Poland and Finland 91 

Count Serge de Witte 94 

CHAPTER VI 

The End of the Revolution 99 

Dissolution of the first duma 102 

Repression 105 

Results of the revolution no 

Conclusion ... * 112 

BiBuoGSAPRY 115 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



INTRODUCTION 

Keen interest was shown in France in the revolutionary 
movement which convulsed the immense Russian Empire in 
the year 1905. The critical situation of the mighty fortress! 
of autocracy greoccupi§4,Er^£h. j^olitidans^ Jin^ciers. and 
sentimentaJistSj They talked and wrote about the prot>- 
lems of Russia; they proposed remedies; and they made 
predictions. It was in this year that Victor Berard pub- 
lished his U empire rttsse et le tsarisme and Alexandre Ular 
La revolution russe to meet the pressing demand for ^r^ 
information about that mysterious empire of the tsars, V. t^ ' 
known as Russia. French publicists deplored the scanty ^Vc) V^" 
knowledge of their compatriots about things Russian; they 
admonished them to study the social and economic condi- 
tions in that country. 

The main reasons for the French interest in the 
internal situation in Russia were three, namely, (i) The 
existence of the F ranco-Russian Alliance, (2) the French 
capital invested in Russia, and (3) the sympathy of the 
French ^gifiah'otn, The revolutionary agitation in Russia 
would indisputably affect France on account of the political 
and financial relations between the two states. The French 
Socialists, openly sympathizing with their Russian con- 
freres, had greatly aided in enhancing the magnitude of 
the revolution before the French public. By their press, 
their public meetings, and their resolutions, they mad€? 
their influence felt in the shaping of popular opinion. 

The Franco-Russian Alliance, on which the French gov- / 
^45] 9 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



lO THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1905 [^^g 

eminent counted as a protection against German aggression, 
had many opponents at home. Since its formation, the 
Socialists had not ceased to criticize its originators and 
its pretended utility. And when Russia in her war with 
Japan suffered humiliating military defeats, the Alliance, 
in the opinion of its opponents, had become worthless. 
Then, simultaneously with foreign disasters, occurred the 
internal revolution which rendered the Russian government 
seemingly powerless and on the verge of ruin. The of- 
fensive attack of the opponents of the Alliance acquired an 
added impetus. The propitious moment to secure the an- 
nulment of the "abominable" Alliance seemed to be at 
hand. 

In the French political arena, the anti-ally view was) 
voiced by the Socialist members of the Qiamber of Depu- 
ties. After the event of 22 January, 1905, so-called " Red 
Sunday " in Russian history, Premier Rouvier declared in 
the Chamber that France would continue to observe the 
treaty of alliance with Russia. A cry of " A bas le tsar! 
Mort a Tassassin ! " was heard from the Socialist deputies. 
A^batejjgtweeiijthe^ fordgn affairs, Delcasse, 

and the Sodalists jeii^lfii^-T Socialist deputies con- 
3emned the Alliance and reiterated their unconditional sup- 
port of the Russian Socialists and the Russian revolution. 
Delcasse replied that they should .be: cautious in judging 
the internal affairs of a foreign country, adding that the 
Alliance had given security to both France and Russia for 
the past decade. For this security, retorted Bepmale, a 
Socialist deputy, France had paid five milliards of francs.^ 

Meetings were held at which the Alliance was defied. At 
one of these held in Paris on 27 January, 1905, Anatole 
France, in a stirring speech, referred to it as " the mon- 
strous alliance of a despot with a Republic". Another 

1 Journal OfHciel, 27 January, 1905, pp. 75-77- 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



447] INTRODUCTION II 

Socialist, Frangois de Pressense, asserted that France should 
deal only with " popular Russia, with revolutionary Rus- 
sia"; for, according to Jaures, the Socialist leader, there 
would be no objection to an alliance between the French 
and the Russian peoples. 

" The so-called Franco-Russian Alliance is not the alliance 
of two peoples, but only the accord of tsarism and French 
reactionaries. This accord, an ignominious and fatal counter- 
feit of an alliance, is obnoxious to French democracy and re- 
pugnant to French socialism. To-morrow, when Russian de- 
mocracy triumphs over the tsar, grand-dukes, and greedy 
financiers, when she becomes the government of Russia, no 
false pretenses will unite the two peoples, and their union, 
which will not suggest any aggressive after-thought against 
a third party, will be an admirable guarantee of peace, security, 
and dignity for both.'' ^ 

Jean Jaures was a formidable adversary of the Alli- 
ance. Since its formation, he had regarded it with 
apprehension. He feared that it might drag France into 
war in the Far East.^ The benefits which France expected 
to derive from it were a vain dream, he said. On the con- 
trary, he continued, she would soon realize that it would 
endanger her national integrity and check her ** republican 
and socialist vigor." Moreover he regretted that the rap- 
prochement, which should come from Russia, always pro- 
ceeded from France. To his mind it was unbecc«ning for 
republican France to court autocratic Russia.* In his later 
writings and utterances, he repeatedly declared that the chief , 
obstacle to the friendship and close alliance between France 
and Russia was autocracy. Charles Rivet, an avowed 
enemy of the old regime and a close observer of Russian 

^ L'HumanitS, lo June, 1905, p. i. 
' M. Pease, Jean Jaures, p. 131. 
•Jean Jaures, Action Socialiste, p. 443. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



12 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1905 [^ 

conditions, having lived in that country for many years, ex- 
pressed a similar opinion. 

Since 1895, the year in which M. Ribot laid the foundations 
of a political accord which might have borne good fruit, official 
France had nothing but smiles and praise for the Ministers of 
the Emperor, knowing none and desiring to deal with none but 
the master and his flunkeys, without troubling at all about the 
Russian nation, that great dumb creature hidden by the puppets 
who pretended that they represented it. The French Foreign 
Office made a mistake about the initial formula of the Alliance. 
The public was allowed to believe it was a close understanding 
between two peoples, but the fact was, France was becoming 
the humble servant of the Tsar's personal clique. The French 
took for Russia what was in reality the worst expression of 
that country.^ 

Qharles Rivet emphasized the absurdity of the Alliance on 
accoimt of the character of the two contracting parties. He 
insisted that Russia was driven into the Alliance by selfish 
motives and that France was easily deceived. He wrote : 

The Franco-Russian Alliance was a political precaution, 
nothing more, in the mind of its begetter, the Russian sovereign 
who prepared it. Alexander HI was too reactionary to seek 
for anything else in a " rapprochement " with the French Re- 
public. His great hand in the hand of Marianne was symbolic 
only of a marriage of convenience with a touch of condescen- 
sion on his part which a Russian journalist, influential at the 
time, Alexis Suvorine, director of the Novoye Vremya, did not 
let us forget. 

The Grand Panjandrum was good enough to marry beneath 
him as a matter of necessity. The Frenchman, always an 
enthusiast, saw at once in this union a love match which flat- 
tered his conceit. He went off his head with joy, and his 
childishness, the pleasure he took in making himself cheap, gave 

' Charles Rivet, The Last of the Romanoffs (Button, New York, 
1918), p. 297. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



449] INTRODUCTION 13 

a wrong impression to his new friends as to the respective value 
to the other of the two contracting parties. 

The Frenchman did not realize that. He took delight in un- 
ending sentimental demonstrations, even discovered that he 
had certain features in common with the people of the North. 
Self-deceiving, intoxicated by the glitter of gala performances, 
he never tried to find out what there was beneath the tinsel.^ 

The journalist, J. Comely, characterized the Alliance asi 
unmtural, for neither j^olitically^s^^ mogiUy were 

the two peo ples a like. An alliance with Germany, he 
alleged, would be more natural, because of the intellectual 
aflfinities between Frenchmen and Germans. But he would 
prefer an alliance with England, because, in race as well ag 
in spirit, the peoples of the two countries were closely re- 
lated. He added, however, that in France, the ighoi-aht 
hated the English and adored the Cossack. " The intellec- 
tuals do not, however, detest the Cossack; but it is natural 
for them to love England and applaud her alliance." ^ 

To the long list of, th£..enemies of the Franco-Russian 
Alliance should be added, the Anarchists. They had op- 
posed it at the very beginning. Upon the report of the 
outbreak of the revolution, they attacked it with renewed 
vigor. Their advice to the French government was the 
recall of the French ambassador at Petrograd and the dis- 
missal of the Russian ambassador at Paris, an act which, 
they alleged, would be in accord with Republican traditions 
and signify the protest of the French people against the 
atrocious crimes of the autocratic lord of Russia. They 
urged the dissolution of the Alliance. "And we, French- 
men," declared Michel Petit in the Anarchist weekly, Le^ 
Temps Nouveaux of^i6 T"d5ruary",'"i9b5, " who no longer 
a^rove of autocrats, who have traced in tlie world with 

1 Rivet, op. cit, pp. 274-275. 

* UHumaniti, 8 August, 1905, P. 3- 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



14 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1905 [450 

our blood the road to liberty, it is high time that we break? 
the infamous pact which our inertia has allowed a govern- 
ment of capitalists and business men to impose on us/' 
Jean Graves, a well known Anarchist, called attention to 
the absurdity of the Alliance , " a monstrous and iniquitous 
alliance which is the most cynical, flat contradiction to good 
semse and logic." ^ Andre Girard, another Anarchist jour- 
nalist, regretted that the French government had formed 
the Alliance without consulting the people. It had com- 
mitted a great error, and now was its chance to correct it. 
The ministerial declaration, already mentioned el^where, 
he regarded as an expression of sympathy with the " san- 
guinary coward of Tsarskoe-Selo ". He concluded from 
the attitude of the French government that it was in favor 
of absolutism; otherwise it would have broken diplomatic 
^A,<Felations with the autocratic Russian government after its 
P^ crime of 22 January, 1905.^ 

Despite these diatribes, the partisans of the Alliance stood 
firm. When Count de Witte. stoppedLat Paris on his way 
^o Portsmouth, Premier Rouvier declared that the Alliance 
haS lost nothing of its force and diat it was a propitious 
moment for France to render political and financial aid. to 
its ally.' The Figaro of 29 January, 1905, commenting 
editorially on the fall of the Combes' ministry, asserted that 
the change of cabinet in no way aflFected the Alliance with 
Russia. It still retained its traditional value, and the wrath 
of Socialists would not prevail over the soimd motives, that 
is, the common interests of the two states and the friendship 
between the two peoples, which inspired its formation and 

^Les Temps Nouveaux, 10 February, 1905, p. i. 

' Socialists and Anarchists alleged that the Tsar ordered his troops 
to fire on the workers who joined the grand manifestation on 22 Jan- 
uary, 1905, under the leadership of Father Capon.. The general opinion 
was that the troops had fired to keep ordier. 

'Revue des Deux Mondes, vol. 28 (1905), p. 719. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



45 1 ] INTRODUCTION 1 5 

continuance. Eugene Lautier, writing on Russian current 
events, affirmed that the Alliance had survived and would 
survive all passing accidents. 

The defenders of the AlUance reiterated their confidence 
in its usefulness. Fgr thirtero yeari^ wrete Giiergg ViUiarc 
in the Catholic nK)ntMy,^ jgga3<^j EQ^iV H'i< # e f^ LiH i m i ^ ei i 
July, 1905, it had j^ven security JaJFjauce. It was, more- 
over, a geographical necessity. 

T^ tittle-tattle of Ae,^^ the- Allianca wnadd 

find no echo in official France, declared its def erxdfics. The 
Frendi government would not intferf ere with the internal 
politics of its ally; it was the duty of France to respect the 
domestic affairs of Russia. Those who urged it to break 
the Alliance should be reminded that " it is not in French 
natiwe to turn its back against a ' friend and ally ' at the 
moment when she is exposed to the greatest dangers ", said 
Qiarles de Lariviere, director of the Revue des Etudes 
Franco-Russes. 

AjQpording to Victor Berard, author of V empire russe et 
le tsarisme, much of the hostile criticisms of the Franco- 
Russian Alliance could be attributed to the Frenchman*s 
ignorance of Russia. During the first ten years of the 
existence of the Alliance, so-called " la lune de miel " of the 
union, France had nothing but admiration for her ally, be- 
lieving that she was invincible, and therefore a reliable 
friend in time of need. Hence her disillusionment when 
Russia was defeated in the Russo-Japanese War, 1904-1905. 
With her shattered njilitarjr pre3%e, Rug fti a no kjager 
counted as a European force. France'si disappointiment 
sTiowed how little she knew of her all/s capacities and true 
merits, the possibilities and necessities of her national life. 
The existing^ political and economic rdations between the 
two'countries should encourage the French to study Russian 
cctaditions, her problems and their possible solutions.^ 

^ Revue de Paris, vol. 2, p. 202. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



l6 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1905 [^e^ 

B^de the political relations of France and Russiaj_tfiere 
were_ecanomic ties which might seriously be affected by the 
internal disturbances. French capital had financed many 
pubKc and private enterprises in Russia. It had been used 
to build factories and railways and to develop natural re- 
sources. The thrifty French peasant as well as the wealthy 
banker had money invested in Russian stocks and bonds, 
for the French capitalists considered Russia a rich field for 
investment. They had always worked to improve Franco- 
Russian commercial relations. In 1905, the year of revolu- 
tionary agitations, they secured a new commercial treaty 
which did away with the prohibitive duties levied on French 
products, especially wine, champagne, and liquors. The 
negotiation for the new treaty, however, was influenced, 
not only by the economic advantages it would bring, but also 
by the renewal of the commercial treaties between the mem- 
bers of the Triple Alliance. Pierre Fauvef, writing in Le 
Monde Economiqtce, called attention to tfiis renewal, alleg- 
ing that it was a step taken to strengthen the military alliance 
of the members of the Triple AlUance. France should ndt 
overlook the example. He advocated closer economic ties 
with Russia, the ally of France. A favorable treaty, at any 
rate, would be an inducement to French business men to 
engage in Russian trade. Robert Doucet estimated the 
total value of French business enterprises in Russia at 
eighty- four million francs distributed as follows : * 

49,000,000 in commerce 
17,000,000 in immovable property 
18,000,000 in banks 

French capital in Russian enterprises amounted to seven 
hundred ninety-two million francs distributed geographi- 
cally as follows : 

^Le Monde BcononUque, vol. i (i90S)» PP. 385-386. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



453] INTRODUCTION 17 

3CX>,ooo,C)CX> in South Russia 
242,000,000 in Central Russia 
180,000,000 in Russian Poland 

25,000,000 in North Russia 

45,000,000 in other parts 

According to Alfred Neymark, an authority on finance, 
12,123,000,000 francs was the nominal value of Russian 
titles actually negotiable in France in 1905. 

Tentative as these figures may be, they at least give the 
reader an insight into Franco-Russian financial relations. 
They explain to a large extent the lively interest of the * — 
French bourgeoisie in the revolutionary movement in Rus- 
sia. The distinguished economist, Patil Lcroy-BeauKeu, 
fittingly remarked that the political and social crisis in 
Russia, had perplexed niany Frenchmen, not only because 
""'of its alarming effects on the European equilibrium, but also 
Because of its consequences on about ten milliards of francs 
which had been invested in Ru§t§ian government bonds and 
stocks. "Will Russia remain always solvent?" was the 
qu^inrr propounded by many Frenchmen. Professor Paul 
Leroy-'Beaulieu believed that Russia could easily avoid the 
humiliation of being insolvent, and that only in the event 
of the victory of the revolutionary socialists and " ignorant 
and impulsive" peasants, which was very remote then, 
would there be any repudiation of the national debt 

Under the caption, ''La ' pratique ' loyale de Vailiance 
riisse'\^ the distinguished French historian Professor 
Charles Seignobos endeavored to show how the French 
government had financed its ally. The tsar like Louis XVI | 
was 'badly in need of money ; but while the French monarch 
had to count on his own subjects to supply him with funds, 
the Russian autocrat could depend upon the Alliance, and 

•*^: i"'" ^UEuropien, 18 February, 1905, pp. 1-2. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



% 



1 8 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1905 [4^4 

I thus he was rendered independent of public opinion. Thisi 
independence enabled him to pursue his absolutist policy 
to the great detriment of -the people. In the last analysis, 
therefore, the French government was responsible for the 
squandering and abuses of the Russian bureaucracy and the 
Russian imperialistic designs in the Far East which cul- 
minated in the disastrous Russo-Japanese War, 1904-1905. 

Professor Seignobos deplored the use which the tsar had 
xnade of JFrgach^^ptai In only one respect, he continue^ 
could it be said that it had been well spent : it was in the 
development of big industries which in turn gave rise to a 
proletariat class who would form the necessary bond be- 
tween the intellectuals and the mass of ignorant peasants. 
This new social class would help to emancipate Russia; 
already it was making its influence felt. 

A Socialist^, journalist^ who believed that the enormous 
sum of money which France had lent to Russia should have 
been employed for social improvements, regretted that, der 
spite these loans, the misery of the masses in the whole 
empire had not been diminished. " Every year ", he ob- 
served, **one and a half million children die of himger, 
privation, alcoholism, or sickness '\ " Russia is d)ring ! " 
he exclaimed. In fact it was Germany who had reaped 
the benefits of the French loans to Russia. Russia had used 
French money to pay her debts to Germany and to buy of 
her war materials and rolling stock.^ 

As early as 1896 Jean Jaures had pointed out the financial 
dependence of Russia upon France, in an article in La Petite 
Republiqw,^ He wrote at that time : 

The Russian Government has largely exploited the movement 
of opinion in France for the last three years : it has borrowed 

^ L'Hutnaniti, 27 September, 1906, p. i. 
'Jean Jaures, Action Socialiste, p. 435. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



455] INTRODUCTION 19 

six milliards from us to build its railways, to cover the deficit 
of its budgets, and to back up its paper currency. It has leaned 
upon us to carry out political designs in the Far East; it has 
posed as the arbiter of peace in the world ; and it is fully aware 
that in the final settlement of Balkan questions, its increased 
prestige will be of great help. 

'^'^SJIl^J'^^yjSL^^ di§tipction be- , 

tweenjending monejr to jfli£j^..aadJP-.1i^^ They 

opposed the loans to tiie tsar because they strengthened his 
autocratic government. But they raised no objection if the 
loans were made to the Russian people, for they contended 
that the tsar's gov ernm ent did not represent the people. 
Their views on this subject were ventnateTuiTlie' 'Pi eiich- 
press in the early part of 1905 when the Russian government 
was again negotiating for a new loan. 

Professor Charles Seignobos pointed out the relation of 
the new loan to the revolutionary movement in the empire. 
He asserted that a new loan would spell the indefinite post- 
ponement of constituBoSSTreictt^ IFthe IFrendr govern- 
ment supported this loan without any guarantees from the 
tsar, it would do a grave injustice to the Russian people. 
Its duty on this matter, he continued, was apparent. It 
should advise its citizens not to purchase bonds of the new 
loan, and to the Russian government, it should say : " As an ^ 
ally, France has no advice to give you on your internal 
affairs. But, as lenders, the French people have a right to 
certain guarantees. If you are determined to hold on to 
patriarchal autocracy, you have to lead a patriarchial life. 
You have consented to lead a modem life, you would have 
a big industry, cuirasses, cannons, railroads at one million 
per kilometer, and enormous expenditures and loans. You 
owe it to your creditors to surround yourself with condi- 
tions indispensable to modem industrial life; these conditions 
are publicity of transactions and control of expenditures. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



20 



THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OP iBOS 



[45^ 

Neither the publicity nor the control is possible with the 
existing censorship and the bureaucracy. You can establish 
them only by the liberty of the press and the creation of a 
representative assembly. You owe these guarantees to 
your creditors ".^ 

Anatole France, speaking before the " Societe des Amis 
du Peuple Russe et des Peuples Annexes", vigorously op- 
posed the new loan. He reminded his compatriots that the 
tsar's government might fall at any time and the popular 
government that would take its place would repudiate all 
debts contracted after 22 January, 1905. The Russian 
Liberal Party, he added, especially mentioned this in one of 
its proclamations. For material and moral reasons, France 
should not subscribe to this loan. To subscribe to it, he con- 
tinued, " would be to approve the most cruel and foolish of 
wars; it would be to consent to the oppression of a people; 
it would be to approve crime and madness. No ! The loan 
for war and repression, the loan for fusillades and mas- 
sacres, the sanguinary loan, should not be floated in France. 
To accept it would be a crime. , Beware ! " ' 

Edgar MiUiaud turned his attention to the attitude of the 
French government toward the loan. While the French 
nation, he wrote, was on the side of revolutionary Russia, 
the government of theJB.qmbIic was drawing closer the ties 
that bound it with the tsar's government. To prove this, he 
cited the zeal with which Premier Rouvier and the minister 
for foreign affairs, Delcasse, were working to make the loan 
a success. The French govermnent was acting against the 
interests of its citizens and the Russian people who were 
struggling for their emancipation from the tsarist yoke. 

The French Anarchists were no less emphatic in 
denouncing the Franco-Russian financial relations. The 

^L'Europien, 18 February. 190S. PP. !-«• 
« Ibid., 25 Mardi, 1905, p. 6. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



457] INTRODUCTION 21 

revolutionary agitation in Russia and the floating of 
a new loan in France furnished them with new pretexts 
to inveigh against the French government, the bour- 
geoisie, and the tsar. They expressed surprise at what they 
chose to call the tsar's boldness in seeking a new loan in 
France after his policy, both foreign and domestic, had been 
dealt a severe blow by military defeats abroad and civil 
strife at home. They thought that after the disastelrsr 
which the tsar had suffered iiTtfie war with Japan, the 
French financiers would refuse to lend him more fimds 
with polite pretexts, and the French public would show their 
disapproval with hissings. But, to their great disappoint- 
ment, such was not the case. The success of the loan 
showed that the tsar and the French capitalists were still on 
good terms. The Anarchists jthen turned to the French 
workers to inform them of their bitter discovery. They 
announced that the friend of the French capitalists was an 
enemy of the French people, and the French capitalists were 
aiding the tsar with their money to carry out his " bloody '* 
schemes and to put down the Russian revolution, which was 
a "daughter of the French Revolution". The French 
workers, said Michel Petit, should do everything in their 
power to help their Russian confreres in their struggle for 
liberty so that their victory would not give place to the rise 
of new tyrants, the bourgeoisie, as in France. 

Lastly the attitude of the French^ S oci al igt s, thrir sjrm- 
pathy with the Russian Socialists, contributed to the interest 
which the Russian revolution roused in France. Through 
^their press and their leaders they presented before French 
public opinion the cause of the Russian people as they saw 
it according to their social and political principles. The 
malady of their Russian brothers, according to their diag- 
nosis, was political tyranny and rigorous capitalistic ex- 
ploitation. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



22 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1905 [458 

T}]i£J5xgn<^!S jQCJalist s w al k r AAAy uidtavuie d^Ttrwm- the 
French nation to the side of the Russiajijreyg^^ 
butThey also worked hard to influence the French govern- 
ment to act in their favor. They advised it tot .§§yer diplo- 
matic relations with Russia, and to rrfuse.ta^subsodbe to a 
new loan except on condition -that the tsar^ant ronstitu- 
tiofial reforms. They attacked its foreign policy; they de- 
' noimced the Alliance. Francois de Pressense regretted that 
the French government had not expressed in the name of 
the people its sympathy with the Russian nation and its 
horror at the massacres perpetrated in the allied country. 
It was humiliating for France, a free country, that its gov- 
ernment had not even uttered a single word to greet the 
dawn of a new era for the Russian people.^ The Socialist 
depute Vaillant asserted that French Socialists should exert 
all their efforts to combat the friends of the tsar who were 
in the government of the Republic. 

It was also due to the SociaUsts' activity that popular 
meetings were held, not only in Paris, but in the provinces as 
well, to promote the cause of the revolution. On such oc- 
casions tile Socialists gave vent to their wrath at the tsar. 
Of the meetings held at Paris the largest one took place in 
Tivoli-Vaux Hall on 30 January, 1905. One of the speakers 
was Ahatole France who began his speech by saying " Le tsar 
a tuS le tsarisfne " and conduded it with a peroration on the 
crimes and misdeeds of their hated enemy. The meeting 
ended with cries of '' A has le tsarime! Mort au tsar! '* 
The "Societe des Amis du Peuple Russes et des Peuples 
Annexes," an organization whose purpose was to acquaint 
the French people with Russian affairs, held periodic public 
meetings. Among its members were Messieurs Anatoie 
France, Octave Mirbeau, Ch. Seignobos, Pierre Quillard, 
and Mesdames Emile Zola, Camille Flammarion, and 

^ UEuropeen, 25 November, 1905, pp. 1-2. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



459] INTRODUCTION 23 

Severine/ Representatives of the Confederation G^n^rale 
du Travail cafrecrseve TO p op ul a r niecUiigs in P»i» and 
various Socialist groups organized on 18 and i9"TeBruary, 
iglbj; twenty-one meetings at Dijon, Saint-Etienne; aer- 
monft-Ferrand, Tours, Dunkerque, Rouen, Le Havre, 
Perigueux, Cahors, Lille, etc. Among the speakers were 
Jaures, Longuet, Allard, Ddory, Thivrier, Lucien Rolland, 
and other stars of the Socialist firmament. 

The French Socialists had also taken the initiative at 
various Socialist congresses in drawing up resolutions of 
sympathy with the Russian proletariat. At the Congress of 
Chalons, the French section of the Internationale invited 
"all the other sections of the Internationale to see that their 
respective governments did not render aid to the tsar to 
'check the revolutionary movement.^ At the same congress! 
'it was Lafargue who read the resolution of sympathy with 
the Russian proletariat.* Later at the International Social- 
ist Congress of Stuttgart, held from 18 to 24 August, 1907, 
the French Socialist Party again drafted a resolution invit- 
ing the socialist parties of every country " to take the 
necessary steps to assemble their delegates and to give them 
the means, in case of a threatening international conflict, 
to decide on the measiu-es to be taken in order to forestall 
and prevent it ". 

In these various ways the French Socialists gave con- 
siderable publicity to the Russian revolution. Thanks to 
their efforts, the side of the revolutionaries was ably pre- 
sented before the French public. 

The following chapters will be devoted to the presenta- 
tion of certain French opinions on various phases of the 
Russian revolution of 1905 which roused special interest 
in France. 

* Free Russia, i April, 1906, p. i. 

^ Revue Socialiste, vol. 41 (1905) » P. 589. 

» L'Humaniti, 30 October, 1905, p. i. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



CHAPTER I 
The Outbreak of the Revolution 

It was the spectacular workingmen's manifestation of 
22 January, 1905, and its fatal results that diverted the at- 
tention of the civilized world from the Russo-Japanese War, 
1904-1905, to the internal situation of Russia. The disas- 
trous foreign war had put the Russian government to a 
severe test The defeats of the Russian army and ixavy re- 
vealed the abuses and corruption of the administration, 
and-produced widespread discontent. The workingmen 
of '-i^etrogTad- under the leadership of a priest of the 
Russian Orthodox Church, Gapon by name, took the in- 
itiative in voicing the popular discontent by appealing dir- 
ectly to the tsar and respectfully begging him to alleviate 
their sufferings. It was the response of the tsar's troops 
to this originally pacific demonstration that led to the desig- 
nation of 22 January, 1905, as " Red Sunday ", and began 
the prolonged series of disturbances throughout the em- 
pire which attracted the attention of foreign nations. 

In France, it roused the indignation of the Socialists. 
They called it the " day of massacres " and they placed the 
responsibility upon the tsar, alleging that it was preme- 
ditated, that he had ordered his troops to fire on the petition- 
ers. At a meeting of the " Societe des Amis du Peuple 
Russe et des Peuples Annexes " held on 27 February in the 
" Hotel des Sodetes Savantes " at Paris, the Socialist 
spiers d«:Iared that the t^r's reply, to the humbk peti- 
fion of his peaceful and patient subjects was murder. On 
that day, they announced, tsarism was killed. P. G. La 
Chesnais remarked that it was merely a " preface " to the 
34 [460 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



46l] THE OUTBREAK OF THE REVOLUTION 25 

revolution. The 22 January, they claimed, was similar to 
the 5 October, 1789, at Paris when a procession headed by 
women marched to Versailles with the naive hope that 
the king could alleviate their misery. But, they observed, 
there was a difference in the attitude assumed by the French 
monarch and the Russian tsar. The Bourbon king did I 
not reply to his subjects by shooting and letting the blood 1 
of innocent men and women flow in the streets. It had not » 
been till two years later that an event similar to the Russian 
blood-letting of 22 January had occurred in France: the 
flight to Varennes and the massacre of the Champ-de-Mars.*' 

The wrath of the Anarchists was boundless. Their ver- 1 
sion*of the event of 22 January' was similar to that of the! 
Socialists. Nicholas II, " the assassin of his people ", was ' 
responsible for the "massacre" of 22 Januaiy. The 
** Bete Rouge de Petersbourg " hid in Tsarkoe-Selo and 
then ordered his troops to massacre the petitioners. A notor- 
ious coward, he had no courage to speak to his own sub- 
jects, declared Oiarles Albert. But fire and sword, they 
sententiously declared, would not put an end to the uprising 
or pacify the petitioners. A horrible and tragic day like 
the 22 January does not end in an " ^meute '' ; it begins a 
revolution. That day would always be memorable in the 
history of popular movements. 

The French conservatives deplored the vituperations of 
the Socialists and Anarchists. They protested against their* 
exaggerated accounts of ^* Red Sunday". Georges Bour-| 
don, correspondent of the Figaro at Petrograd, wrote that, 
while the number of the dead did not exceed five hundred 
and of the wounded, fifteen hundred, the Socialist papers 
reported ten thousand dead and thirty thousand wounded.* 
Radical opinion in France in respect to the responsibility for 

^ LEuropien, 28 January, 1905, pp. 1-3- 
^Le Figaro, 7 February, 1905, p. 3. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



26 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1905 [462 

the shooting on 22 January was erroneous, he added. The 
troops were not given orders to fire on the people; they 
facted in obedience to miHtary rule which prescribed that 
force could be resorted to if all other means of preserving* 
order had failed. 

Father Gapon, that obscure priest of the Russian 
OrthCiiltcrCliaTth, who suddenly came to the public eye as 
the champion of the proletariat, was admired by some and 
derided by others in France. His name ibecame indelibly 
linked with the |)roletarian movemeht tn Russia, anS-^the 
Socialists and Ainarchists of Frante extolled him as a hero 
of thfr oppressed class. They praised Tiis work, his initia- 
tive, his sacrifice. But the French conservatives had an en- 
tirely different impression of this " bizarre apostle ". To 
their mind his spectacular and ephemeral career was com- 
monplace. Georges Bourdon held him responsible for the 
manifestation of 22 January and charged him with the 
" crime '' of transforming the piu-ely economic claims of the 
workers into political demands. And J. Bourdeau, corres- 
pondent of the Journal des Debats, accused him of planning 
to establish a proletarian dictatorship and of resorting to ter- 
rorism to gain his end. 

In regard to the significance of the workingmen's mani- 
festation of 22 January, 1905, there was a diversity of 'opin- 
ion in France. Was it the beginning of anarchy or revolu- 
tion ? The conservatives would not admit that it marked the 
first stage of a revoluticnj^ ,To r^jard it as theLbssiwi^^g ^^ ^ 
rev^34trrit?rtrsai3 the Revue des Deux Mondes, was preposter- 
ous. Russia was disorganized and there were local troubles, 
some of which were alarmingly grave, it was true; but these 
were merely the symptoms of anarchy and not the incidents 
of a revolution. That the nation would rise en masse, that 
the true revolution wtould be inaugurated, and that a re- 
public would be established on the ruins of the old regime- 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



^63] ^^^ OUTBREAK OF THE REVOLUTION 27 

these things were a chimera! Russia, indeed, was exper- 
iencing a violent shock, added Le Monde Economiqiie, but 
it was merely a short-Uved, transient agitation/ 

The French conservative attitude toward the Russian revo- 
lutionary movement was influenced partly by their habit of I 
judging by Western standards and partly by their personal! 
interests or those they sought to defend. T hey were wont to 
compar e the Rus gjf^n iipr*'^^g with th^^_ in Wes tern Eur ope.^ 
The sudden explosions and the temporary abatement, they 
oBserved, were so'unliEe the course of popular upnsings in 
the West. In Russia, after a violent outburst, there would 
be a halt which seemed as if it would' end There, as if its " 
«iergy were e^diausted. The Reime des Deux Mondes ad- 
fnittecf that the Russian movement was disconcerting to 
Occidentals. In Western Eim>pe, it claimed, a popular up- 
rising proceeded differently : once begun, it would continue 
cm uninterruptedly and rush to its end. Despite this dif- 
ference, it would not dignify the agitation in Russia with 
the name " revolution " ; it was nothing but anarchy. The 
local disturbances, though violent and brutal at times, were 
without imity; they were simply scattered beginnings over 
a wide area. With the sole exception of the first general 
strike, which was the only movement revealing a concerted 
plan, all the other incidents were a manifestation of anarchy 
"Tather than a revolution. And the participation of the 
police in the disorders and the mutinies in the fleet — were 
these not unmistakable symptoms of anarchY ? * 

Reni^ Millet expressed a more s^pathetic appreciation 
of the agitation in Russia. Although he admitted that it 
was yet too early to judge such a " grand movement ", he 
contradicted many of the assertions of the conservative pressi 

* 28 January, igos p. "7. 
a Vol. 29 (1905), p. 237. 
^ Revue des Deux Mondes, vol. 30 (190S), PP. 332-233. 4&>. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



28 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1906 {464, 

V^ in regard to the character of the uprising. It was the first 
^'- general strike which particularly impressed him. It had 
^ t been said that the Russians could not organize themselves 
\ ^^ xuid were incapable of concerted action; but tha^generaLl 
Vv ; - ^^'stf^e disproved this assertion. It had been alleged that 
s -^ t they did not know what they wanted and yet from all the 
xy ^ four comers of the empire came the demand for political 
fv liberties. He denied too that the movement lacked com- 
petent leaders. There were committees working in the 
shadow, he declared. The people's long oppression had 
given them, so to speak, the genius for conspiracy. The 
trouble with the Frenchman, he explained, was that he 
could not conceive of a revolution without a " social con- 
tract, an assembly of notables, a tennis court oath, and fine 
oratorical gestures ".^ 

The French Socialists were among those who held the 
opinion that the 22 January inaugurated the Russian revolu- 
tion which would finally liberate the people from the tsarist 
yoke. FranQois de Pressense declared that it was a political 
iand social revolution : it would give to the proletariat " real 
rights '' which would be guaranteed by a free nation. In 
a stirring speech, Jean Jaures stated that " a revolutionary 
period had opened for Russia, which would not be closed 
save by the establishment of the power of democracy, 
political and social '*. Russian democracy, he continued, 
had begun to speak to the world and its advent was a cer- 
tainty. 

The French Socialists entertained the brightest hopes for 
the tthhnate victory of thcTcrollition. ' They were confident 
*" that the Russian Socialists, whom they claimed were playing 
an important role in the movement, would carry the strug- 
gle to the end. They denied the assertion of the French con- 

^ Revue politique et parlementaire, vol. 46 (1905), p. 424. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



465] ^^^ OUTBREAK OF THE REVOLUTION 29 

servativ^ that k was m anarchy and n ot a revolut ion 

t hat exist ed in Russia. They affirmed that it was a veritable 
revolution^ the logical outcome of a slow evolution of 
public spirit and it was precipitated by the disasters of the 
Russio-Japanese War. They jloiied that it was confined 
to Petro^d, Moscow, and Warsaw. It was widespread; 
j£, anbraced the entire Russian^^people.V TT^ dedared 
further that it was well organized with a definite program; 
that it was under the direction of competent leaders. It was 
Professor Charles Seignobos who asserted that the Russian 
revolution had been prepared by the propaganda on social 
and political questions among the most highly cultured 
class, and in this respect it resembled the France of 1789. 
Just as France had her philosophers, Russia had her intel- 
ligentzia. 

The French Anarchists emphatically declared that the 

agitation m RussiaTwasiriormidaBTelipHs^ 

^people. The revolution which had commenced maugufafed 

"a^riew'*erar It was a force which would aid the Russian 

workers to conquer and overthrow the last of the 

Romanovs, " the assassin of his people ".^ 

The various estimates of the significance, extent, and 
character of the Russian revolution outlined above show the 
diversity of opinions in France in respect to the situation 
in the allied coimtry. As the revolution progressed, some 
of th^. French conservatives^, as will 1>e indicated in sub- 
sequent chapters, had to revise their opinion of the revo- 
luHmi. The Socialists and Anarchists too, by the end of 
th<e year 1905 when the government had regained its lost 
strength, discovered that their early estimate of^ the revo- 
lution had to be modified. 

* Temps Nouveaux, no. 40. 




-^^ 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



CHAPTER II 

Tsar and Bureaucracy 

The discussion of Russian internal affairs which was. 
started by the event of 22 January, 1905, divided Frenck 
*^ opinion into two camps. In one camp were those who uj^- 

held the tsar but assailed the bureaucracy; and in the other, 
those who condemned both the tsar and the bureaucracy 
un3er the conimon designation of " tsarism '' or " tsardom *\ 

\i They were foremost among those who "made dire predic- 
tions of the future of tsarism. They proclaimed that they 
were the enemy of the tsar, and those who loved liberty 
should follow their example. At a meeting of the " Societe 
des Amis du Peuple Russe et des Peuples Annexes," Anatole 
France opened the session with the following exhortation : 
" Citizens, let us open this meeting by proclaiming ourselves 
the enemy of the tsar and the friend of Russia''. The 
French Socialist writers were quick to make deductions 
from the reports of the occurrences in Russia. Take for 
example, Francois de Pressense, whose prolific pen was 
ever at the service of the "cause". Just a few days 
Njfter " Red Sunday ", he published an article in the Socialist 
* ^^> .weekly, VEuropeen, tmder the caption of ''La Fin du 
K Tsarisme'' in which he announced that Imperial Russia, 
, I T the empire of the tsars, was falling into ruins. " There is 
^ . no longer any Tsar : Popular Russia, the revolution in pro- 
f gress, alone remains".^ Another article of his was en- 

^ VEuropien, 28 January, 1905, pp. 1-3. 
30 [466 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



467] '^^^^ ^^D BUREAUCRACY 31 

titled '' UAgonie du Tsarisme" which appeared in the 
same weekly shortly after the defeat of Rozhdestvensky.^ 
This was a disaster, he said, which demonstrated the in- 
capacity and the impotence of the government of the tsar. 
On 4 November, 1905, just a few days after the procla- 
mation of the October Manifesto, he wrote that whatever 
hardships and obstacles might be encountered by the Rus- 
sian revolution, one thing at least was certain : " autocracy 
is dead, a new era has commenced; they will never return 
to the monstrous regime which has succumbed under the 
burden of its own faults, under the crushing responsibility 
of the war in Manchuria, no less than before the almost 
unanimous demands of a great people in arms ". A writer 
in the republican socialist daily La Pitite Republiqtie ^ pro- 
nounced tsarism to be in extremis. Xhe mutinies in the* 
fleet, the disasters in the Russo-Japanese war, the massacres 
of innocent men and women, were but the prolegomena of an 
inevitable death.' , Pierre Ouillard called attention to the 
horrible iiiassacres in Russia and remarked : " In the blood 
of Russians, Poles, Armenians, Jews, and Finns, the blind 
tsar is proceeding with rapid strides toward his destiny ".* 
The socialist daily UHunumitS, under the direction of 
Jean Jaures, declared that it was high time that tsarism 
should be dead and buried. 

What should be the attitude of official France toward 
the tsar? was one of the favorite topics of discussion in 
socialist circles. Time and again the Socialists had urged 
the French government to declare publicly that it <xmr 
demned tsarism. Frangois de Pressense boldly declared that 
France would be crushed if she attempted to render either 

• L'Europien, 3 June, 1905, pp. 4-5. 

• UHumaniti, 2 July, 1905, p. 3. 

• L'Europien, 12 August, 1905, p. 2. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



32 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1905 [^68 

pecuniary or moral assistance to tsarism. In favor of the 
popular parties only should she exert her entire influence. 
The Socialis^^f urther urged the J^J^<^hjiSS£XSiSSX£XiLAo 
exert its utmost power to. CQis^^tbc. tsar J;a grant the des- 
mands of the revolutionaries.^ They claimed that France 
was in a position to do this if she only wished. Then, 
not content with these exhortations, and, as if appealing to 
French honor, they endeavored to convince the public in 
writing as well as in speech that France had been abused 
by the tsar, that she had been fooled to her great loss, that 
she had become the obedient and htunble servant of auto- 
cracy. Russian diplomacy, they further said, was directed 
by Berlin with such a happy result that William II could 
wett be proud. At any rate, the tsars of^ Russia, the 
RcMiianovs, had not a single drop of Russian blood; they 
were really of German extraction and had always piu-sued 
a German policy.^ Nicholas II was responsible for all the 
catastrophes of the Russo-Japanese War, for all -tfie miseries 
and tragedies within his empire, for the closing of universi- 
ties and the restrictions on the freedom of the press, for 
the massacres of Armenians, in the Caucasus and the pog- 
rbms in Poland. He was " a coward, a liar, a traitor, a 
murderer". Why should the government of a Republic, 
they asked, express S5rmpathy with such a monarch? 

An avowed enemy of the tsar, Charles Rivet, considered 
the tsar as an ignorant autocrat Referring to the attitude 
of the French conservatives toward the tsar, he said : 

The FreiKh newspapers had portrayed him as an enlightened 
despot to whom the war had revealed the dangers of an irre- 
sponsible bureaucracy, as one who meant thenceforth to call to 
his side for the purpose of government the living forces of the 
nation. That was the purest imagination. The real Nicholas 

* UHumaniti, 27 September, 1906^ p. i. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



469] ^-^-^^ ^^^ BUREAUCRACY 33 

II had unfortunately no resemblance to that fictitious creature. 
He bore the same name, that was all. 

The fact is, the Tsar did not understand his people, had no 
system, no policy, unless it was — quite as much owing to self- 
infatuation as to the worship he had of autocracy — ^the intention 
to maintain intact the rule of absolutism.^ 

Qafe^thejtsar's personal weaknesses which particularly 
incensed his enemies in I^rance was Iiis indecision; his 
"lack of will powerr^Throughout the course of the revolu-"' 
ti6ri,'lt was this grave personal defect which made him dis- 
liked even in circles less hostile to his government Alex- 
an dre Ula r dwells on this point in his book, Russia from 
Within, 

The Russian Empire has become a chaos, where men and 
ideas ephemerally set and rise. This chaos is symbolized in the 
reiterated and monstrous contradictions of Nicholas II ; by his 
indecision; his manifest duplicity; his megalomania, which 
after the scattering of his fleets and armies, stickles for the 
notion of honor — ^the fool's honor, which immolates the rising 
generation of the country to economize a little money in this 
disgraceful aif air ! — ^the honor of this caricature of a Sovereign 
who ensconces himself trembling in his Castle, dares not show 
himself to his people, as yet pacific, and traitorously assassin- 
ates them in the streets! The honor of the sick man who 
brags in the morning that he will save his country, and saves 
it again at night by undoing what he has just done.* 

UHumanite complained likewise of the obstinacy of the 
tsar and!, Hs- ^cn^g remark s.* He had refused to act when 
the situation of the country demanded it; he had turned a 
deaf ear to the wise counsels of responsible men. His judg- 

* Charles Rivet, op. cit, p. 18. 

•Alexandre Ular, Russia from Within (London, 1905), p. 18. 

• L'Humaniti, 24 April, 1905, p. i. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



34 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1905 [^^q 

ment could not be trusted and his bad faith had more than 
once been proved. Alexandre Ular declared that the tsar 
" has ever ibeen the product and the instigator of moral 
corruption". He had introduced spiritualists and clair- 
voyants into his court, and it was through these agents that 
reactionaries managed their sovereign.^ Nicholas II, Alex- 
andre Ular continued, was not merely a " sick man " ; he 
was a " nefarious sovereign ". 

The Ttench 'Anarchists, on their part, were not outdone 
in their abhorrence of the Russian autocrat. They had at- 
tached to him such uncomplimentary epithets as " Le Bete 
Rouge de Petersbourg '', "assassin of his people", 
" coward ", and " traitor ". His vague promises were ex- 
asperating to them. If the Russian revolutionaries, they 
declared, desired the cessation of the horrors of absolutism, 
they should support their claims by force. They could 
gain their liberty only by the use of force. 

They proclaimed that the downfall of the tsar was inevi- 
table. The tsar was leading a precarious existence, and 
whatever he might do, his days were already ntmibered. 
The bomb of Ivan Kalaiev, the assassin of Grand Duke 
Serge, uncle of Nicholas II, was a signal, said the Anar- 
chists, that the " hangman " could expect no pity.^ His 
overthrow, said Michel Petit in the Temps Nouveaux of 5 
August, 1905, " is inevitable, certain, approaching, and like 
the melting of snow on high summits, there will be terrible 
avalanches ". 

The Anarchists assailed the attitude of the French gov- 
ernment toward the tsar. M. Delcasse, they declared, had the 
boldness to announce in the Chamber of Deputies that he 
wotdd not permit an allied monarch to be insulted in France. 
The dutyof aUFrenchmgiu.ihey^. asserted, was to con;;_ 

» Op. cit, p. 43. 

' Temps Nouveaux, 3 February, 1906, pp. 1-2. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



^/^ 



471] TSAR AND BUREAUCRACY 35 

demn unanimously^ not .. merely th^ "maj^saorc" of 22 
January^ but the tsar and tsarism. 

Despite the vigorous propaganda of Socialists and Anar- 
chists against the tsar, there was a certain section of French 
opinion which remained friendly to the tsar and condemned 
the vituperations of the radicals. The Paris Temps, the 
Matin, the Figaro, the Petit Journal, and the Journal des 
Debats were among t he prontsarist dailies which defended 
tilie tsar again st the attacks of Socialists and Anarchists. ^^^^ -ik^ 
They were organs cohfroHed by Dig nnancial cofporaSioiisr'^.^ cr q ' *^ 
^fcfi^for powerful economic reasous, desired to preserve U^^ Xrf i 
*"rtte prestige of tihie Russian government. They weremoder- ^Cc^^ a ^M^ 
ate in their appreciation of the disturbances in the empire 
and they openly expressed regret at the exaggerated and 
impassioned opinions of their radical compatriots. To the 
official attitude of the French government toward Russian 
affairs, they gave their whole-hearted support. The Figaro 
of 29 January, 1905, commended editorially the minister 
for foreign affairs when he criticized before the Chamber 
of Deputies the " injtuious and unjust *' epithets applied 
to the tsar by the French Socialists. It was his duty, it 
iadded, to see that a friend and ally was not abused by 
Frenchmen. Alcide Ebray, writing in the Revue politique 
et parlementaire, deplored the tendency he had observed in 
Some press comments to exaggerate wilfully the gravity of 
ttie situation in Russia. Some did so, actuated by their 
hostility against the tsar, and others, by their sympathy 
with the political and general strike movements. The mani- 
festations against the tsar, he regarded as useless, out of 
place, and imprudent, considering the existing alliance be- 
tween France and Russia. Such demonstrations were un- 
becoming to an allied country. It was imperative that the 
enemies of the tsar should exercise their right to criticise 
him with prudence and moderation, for nothing better would 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



36 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1905 l472 

serve the purpose of those who sought to embroil France 
with Russia than the manifestations against tsarism. He 
hoped that the indignation against the tsar would cease as 
soon as possible. 

jTheJFmKh^ltl^ t^drjajjjgjgg^^ tsar 

with a certain reserve. His persecution of the Catholics 
was stifr remembered by tKemf The Revue du Monde 
CathoUque declared that from 1772 to 1905 the tsars of 
Russia maintained a regime of violence against Catholicism. 
But the troubles whch menaced Nicholas II's throne had 
compelled him to grant concessions to religious sects. By 
far the wisest reform he had made in the empire was the 
granting of the liberty of worship, which was a real blessing* 
to the people.^ / 

In regar d to the attitude of the Russia n people tow^rcjt the 
^ tsar, a writer in La Reforme Sociale, whose name is not 
revealed, expressed very favorable impressions. 

The Russian people taken as a whole, in spite of some ap- 
pearances to the contrary, still love and reverence their tsar; 
they only ask to be led by him. They complain bitterly of the 
too numerous intermediaries, inclined to hide the truth, who 
separate them from their sovereign. The Tsar has lost nothing 
of his prestige and authority ; he is always the " batyushka " or 
" little father ", and they do not hold him responsible for their 
present unhappiness. But on account of their ignorance, the 
Russian people are easily misled; and, if care is not taken, the 
ringleaders, who are agitating terribly, will take advantage of 
them. At present the Tsar and the people can understand each 
other and, as it behooves them in moments of trial, draw closer 
the traditional bonds which unite them. In order to do this, 
it is necessary to hold together; it remains to find a practical 
mode of communication between the sovereign and his more 
than one hundred million subjects.^ 

^ Revue du Monde CathoUque, 15 May, 1905, pp. 602-621. 
• La Riforme Sociale, 16 April, 1905, p. 655. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



473] ^-^^^ ^^^ BUREAUCRACY 3^ 

According to Anatole Leroy-Beaulieu, a prominent Cath- 
olic layman and economist, one of the greatest hindrances 
to the solution of Russian problems was the amazing ignor- 
ance of the tsar about Russia. Of all the Russians, he ob- 
serraJ^ltfie tsar was the least acquainted with the Russian 
people; and imluckily the majority of the men who had 
access to him had a personal interest in the maintenance of 
absolutism and the continuance of abuses/ 

In expressing their opinions of the tsar the moderate 
thinkw-^of Trance refrained from the use of abusive lan- 
guage whidi dmmfcfi&rized the advanced thinkers. While^ 
admitting that he had many shortcomings, they did not 
etitirdy place tm liim the i-esponsibHity for all the mrsenes 
and strffermg*-^ -d!^ mentioned above 

they' drew a'Sistinction between the tsar and his official! 
family, the bureaucracy. The tsar, in their opinion, was to 
a large extent the creature of circumstances. 

The Bureaucracy 

All shades of French opinion were unanimous in their con- 
demnation oFthe notorious KussianT)ureaucracy. The nus« 
government, which Socialists and Anarchists attributed td 
the tsar, was regarded by moderate thinkers as the fault of 
the bureaucracy. The real enemy of the Russian people was" l 
the bureaucracy, according to French liberals and conserva-T^ 
tives. It was responsible for the disasters of the Russian 
army in Manchuria and for the corrupt government of the 
empire. It had proved to be a disastrous form of govern- 
ment, a total failure, observed Eugene Lautier. The people 
of Russia, asserted Rene Millet,* was rising not against the 
tsar, but against the all-powerful bureaucracy. Even a Soc- 

* Le Petit Journal, 3 July, ipoS, p. 2. 

* Revue politique et parlementaire, vol. 45, (1905), p. 207. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



^1 



38 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1905 [474 

ialist, P. G. La Chesnais, was compelled to admit that the en- 
emy of Russia was not the tsar. The real enemy, who was 
more dangerous and more difficult to overcome, was the cen- 
tralized bureaucracy. It could exist without the tsar, and 
the tsar without it wotdd no longer be dangerous. He con- 
cluded that any constitutional reform for Russia must^l3e=^ 
dtfntrsilize iYie government, thus removing the power from 
the much-hated and corrupt bureaucracy. The work of 
" reiform should include the disintegration of this system of 
government, for it was the bureaucracy that hindered the 
solution of Russian problems. The socialist daily, UHu- 
manite, discovered two aspects of the Russian bureaucracy ; 
namely, the " robber " bureaucracy and the " hypocrite and 
liar" bureaucracy.^ The Russo-Japanese War, 1904- 1905, 
brought to light these abominable defects of the system; 
the thefts practised by high bureaucrats, the bribery they 
exacted, the waste of war materials, the entire lack of dis- 
cipline in the army and navy. The war revealed these im- 
Wistakable proofs of the utter inefficiency of the bureau- 
cracy. 

After a visit in Russia about the middle of 1905, Anatole 
Leroy-Beaulieu declared that the bureaucracy had already 
lost Its prestige. Its tyrannical government had exhausted 
the patience of the people, " perhaps the most patient in the 
world ". The elite of the country were in accord as to the 
necessity of putting an end to the rule of the bureaucrats 
which had brought humiliation to the empire. Alexandre 
Ular expressed the opinion that the bureaucracy had fallen 
so low in popular esteem as never to be able to rise again. 
, Beside its old abuses and corruptions, its behavior during 
the course of the revolution had been characterized by a 
ivacillating and treacherous policy and had increased the 

» VHumaniti, 21 April, 1905, p. 2. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



475] ^-^^^ -^^^ BUREAUCRACY 39 

hostility against it. " One thing is certain " — ^he wrote in 
his l;)ook Russia from Within — " Tsardom will not recover 
from its decadence, for this is natural and fatal. By a 
more and more rapid, but absolutely logical development, 
it has evolved to disaster, at once internal and extemaL 
Just as the bureaucracy has lost the two great symbols of 
its niunHane power, Fort A^huf and Miikden, in this san- 

"guiriary war, so in the moral war which it has insolently 
faunched against its clients, it has lost the^only two bases of 
a stable government: popular esteem and Its own dignit£^* 
The relation of the tsar with the bureaucracy was ridiculed 
by French Socialists. Ja3ja!£>lsdgjgy asfnfift| and . Socialifi t 
opinion generally, regarded the tsar as the " docile p^jppet 
oT ifte^'btireaiicracy^a plaything in the hands of 

^I^Mfeh andjmbitio^^^^ had refused 

to ]^ay the traditional role of the national tsars. Being an 
autocrat who did not know how to use his power, he de- 
pended solely on the corrupt but powerful bureaucracy ; and 
l>eing weak and cowardly, he had allowed the bureaucracy 
to commit all kinds of crimes in his name.* He was but 
the "lamentable impresario" of the "political comedy" 
which was going on in his empire.* 

Conservative thinkers, while condemning the clique around 
him, affirmed that he had ignored their counsels and listened 
to the insistent demands of his subjecte. Euj^ene Lautier 
expressed the opinion that it was his wisdom which kqjt the 
f evolution within bounds; that it was his resistance to the 
comisels of reactionary bureaucrats that made possible the 
restoration of order and the resiimption of normal life. 
The bur^Lucrats, more royalist than the tsar, opposed vigor- 
ously the concessions he had granted, and because he had 

* Op. cit, p. 290. 

• L'Europien, 2S January, 1905, Pp. 1-2. 
*L'EuropSen, ii March, 1905, pp. 5-6. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



40 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1905 [476 

yielded to the popular demands, they accused him of weak- 
ness. 

Absolutely nothing which savored of a defence of the 
Russian bureaucracy could be found in any section of French 
public opinion. On other Russian problems opinions dif- 
fered, but there was luianimity in the condenmation of the 
notorious bureaucratic system. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



CHAPTER III 
Causes and Aims of the Revolution 

The interest which the Russian revolution aroused in 
France inspired more than one Frenchman to make an in- 
quiry into the causes juidprj^^^ uprising. Not only 
in magttzine and newspaper articles were attempts of this 
kind made, but also in detailed and more pretentious studied, 
of which Victor Berard's V empire russe et le tscarisme, 
Georges Alf assa's La arise agraire en Russie, and Alexandre 
Ular's La revolution russe are well known. Berard's boofc^ 
is a well written, scholarly jtudy^f the rail ^£S of tbft ^JT^r 
sikri' movement fTQfassa attempts to seek the causes of the 
revolution in {He agrarian system ; and Ular give^ an inter- 
esting anti-tsarist account of the general conditions pre- 
vailing at the outbreak of the revolution with a view to 
explaining the causes of the uggheaval. The newspapers and 
'magazines cbntaTnad from time to time monographs on this 
topic by such eminent writers as Anatole Leroy-Beaulieu, 
member of the Institut de France, Alfred Anspach, pro- 
fessor of French literature at the Ecole St. Pierre at Petro- 
grad, Paul Beauregard, economist, and J. Flach, professor 
at the College de France. 

Anatole Leroy-Beaulieu gave four DrjytjdpaljCSOl^^ 
agitation in Russia, two of which were pohtical and the 
Sffiertwo,'' social. He attributed the political and '^ moral *^'' 
cnses to the regime inaugurated by Sipiaguine and Plehve, 
and to flie arbitrariness of the bureaucracy. The rule of 
'iPIehve particularly was most oppressive. It was under him 
477 41 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



42 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1905 [478 

that conviction without trial for political offenses was o£- 
fically sanctioned and the enforcement of this regulation 
filled the state prisons and the wilds of Siberia. Qamor 
for a change of regime and for administrative, ecoaomic, 
judicial, and religious reforms became so insistent during 
his regime that in November, 1904, a few months after his 
assasisination an assembly of the members of the ToSd- 
^ ^emstvos '^ and mimicipal " dumas " petitioned the tsarjo 
refdftii the political system. In December the tsar issued 
a proclamation promising some vague reforms, which wSe 
far from satisfactory. The social causes were the growth 
of the urban proletariat and the rise of the 'bourgeoisie. By 
1905 the proletariat formed one-half or one-third of the 
population of Moscow, Warsaw, Lodz, Odessa, Riga, and 
Kiev. It was the urban proletariat that furnished the 
:*',./♦ v^ material for revolution. Then there was the growing 

'*->* ?\ middle class who desired to participate in the government 

J^^ t \ w ^ ^U' f 1 but whose cooperation was never invited by the administra- 
; f i ^ i ^Qjj Russia, he asserted, was traversing the same econ- 
"( - ''^ ^ * omic phasds as, the Westl She had reached what thd 
Socialists call, " the capitalistic stage ".^ 
^ ^^ An anonymous writer in La Reforme Socicde, a Catholic 
"" ' f ofthrgKtly publication, attributed the causes of the agita- 
tion to the Orthodox Church, the inferior position of the 
bourgeoisie, and the humiliation of the nobility. The of- 
ficial religion had lost its moral authority over the people. 
It could not restrain their passions nor comfort them in their 
misfortunes. It had allowed sdiool children to be brought 
up in pure atheism, if not in Tolstoyan doctrines. The 
wealthy bourgeoisie felt humiliated because of their in- 
ferior status in the political and social life, and now tiiey 
wanted to play the role of the middle class in Western! 

1 Revue Politique et Littiraire, 11 February, 1905, pp. 165-167. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



479] CAUSES AND AIMS OF THE RESOLUTION 43 

Europe. The nobility, who had been deprived of their 
former privileges and reduced to a position of inferiority 
in the state, joined the revolution with the hope of regain- 
ing their traditional prestige and position.^ 

Le Petit Journal, a republican independent daily, reported 
that a French diplomat in Russia, whose name was not 
disclosed, attributed the reigning tmrest to the existence of 
three discontented classes, namely, " the nobility which was 
dispossessed by Peter the Great, th e adminis tration which 
was diqK)ssessed by the police, and tljafrBfaKkn^Sfho could 
not find positions wherein they could make use of their 
training *'.' 

The Petit Journal believed that if the Russo-Japanese 
War had not broken out, there would have been no revo- 
luticMi^mJRussia.^ It w^' "tteTTepef ciisslon of the disasters 
"buffered by the Russian forces that prepared the way for 
the uprising. The discontent created by the unforeseen 
defeats abroad aided the agitators to stir up the people. 
For many years, it was true, students and nobles had sur- 
reptitiously been preaching revolutionary doctrines among 
the peasantry and the proletariat, but if the Russo-Japanese 
War had not gravely embarrassed the Russian government, 
the revolution would not have occurred.* 

The eminent economist, Patd Beaur^^ard, writing on 
28 January, I90j,""asserted that the Russian revolution was 
closely related to the . international ...socialist movement 
whidb had reached that country and where it had many 
sympathizers^ It was the progress of this international 
movement that awakened the proletariat to their political 
andieconomdc needs.* 

* La R^orme Sociale, i March, 1905, p. 412. 
" Le Petit Journal, 24 January, 1903, p. i. 
•/Wrf., 4 March, igo5, p, i. 
*Le Monde ^conomique, vol. i, (1905), PP. 97-98. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



44 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1905 [-^g^^ 

Professor J. Flach, like Anatole Leroy-Bealieu and 
other Catholics, was of the opinion that one of the causes of 
the-imresriir-iRnssia-i^^s Ihe g^ 

clas» -w itho t It"pdlitfcaI npfts^and uf^^ in- 

^eiice far the government. J[nstead of calUng it to its aid, 
tsafism regarded it with suspicion. Another cause, he 
$iaid* was the^absolutism of the bureaucracy and the despot- 
ism of the rural commune.^ 

G. de Molinari attributed the causes of the domestic 
^\,._^,^ ..4 f ^troubles of Russia to the poverty, not to say the general 
^ ^ i ^ misery, of the mass of the population and to the dispro- 
.4 ^l^L\^\^ i^ortionate burdens of government. The enormous war 
budget had increased the burden of the taxpayers and con- 
sequently the general discontent. 

Rene Millet considered that one of the causes of the wide- 
^ : I vA 4< i^\ spread disturbance in Russia was the agitation of the numer- 
, ^ ous subject races. The nationalist movement had been in 
i.v.i V progress for many years. As it imperiled the unity of the 
\ O C ^ '•*" * empire, it augmented th^ importance of the Russian situa- 
tion to the outside world. The race question was of tre- 
mendous import to the government. The antagonism be- 
tween the various races, as between Armenians and Tar- 
tar, the Jews and the Russian official, contributed to in- 
crease the magnitude of the revolution.' 

According to Georges Alfassa, one of the principal 
* ...\ ;»:,.s "*^ causes of the crisis in Russia was to be found in the agra- 
^ ^, , r ^ > rian system. His study of peasant life in Russia had re- 
vealed to him that discontent among the peasants was at- 
tributable to the defective rural organization. The " mir '\ 
or the rural commune, placed too many restrictions on 
peasant life but afforded little protection of life and pro- 

' Revue politique et parlementaire, vol. 45, pp. 37-43- 
' Ibid., vol. 46, p. 615. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



48 1 ] CAUSES AND AIMS OF THE REVOLUTION 45 

perty. " A study of the * mir ' reveals to us that a regime of 
collective ownership requires perfect discipline on the part 
of those who practice it, and absolute authority on the part 
of those who direct it ... . Managed by incompetent men, 
it degenerates almost fatally into tyranny." ^ His conclu- 
sion was that the " mir " system of rural government was 
inadequate and was one of the causes of the agrarian crisis. 

Professor Alfred Anspach, in his analysis of the character ^'> .^ 
of the Russian revolution, discovered certain similarities ^ 
-and differences between its causes and those of the French |VM.X;t:s ^^ 
Revolution. He pointed out that in both countries peasant .* ^ ^ 
life was similar. In France as in Russia the misery of the r'^'r? 
peasants was notorious. Their homes were barely furnished \ Wcf> - 
and the implements they used in farming were primitive 
and inadequate. Like the Russian peasants, their land- 
holdings were too small and altogether insufficient to enable 
them to pay their dues to the State and support their families. 
The peasants in both countries had to pay heavy taxes on 
tea, sugar, cotton, and iron. 

But the most salient differences between die causes of 
the French Revolution and the Russian revolution lay in 
the fact that while Russia in 1905 was a growing industrial 
country, France in 1789 was not so, France had not yet 
experienced tiie Industrial Revolution. The ideas which 
were agitating Russia were not found in the eighteenth 
century. Since 1789 social science had advanced remark- 
ably, and Buchez, Louis Blanc, Marx, and Engels had 
preached their doctrines to the world, so that in the twen- 
tieth century it could be said that economic questions occupy 
the first raiik. Socialism had penetrated Russia and its 
influence was reflected in Russian literaturQ^.Tschemichew- 
ski was a faithful disciple of French Socialists, and Four- 

^ Revue d'Economie Politique, vol. ao, (i905)» P. 336. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



/ 



46 ^/^^ RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1905 [482^ 

rier's " new industrial world " idea seemed to have been, 
realized in Russian society. The works of Turgenev, 
Grigorovitch and Nekrassov were inspired by sodalisna.^ 

Pierre^Giffard, coirespmdent of the Figaro at Petrograd, 
believed that tHelmrest in Riissia^was^ue"tcrEKe attitude of 
the goveiTHnent and the press'. The govemmehf Tiad re* 
pSitedly made promises of reform, but it had not shown its 
good faith by putting them into practice at once. The people 
had lost confidence in the administration chiefly because its 

^promises remained unfulfilled. It was this attitude of the 
government that kept popular feeling at high tension. The 
^ ^- v^. Russian press too could be held responsible for the contin- 
uance of the disorders. He observed that it indulged in 
printing highly colored accounts of current events and 
fantastic tales. Among the French, it would only provoke 
laughter, but the Russians, who were little accustomed to 
press exaggerations, were easily stirred.^ 

Alexandre Ular dwelt on the defects of the administra- 
tive system to explain the causes of the revolution. In the 
administration of justice the arbitrariness of the bureau- 
cracy prevailed. Plehve and Muraviev had elaborated a 
regulation by which any person suspected of a political of- 
fence, could be arrested and thrown into prison without 
trial. Next diere was the general corruption in the army, 
navy, and public works. He cited several cases to support 

'his assertion. 

The mere management of the Commissariat enabled the Gen- 
eralissimo Kuropatkin to amass a personal fortune of over six 
million roubles by January, 1905, as is shown t^ his catalog of 
depots and appointments. General Sukhomlinoff, the Gov- 
ernor-General of Kiev, alone has (as was proved by an official 

* Revue des Btudes Franco-Russes, July, 1906, pp. 313-320. 
' Le Figaro, 13 Novenil)er, 1905, p. 2. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



483] CAUSES AND AIMS OF THE REVOLUTION 47 

inquiry) laid hands on £24,cxx), by falsifying his accounts, and 
diverting the capital to his private balance. ... In the month 
of June, 1904, one of the highest personages in Europe assured 
the author that of £320,000 which the war was then costing 
daily, a fifth part must be reckoned as lost in the pockets of the 
officials. 

The war had exposed this moral depravity and the people 
realized that political administration was responsible for 
the economic crisis; so that in their desire to remedy their 1 
economic distress, they asked for changes in the system of I 
government.^ 

Another cause of the agitation was the defective peasant ^' ' 
administration. The local **zemstvos", which were elec- - • -[' 
tive organs of local administration, enjoyed originally a O^^' 
certain degree of d^^^^Ys ^^^ ^^ ^^^ ^^^ bureaucracy 
had usurpea^nroiSau meir powers, thus reducing them to 
simple registration offices. Their deliberations were strictly 
supervised and their decisions were subject to the govern- 
ment's veto. Ti; ^^.^ thfi /'T^f^stvos '^ who perceived, that 
the enen^r of the nation was the biu-eaucracy, and that it 
Should be replaced by a constitutional regime. In Decennber, 
1904^ their members together with those of the municipal 
" dumas " petitioned the tsar to introduce changes in the 
system of administration. 'But the " mir " was " funda- 
mentally the whole problem of the peasant problem in 
Great Russia '\ JTiieJ^jniiilLji^ 
sibility, and so far, it had proved disastrous. Its members 
TieTd'Snair and: scattered parcds"o^^ were subject 

to the rules and regulations of the '* mir." This system 
proved so unsatisfactory that it had forced maiiy peasants ' 
to m oveT:d~the cities. ''The peasants have become con- 
scious7 if we may venture to put it so, of what they no 

1 Alexandre Ular, op. dt, pp. 257-260. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



48 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1905 ["484 

longer want; but they have not yet become aware of what 
they do want. And if in the majority of cases, orthodoxy 
and custom, conjoined with the responsibility of obtaining 
instruction, prevents them from conceiving an Empire with- 
out a Tsar; they have on the other hand a clear conception 
of the iniquity of great landed property, of the immorality 
of the advantages accruing to the bureaucrats who are at- 
tached to the defense of the Government — ^they can finally 
conceive the Constitution, which is the essential matter: 
— ^an immense ' mir ', a ' district delegation ' including the 
entire country; — in brief, National Autonomy".^ 
The enemies of tsardom within the empire were another 
cause of the revolution, according to Ular. They were 
the White Russians, Esthonians and Livonians of Finnish 
extraction, Letts and Lithuanians, Georgians, Armenians, 
and Ruthenians or Ukrainians. The Socialist parties of 
the White Russians, Esthonians, Livonians, Letts, Lithuan- 
ians, and Jews were fused for the revolutionary movement. 
The Jews, in the opinion of Ular, played an important role 
in the revolution. " In reality, there is not a single great 
political organization in the Empire that is not directed, 
or at any rate markedly influenced, by the Jews. Even the 
' Liberals ', constitutional monarchists who are recruited 
from the highest classes of society, and among the officials 
themselves, wherever opportunism has not stifled their in- 
dependence of opinion, would 'be lost without the Jews 
.... Marxian Social-^Democrats, the Terrorist Social- 
Revolutionists, the Socialists of Poland, the Jewish artisan 
party, the ' Bimd ' are directed by Jews, and are necessarily 
influenced by the Jewish radicalism of the alien." The 
Jews ' aspiration was to acquire the same rights and pri- 
vileges as those enjoyed by the nationalities among which 

1 Alexandre Ular, op, cit, p. 277. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



485] CAUSES AND AIMS OF THE REVOLUTION 49 

they lived, but the Russian government had constantly re- 9^-.n\v\c \ 
fused to grant them the liberties they desired and had put : >^ ^ . ^ 
many restrictions on their freedom of movement/ 

Alexandre Ular recognized too that the rise of a capitalist 
bourgeoisie and an artisan proletariat, which were " a moral 
danger for the bureaucratic system", were other causes 
of the Russian agitation. 

The majority of Socialists attributed the Rus$ian revolu- ""^ 
ti^ ~tb the character of the Russian government Jean 

"Jaures, the Socialist leader, declared that an uprising under 
such a regime was further made inevitable by the Industrial 
Revolution and the subsequent rise of a proletarian class." 
However, he, and Socialist opinion generally, emphasized 
that it was a revolt against the system of administration, 
against "a permanent regime of savagery and barbarity 
which refuses the most elementary guarantees of life td 
hum an beings : a rain of bloodj.f^IKng m the silence of dark- 
ness wKi3r fs penetrated intermittently byja ray of Ji^t, 

^^evealin^ its savage splendor ".* 
*^1h regard to the aims of the revolutionary agitation in 
Russia, there was a diversity of opinions. The republican 
independent daily, Le Petit Journal, declared that the aim 
of the movement was to show to the sovereign that the * 
Russian people desired to be governed with more equity.^ 
But Eugene Lautier was inclined to believe that its aim wasl 
ifierely to thwart the mobilization of troops to be sent to the 
Far East, Aat the agitation, in brief, was a protest against 
the continuance of the war.' Later, in October, 1905, he 

• Alexandre Ulsrf, op, cit, pp. 213, 224, «35-236. 

• L'Humaniti, 4 November, 1905, p. i. 

• Free Russia, i June, 1905, p. 83. 

• Le Petit Journal, 23 January, 1905, pt i. 
•i> Figaro, 6 July, 1905, p. 2. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



50 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1905 [486 

wrote that the revolutionaries seemed to have for an ob- 
ject the overthrow of the social order. They had no pro- 
gram and their aimless agitation had led to the spread of 
-■^ anarchy.^ Moderate ogmm ia ^^oral JKas.ibat.lbe Rus- 

sian revolutioiiaries did not know just what they wanted. 
They had risen a^unst the established government merely 
because theg^ were suffering from its pii^nilft 
-,— To the French SociaEsts, on the otiher hand, the revolu- 

\ ( tion had clearly formulated aims. These were, namely, a 

""^ ^^ \ ^;^^^onstituent assembly, universal suffrage, freedom of speech, 
C^^ ' -^^ ' freedom of the press, and freedom of association. In short 
they were agitating for the very same liberties which the 
people of Western Europe enjoyed The movement in 
Russia, to their minds, was essentially a political revolution. 
Its aims, if accomplished, would mean tiie disappearance 
of autocracy and the establishment of a constitutional 
monarchy.^ The French Socialists contended that the Rus- 
sian proletariat had been so educated by propagandists, who 
were followers of Kropotkin and disciples of Karl Mane, 
that they had become masters of themselves and were fully 
aware of their needs. 

The French Anarchists considered the chief aims of the 
revolution to be freedom ofihe individual and the complete 
, ^^ .l^l^^ts^^verf!^ of the autocratic govemmcnt. They could see 
p * "^ * no better object of the movement than the destruction of 

the established order and the attainment of " freedom ". 
^. Opinions thus varied according to the viewpoints of the 

/^^^ groups which held them. The Conservatives, who were 
r} not in sympathy with the anarchical methods employed 
^ ' ' ' ' by the agitators, could see only an aimless, incoherent agita- 
tion. A few of them admitted that the revolutionists were 



1 Le Figaro. 29 October, 1905, p. i. 
« UHumaniti, 28 October, 190s p. 3. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



487] CAUSES AND AIMS OF THE REVOLUTION 51 

demanding political ref onns, although they had no definite 
program. The Socialists, bitter enemies of the autocratia ^ 

Russian government as Aey were, discovered most laud- <^cC\^ "^^ ^^ 
able^piqHascg^iiL tflft-JreyQlu^on! i^iriany ^tli e Aiiai ' diistaf ■ % , 

true to their doctrine, believed that the objects of the t^V^^^ * --' 
Russian movement were the overthrow of the established 
system of government and complete freedom from gov- 
ernments of any kind. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



CHAPTER IV 
Progress of the Revolution 

After the workingmen's demonstration of 22 January, 
I90S> which resulted fatally for both the government and 
the participants, French public opinion watched with keen 
interest the further developments in the Russian situation. 
The press reports of the occurrences in Russia were copious 
and detailed. Besides the general situation which caused 
alarm in many quarters and created much speculation as to 
the effect on France of the prevailing condition in Russia, 
each event of apparent dramatic or political interest wa^ 
discussed with much enthusiasm in the press. 

One of the eyepts in the Russian upheaval which attracted 
considerable attention in France was the mutiny of the 
crew of the Knias-Potemkin, a war vessel. The French 
Socialists never failed to refer to it in their condemnation 
of the regime in Russia. The socialist paper UHumanitS 
of 30 June, 1905, considered the occurrence of tremendous^ 
importance. It broke to pieces military servitude; it wasi 
a signal that tsardom would fall by the blows of those who, 
heretofore, had been its most formidable support. Jaure^ 
could not let the event fade from the memory of the French 
without letting them know the entire significance of it as 
seen by a distinguished Socialist leader. So on i July, 
1905, in his paper, VHumanite, he set forth his conclusions 
under the caption " La Rh/olution Russe ". The mutiny, 
he said, was the expression of the exasperation of the 
Russian people under the rule of the bureaucrats, " thieves 
52 [488 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



489] PROGRESS OF THE REVOLUTION 53 

and ignorant men " as they were. The sailors had raised 
on board the vessel the red flag which is " the flag of the R^ 
volution Sociale, the flag of the proletarians of June and of 
1871, of the heroes of Lodz and Moscow ". By this act the 
true character of the Russian revolution displayed itself. It 
was to be a revolution for liberty and justice, inspired by 
republican and socialist ideas. Furthermore, the fact that 
the army on which the tsar had relied in upholding hifl 
authority had risen against him, showed the extreme gravity 
of the situation in Russia. Thp. rai^ . s f> gf th^ nintiny wA<i 
joLJthe,.bad_food_as reported by the FriencbJiberal press; 
the real grievance was the entire governmental system. 

THeAnarcETst weekly Temps Nbuveaux of 8 July, 1905, 
commenting on this mutiny, declared that it was the most 
serious event which had occurred since the beginning of 
the troubles in Russia. It showgd that the revolution in 
Fussia was entering an acute stage. The French 
Anarchists rejoiced at the news that the officers and men 
of the Russian navy were participating in the revolution. 

The republican socialist daily La Petite RSpublique of 
30 June, 1905, declared that the mutiny signified a new era 
for Russia. Those who had suffered silently under the 
yoke of the bureaucracy were now raising their voices. 
This in itself was significant. 

The French conservatives were alarmed too at the report 
of the mutiny. Eugene Latttier, writing in the Figaro of i 
July, 1905, would not believe that the cause of the mutiny 
was the poor food. There must be something else behind 
this event which was only one of many which were agita- 
ting the Russian empire. The crew, without doubt, had 
been prepared by the revolutionary propaganda. "They 
were prepared for anything, except to do their duty! " he 
exclaimed. The seat of the mutiny, he continued, seemed 
to have been chosen for the moral effect it would exert on 



4; / ^^ 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



54 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 190S [4^ 

Europe. Odessa was a vast commercial and industrial 
center with its four hundred factories and where 100,000 
foreigners and 100,000 Jews, mingling with the Russians,, 
gave it an international aspect like the other cities of the 
Mediterranean — Marseilles, Barcelona, Algiers, Alexan- 
dria, Smyrna. It was among this cosmopolitan agglomera- 
tion that the crew of the Kniaz-Potemkin had revolted. 
"A serious blunder of the revolutionaries who venture to 
stir and alarm international interests in their desire to over- 
throw the autocracy!" He expressed further regret in 
the following passage : 

The friends of Russia and the true friends of civilization 
have more than one motive for deploring the frightful scenes 
of Odessa. It is not good either for Russia or for civilization 
that the question be put — like an absurd and brutal dilemma 
— ^between absolutism and anarchy. We cannot accept this 
alternative. It is true that absolutism provokes anarchical ex- 
plosions but it is still more true that anarchy gives absolutism 
an excuse which is always appealed to. The next day after the 
Tsar has announced his intention to allow the people to partici- 
pate in the government, a mutiny broke out. And what a 
mutiny I complicated with military revolt, violation of private 
property, incendiarism and pillage. 

Rene Millet declared, in reviewing foreign politics in 
the Revw politique et parlementaire,^ that it was difficult to 
foresee to what lengths the military sedition wotdd go, for 
the army, like the nation, was subject to the same raptures; 
and the same temptations. 

The republican independent daily Petit Journal, oi 30 
June, 1905, regarded with apprehension the mutiny. " The 
revolt of the crew of a war vessel marks the formidable 
progress of revolutionary ideas in a sphere where one 

1 Vol. 46, (1905), p. 61S. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



491 ] PROGRESS OF THE REVOLUTION 55 

would least expect to find them. The army and navy, firm 
support of the dynasty and the government, seemed, until 
the present, to be sheltered from contagion. This opti- 
mistic opinion isi unfortunately contradicted by the facts ''. 
The next day it reiterated its suspicion that the mutiny of 
Odessa had a distinctly revolutionary character and what 
was worse young officers had taken part in it 

Another incident of the Russian revolution which re- ^^ 
ceived much space in the French press was the assassina- 
tion of Grand Duke Serge, uncle of the tsar, and champion 
of autocracy. His tragic end, however, did not surprise 
that section of French public opinion which was well versed 
in the current events in Russia; for Grand Duke Serge had 
been the long-sought-for target of the anarchist's bomb. 
For years he had been identified with the extreme reaction- 
ary court clique. Nevertheless the conservatives in France 
condemned this bloody achievement of the Russian revolu- 
tionaries. Alcide Ebray, writing in the Journal des Debate 
of 19 February, 1905, called it the tragedy of Moscow. 
^* However reasonable or justified the political demands of 
a party, even of a nation, may be, assassination appears to 
be, not only censurable from the moral point of view, but 
also injurious to the end which it pretends to serve. __ In 
most cases, in fact, its only result is to strengthen its ad- 
vgr< ^rift<; ^pd to provOke tliW U tQTSew IregrTs^ He 

added further that the tragedy signified that the revolu- 
tionary party would resort to Ae worst measures to attain 
Its ends. He advised the tsar, however, not to abandon his 
plan of reforms on account of the tragedy. 

The France lUustree of 25 February, 1905, commented^ itvyA.cni 
on the effect of the assassination on Russia. It complicated / ^,^ |^y 
the grave situation in the empire; it increased the imeasiness, V" / _ 
distrust, and discouragement which were paralyzing the \ 
vital forces of the country, and it tended to encourage the / 
agitators. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



56 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1905 [^^ 

Georges Bourdon, writing in the Figaro of i8 Februarf, 
1905* was of the opinion that the whole civilized world 
should be filled with indignation at the " abominable " crime 
perpetrated at Moscow. 

T he French Socialists were content to lea rn that with the 
dc gtgTof Grand Duke Serge^ one of th e mo^jEormiaable 
pillars of autocrag^ was^remQved irom ^T^^ <;rpnf», The 
bomb oi Kalaiev was an eloquent warning to the regime 
that it could no longer ignore the demands of the revolu- 
lionists. It should accede to the popular wishes, otherwise 
more blood would be spilt for the people's cause. 

The strikes, which figured conspicuously in the Russian 
revolution of 1905, formed an absorbing topic for discus- 
sion in the press. Their economic effects, to be sure, were 
felt beyond the confines of the empire, and French publicists 
many times reiterated that of all the European nations 
France suffered most from the disorders in Russia, which 
was her ally. 

Just a few days after the demonstration of 22 January, 

1905, the pro-tsarist French daily Le Figaro accused the 

enemies of Russia and of public order of financing the 

workers' movement. Great simis of money, it alleged, had 

been sent to Russia to encourage civil war and bribe the 

workingmen to abandon their work. It was rumored in 

I Paris that the Japanese, then engaged in war against 

\ Russia, were secretly engineering the strikes of the workers 

j which were reported to be fast spreading throughout the 

I empire.^ 

By February. 1905, the anarchist newspaper Tempt 
Noiweaux triumphantly declared that the strikes, far from 
being on the decline or localized in Petrograd, Moscow, or 
Warsaw, had spread to the four comers of Russia. The 
triumph of the revolution was assured.' t>^ "^ } ^ ^\C 

^ 30 January, 1905, p. 2. 

* Temps Nouveaux, 3 March, 1905, p. 4. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



493] PROGRESS OF THE REVOLUTION 57 

The character of the strikes soon became evident to the 
French. Georges Bourdon in the Figaro of 13 October, 
1905^ admitted that the strike movement in Moscow, at 
least, had more of a political than an economic character. ^ 
On 26 October, 1905, the Fiijar o commented editorially ^^ . .^^^ 
^?i^jyiLstrikers were not asking; |ot '^^omic "anieriora- "^Z^^ 
tion; the s trike was being emplo^ to exelt^^ ^^^T^ ^^-^ 

t he gov miment io^rdMmgre^com2h^^ \^^ 

'• The railways have stopped, not because the machinists" 
demand fewer hours of work and higher wages, but be- 
cause they ask for freedom of the press, freedom of speech, 
freedom of association, freedom of religion, and the con- 
vocation of a Constituent Assembly. And not only workers 
are on strike, but also students and subordinate government 
employes". The political character of the strike move- — 
ment was admitted by all sections of French opinion. 

The d isastrous economic effects of the disturbances in 
■Bl I OTa pS ^upTea^yrendr-e cunu n iist^. With t he TepoFt ^ 
of each new strike the prices of Russian stocks fell corres- 
pondingly at the Bourse de Paris. The republican daily 
Le Temps of 2 June, 1905, expressed the fear of French 
financiers when it observed that the continued riots and 
strikes in the allied country imperiled French interests, 
which were considerable. The collapse of Russian stocks 
would indirectly deal a blow to French public credit. And 
what was more to be regretted, wrote Pierre Giflfard in the 
Figaro of 11 December, 1905, the Russians did not seem 
to comprehend the effects of the strike — ^an economic crisis 
which was fast approaching. 

T he strikes had created a state of anarchy which jwras " 
deterimental to the country^s foreign"lui3r"d()mesticTrade. 
In fans it was~Teared"THat"TF Ihe conditiorisof ana rdiy - 
existing in Russia should be prolonged for some time, that 
country's productiveness would be suspended, and it would 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



58 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1905 [^^^ 

be plunged into insolvency. Apprehensions of this kind, 
remarked the eminent French economist and professor at 
the College de France, Paul Leroy-Beaulieu, might in part, 
though not wholly, be justified if the actual state of 
anarchy produced by the strikes should be prolonged for 
a year or even for seven or eight months/ Another dis- 
tinguished economist, Paul Beaiu-egard, professor of poli- 
tical economy in the Law Faculty at Paris, expressed a 
similar opinion on the possible fatal consequences of the 
strikes to Europe as a whole and to France in particulsu*.^ 

The Catholic weekly La France Illustree of i6 September, 
1905, observed that the fires at Baku alone, which were the 
work of the strikers, meant the loss of a great source of 
revenue for the Russian government, because of the des- 
truction of the petroleum wells. This was only one of die 
many instances where strikers not only had ceased working, 
but also had destroyed machinery, entire factories even, and 
ntmierous other means of production. If the strikers, it 
observed, should continue their work of destruction, the 
whole country would be devastated and the people would 
be starved. Exports would cease, and many European 
banks would suffer immense losses. 

The political aspects of the strike movement had already 
become manifest at its very commencement Th e dema nds 
of the strikers, it has been outlined elsewhere, were of a 
p tMlliad laJiei llian of on -^onogac ch a ra c ter ,, .and the 
general strike Ihovemetit was the msfiiimeyfiLrby which the 
revoTuEbnaiies" hq[)eJ Ho realize 'ffidr aimsr But, said 
AIfre3rSnspach* professor at the Ecole St Pierre in Petro- 
grad, the workers could not ameliorate their situation by 
means of the strike. He advised them rather to form what 
he termed " associations de credit et de production '*. The 

^ L'^conomiste Francois, vol. 332, (1905), P. 843. 
• Le Monde ^conomique, voL i, (i905)> PP- 97*98. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



495] PROGRESS OF THE REVOLUTION 59 

greatest difficulty, he continued, was to stop the antagon- 
ism between capital and labor/ Here he ignored altogether 
the political needs of the workers. On the other hand the 
Socialist P. G. La Chesnais declared that the general strike 
meant for Russia the beginning of a new era.* 

Th q^social crisis produced by the general strike rendered U 
the situation m Russ ia pamculariy grave, accordmg to ' 
Trench pub licis ts. The di sorgamzati^ ofpubHc utilities, the 
low morale oFlBhe police iorce wTTo'JoISSr m the miassacring! 
of JewFand in pillaging, tne gen^fSTsta tergf^^ aidi^ cuu - 
stituted the gravest problem whic h confronted the govern r 
ment li. de Molinari, writing in the Journal des Ecofu- 
Offtistes about the Russian crises, asked if the first duty of 
the ministry of the tsar was not to remedy the disorganized 
public service which no longer asstu-ed personal security and 
protection of private property.* By the latter part of ^^ 
the year the French pro^sarist sympathisers were already 
tired of the seexningly endless disorders in Russia. Pierre 
Giflfard in the Figaro of 20 November, 1905, called it a 
" ridiculous situation which everyone desires to have 
ended ", and he deplored the inability of the government to 
restore order. In the f ailiwe of the constituted authorities 
to perform this task, he proposed that the intelligent and 
well-to-do classes who were particularly menaced by the 
pillages and incendiarism should organize for their own 
protection as the bourgeoisie of London did at the time of 
the Oiartist agitation. "Unfortunately the Russians are 
not much used to ' self-hdp \ Instead of facing the danger ^ 
and organizing for resistance, nobles and bourgeois prefer 
to flee ; at Moscow and Petrograd from two to three hundred 
passports are issued daily to them. Emigration is tm- 

* Revue des Etudes Franco-Russes, Jamiary, 1906, p. 44- 
^L'Europien, 13 January, 1906, pp. 17-19. 
' 190S, vol. 8, p. 308. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



6o THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1905 [^^ 

doubtedly an easy means to safety, but upon emigrating, da 
they not give a free hand to the revolutionaries? " ^ 

The French financiers and business men expressed openly 
their disgust with Russian troubles and their exasperation 
at the methods of the Russian revolutionaries. The " rid- 
iculous " situation of Russia, as the Figaro termed it, wa* 
annoying* ^ The revolutionary party, declared Professor 
Alfred ^^ga^^as composed of " sectarians who, blinded 
fby a doctrine of undigested, fanatical ideas, would stop at 
nothing to accomplish their aim *\ Their motto was that 
the end justified the means. 

Yesterday they [the Russian revolutionaries] exaggerated 
the rights of the governed up to suppressing all those of 
die rulers; today they exaggerate the rights of the gover- 
nors even to suppressing those of the governed. According 
to them the people is the only sovereign, and yet they treat 
the people like slaves; according to them, the government 
should only be a valet, and yet they give it the prerogatives of a 
despot. Everything which emanates from the legal authority 
is a crime; and they punish like a criminal everybody who 
resists their authority. They proclaim the sovereignty of the 
people and yet they alone exercise it. Public property belongs 
to them, and public property, in their opinion, consists of all 
private property, persons and property, souls and conscience. 
They do not support their authority by suffrage ; but it does not 
matter much, they govern. They believe that thev ar ejthe only 
patriots, the_only_ones capableof command ; for^ they say^their 
f "y^^^^'^>?;t hf.pn rr^n^t^m^A hy Tnith, RftasoH, m(\ Vir^^*'* 

Such was the opinion of a Frenchman who was an eye- 
witness of the revolution. He had no sympathy whatever 
with the Russian revolutionaries. Just as he ridicided their 

' Journal des Bconomistes, vol. B, 1905, pp. 486-487. 
* Alfred Anspach, " Lc Parti dc la Rdvolution en Russie," Retmt des 
ttudes Franco-Russes, F^lbruary, 1906, pp. 85-891 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



497] PROGRESS OF THE REVOLUTION 6l 

doctrine, so he condemned their methods. He made a dis- 
tinction between the revolutionaries and ^e people. T he 
latter, ignorant as they were, became ajtnere tool Jn the 
KSid roi^the revoTutlOftajrl^: These "demagogies, as he 
called them, working in their own sdf-interest, had per- 
suaded the proletarians to join them, promising &em a 
bright and prosperous future. They deceived the people; 
they published proclamations exaggerating their success, 
they lied when they proclaimed that the people would rise 
en masse against the tsar. They deceived die peasants, 
for they would go out in uniform to the country with 
manifestoes, telling die peasants that the " good tsar " was 
giving them all their lands which diey could take away from 
their lords. They also deceived soldiers and sailors by 
persuading them to believe that the tsar desired the revolu- 
tion as the only means to deliver them from the mighty 
hand of the bureaucrats and the nobles. They spread die 
news that the government was ibankrupt and induced the 
people to withdraw their deposits from the savings banks. 
They called the people to arms and they stopped railways, 
telegraphs and telephones. By means of terrorizing, they 
had stirred up the passions and excited the temper of the 
populace. But what had they accomplished? asked Profes- 
ju> rj\n.<par h. 

Professor An^ pach saw only the destructive activitjes of 
th e^revo lutionaries. To his^Tnind theyJiad'arcotnpUsHcd 
i ^3iing in the wa;^ of ameliorating, the, conditjcgxof.idth^ 
di6 work ingman or the peasant, His opinion was sha red 
by French conservative s at home. Pi erre Giff ard called the 
activities of the revolutTcSriariersterile manifesta tions.3yhi^ 
merely. inrrff^<^pj miQPi^ and benefited^no^otife, . They were 
flirting with liberty, he said, and exclaimed : " Des enf ants, 
ces Russes, des enf ants! " ^ Commenting on the situation 

^Figaro, 13 December, igos p. 2. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



r 



^ 



62 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1905 [4^ 

in Russia in the Journal des Dibats of November, 1905, 
Robert de Caix observed that the revolutionaries had re- 
vealed their incapacity for organization. The disorders, 
which remained spasmodic and local, showed that they had 
not been able to coordinate revolutionary action. 

But the French Socialists had a different story to tell. 
After the general strike of 22 October, 1905, Jean Jaures, 
V c^ the formidable socialist leader, under the 'bold caption of 
ft> "La Revolution Europeenne " lauded the methods of the 
-»- >^ revolutionaries in Russia. The movement was vast and 
methodical and designed to demoralize the forces of resis- 
tance. The general strike had proven its worth. It was* 
the best weapon against tsarism.^ On the use of the deadly 
weapon, the bomb, he expressed his regret that it had been 
resorted to; fbut, he continued, the fault lay solely with the 
government. The bomb throwers were the exact expres- 
sion of the "cruelty, barbarism, injustice, and bloody 
violence of the government Each bomb pulls away a 
piece from the edifice of autocracy. The task is long." * 
The republican independent paper Le Petit Journal re- 
marked that the leader of French Socialists did not protest 
against the employment of terrorism, pillage, and bombs. 

Georges Qen iQiceau, writing in UAurore, found the 
of the revolution in Russia too slow in comparison 
with that in France. " Russia continues to be in revolu- 
tion. The cha racter^k^of the Russian mind is delay. 
The autocfaT^d the people seem equally iiicapaBle of 
bringing about a definitive revolution. With us, that is 
not the way. The Napoleons made their coup-d'etat in 
the twinkling of an eye, or the people, their Revolution in 
three days at most. After which governors and governed, 

^ L'Humaniti, 28 October, 1905, p. i. 
^UHumanitS, 26 May, 1905, p. i. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



W 



499] PROGRESS OF THE REVOLUTION 63 

after making new detours, turned to the road of their old 
propensities '*/ 

P. G. La Chesna ts criticized the procedure of the Russian 
constitutionalists. Instead of merely demanding reforms 
they should have made a revolution, which in their case 
would consist in seizing the bureaucratic machinery. Had 
they done this, tK&^viroulJTiave Be^ the direct- 

ing personnel of the administrative machinery after the 
fashion in the West The activities of the revolutionaries, 
he considered to be directed to one end : destruction of the 
bureaucratic machinery. 

In the French Chamber of Deputies, tiie Socialist deputy 
Marcel Semb at. in a speech, expressed approval of tfie 
^eAodsLPi^Ae Russia, reyoiutionariesr- He was joined, 
in his declaration J>j^ the Socialist dq>uties of the. Extreme 
Left, Aliard, Vallanj, Rpuanet, and^Meslier. Upon his de- 
claration that all Republicans were on the side of the Rus- 
sion revolutionaries, which would signify that they approved 
of their methods — ^anarchy, mutiny, incendiarism, assassina- 
tion — ^the prime minister, Rouvier, rose and protested. The 
French government, which represented the majority of the 
people, was faithful to its ally and could not interfere in its 
internal affairs. This government, he declared, could 
merely sympathize with its ally in its hour of trial and wisK 
it speedy recovery from its present troubles.* 

The Anarchi sts, on thdr..^ut, could not conceal their 
immense sa tisfagtJQP .with, tha.j:ey(dutiQnaxX-X^^ 
that itaiaJly^l^ the^Russian ggwmment. j\ny action that 
would render the government impotent was hailed by them 
as a step forward.* 

» L'Humaniti, 27 October, 1905, p. 3- 

• Journal des Dihats, 6 December, 1905. 

• Temps Nouveaux, 2 January, 1906, p. 2. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



^ 



I 



64 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF IBOB [500 

Who made the Russian revolutioii of 1905 pos^ble? 
The French Socialists propounded this question and they 
claimed that the whole distinction belonged to thdr Russian 
confreres. When the hour to rise aganst tsardom came, the 
socialist parties, lajring aside all their petty differences, 
fused together for more effective action. The different 
socialist organizations — ^the Social-Democratic party, the 
Revolutionary Socialist party, the Bund, the Polish Socialist 
party, the Socialist-Democratic party of Russian Poland 
and of Lithuania, the Proletariat (Polish Socialist party), 
and the Lettish Social Democratic Labor party — ^had formed 
a close alliance to fight Russian absolutism.^ After the 
general strike of 22 October, 1905, Jean Jattfes pointed 
out that the Russian Socialists had a well conceived plan 
of action. By means of the general strike, thqr would carry 
the revolution to a successful conclusion.* 

Jean Longuet, another well known Socialist, declared that 
the Russian Socialists were making their power felt by the 
method of the general strike. He rejoiced at the important 
role of the Socialists in the Russian revolution. Through 
their heroic effort, he asserted, Russia would be liberated 
from the hated tsarism. The Socialists were called upon 
to perform the task.* 

Paul Louis, writing in the Catholic periodical Retme 
Politique et Litteraire of 4 March, 1905, expressed the 
opinion that the revolution in Russia was the work of the 
proletarians of the big cities. Due to the construction of 
a network of railroads and the pouring in of foreign capital, 
there had been a remarkable growth of industry within a 
very short period of time. The industrial development led 
to the rise of a proletarian class which was so numerous 

^ Revue Socialiste, voL 41, (1905). P. 433- 
* L'Humaniti, 28 October, 1905, p. i. 
■ Ibid,, 30 November, 1905, p. i. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



50I ] PROGRESS OF THE REVOLUTION 6$ 

that it had at once become an important social factor. In 
the coal mines alone, 90,000 workers were employed at the 
beginning of the year 1905, and in the textile industry, 
about 800,000. E. F. de Montussaint, director of the 
Ecoles Frangaises at Moscow, was greatly impressed, after 
the general strike of 22 October, 1905, by the strength of 
the Russian proletarians. Heretofore, he said, the Rus- 
sian proletarians were looked down upon by their brothers 
of the West. But at a single stroke, they had come to the 
first rank with a new force that every government could 
no longer ignore.^ 

By the latter part of 1905 the French conservatives, whA 
wanted the revolution to come to an end as soon as possiblel 
began to show their disappointment. The tsar had madA 
concessions, but the disturbances had not ceased. "W<| 
thought that a freed people would appear calm and satisfied 
as soon as they acquired their first liberties. On the con- 
trary, we still witness the brutal expression of ill-feeling. 
. . . After the general strike, occur the massacre of the 
Jews and the mutiny at Cronstadt ". Thus wrote Pierre 
Giffard in the Figaro of 12 November, 1905. The mas- 
sacre of the Jews, the mutiny at Cronstadt, and the fires in 
the mines and factories — ^all these happenings late in the year 
1905 exasperated the French conservatives. Eugene Lautier 
advised the Russian liberals to put an end to the disorder, 
which, if prolonged, might deprive them of their gains. 
If they were wise and patriotic, they should understand that 
it would be to their interest not to prolong the revolution. 
Professor Alfred Anspach was of the opinion that if the 
revolution were well directed and not too premature nor too 
violent it would emancipate the poorer classes and would 
bestow incalculable benefits upon humanity. From his ad- 

* Revue des Etudes Franco-Russes, December, 1905, p. 49i. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



66 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1905 [cq^ 

verse criticism of the Russian revolution, which has been 
mentioned elsewhere, it could be deduced that, in his opin- 
ion, the revolution could yield no good result. 

The Socialists held the view that the revolution should 
continue until all the demands of the revolutionaries were 
obtained. Said Leon Remy in UHumcmite of i November, 
1905: "The struggle had just commenced and with the 
formidable weapon, the general strike, the revolutionaries 
should not be contented with illusory promises and half- 
measures, but should prosecute with vigor the %ht against 
tsarism '\ 

The Anarchists would have the revolutionaries continue 
their agitation until the tsar's government was utterly 
overthrown. Michel Petit observed that the revolutionaries 
were making rapid progress toward their emancipation. 
He believed that they should continue their march despite 
all obstacles.^ 

In the foregoing pages an attempt has been made to 
^l/^^C^ present the different opinions voiced in France on the pro- 
^ gress of the revolution in Russia. It is worth noticing the 
hopeful view of Socialists and Anarchists, in striking con- 
trast with the pessimism of the conservatives. This could be 
attributed to the fact that the various events cited were all 
unfavorable to the tsar, which were just what Socialists 
and Anarchists desired, for in their appreciation of Rus- 
sian events, they had foremost in their minds the under- 
mining of the established regime, while French conserva- 
tives were more concerned with the effects of the revolu- 
tionary movement on Europe in general and on France in 
particular. 

* Temps Nouveaux, no. 40, p. i. 



^ 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



CHAPTER V 

Reforms for Russia 

There was a consensus of opinion in France that re- 
forms were the panacea for Russian troubles. The friends 
of Russia and of peace desired the restoration of order at 
the earliest time, but of a new order of things that would 
insure not only immediate but lasting peace. Eugene 
Lautier expressed the opinion that the tsar should no kmger 
postpone the granting of reforms. It would be to his 
advantage as well as to that of his subjects to undertake 
this task without further delay. By so doing he would 
win the confidence of his people.^ The French financiers 
similarly counseled the Russian government to introduce 
reforms. From the financial viewpoint such a step would 
be highly beneficial to Russian credit, which had suflFered 
from her reverses in the war with Japan and from the 
strikes and riots at home, said E. Guilmard, financial chron- 
icler of the Grande Revue. Alcide Ebray, greatly impressed 
by the gravity of the situation in Russia, concluded Ihat the 
succession of terrorist acts was sufficient warning to the 
tsar not to delay the granting of reforms.* 

The Tsar and Reforms 

A French politician, whose name was not disclosed, was 
reported to have said after the tragic event of 22 January, 

1 Le Figaro, 28 October, 1905, p. i. 

^ Revue poKtigue et parlementaire, vol. 43» (1905), p. 650. 

503I 67 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



68 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1906 [j^^ 

"^ • I9<^5> that the Russian emeutiers, in their desire to imitate 
the French Revolution, pointed out to the tsar what he 
should do: exactly the opposite of what Louis XVI did. 
The friends of the tsar in France had followed closely this 
observation. They had invariably urged him to take the 
initiative in the work of reforms. Some had asserted that 
in view of the conditions in that empire, reforms could 
not be introduced except through government initiative.** 
The Journal des Debats of January, 1905, declared editor- 
ially that in order to prevent the recurrence of the event 
of 22 January, the tsar must grant reforms. A repress 
sive government, it added, was no solution to Russian pro- 
blems. 
— By the middle of the year 1905 criticisms of the tsar's 

conduct began to be heard from moderate thinkers in 
France. Eugene Lautier accused the tsar of delay in. 
^ granting reforms. The tardiness of his concessions, he 
^ declared in the Figaro of 27 October, 1905, tended to en- 
^ ^^ courage the agitators and to make them more exacting. 
C~ ^' Its effects were detrimental. His hesitation emboldened 
C C the leaders of the general strike not only in Russia, but also 
i/) \^ in other countries. It was equally unfortimate that his 
X^ "^^ concessions should appear the day after an outbreak. They 
created the impression that the government was surrender- 
ing to anarchy. Moreover they lost their value as a 
voluntary gift, as a Chart e Octroy ee. The continual pro- 
mises which were published long before they were put in 
force were regrettable, and should have been avoided for 
the prestige of the government. The disturbances in the 
empire should not prevent the tsar from introducing the 
necessary reforms. Repress firmly the disorders and engage 
resolutely in effecting reforms — these were the two waya 

* UAnnee Politique, 1904-1905, p. 413. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



505] REFORMS FOR RUSSIA 69 

which could assure harmony in a good government. After 
the publication of the October Manifesto, he declared that 
the task of the government was simply to keep its promises 
and to observe the provisions of the manifesto. It 
should proceed to purge the government of its dishonest and 
unworthy servants. 

The Revue des Deux Mondes was among those who, 
tfep u g fr frie ndly to the tsar, criticized. him for his hesitating 
pdic^j^^^ It could fiiid no justification for the government's 
delay in introducing reforms and in winning the coopera- 
tion and confidence of the people. Immediate governmental 
action would )deld incalculable advantage both to the tsar 
and to his subjects.^ It said further : 

It is dangerous to show a people a constitution, or even the 
semblance of a constitution, and then not give it to them im- 
mediately. Immediate realization might at least have the ad- 
vantage of keeping them busy, while a mere promise for an un- 
certain, if not improbable future, will lead them to speculate. 
. . . The government does not seem to understand that in time 
of revolution, it is necessary to keep the minds of the people 
occupied with something and to keep them alert in order to 
guide them; in default of which, they go astray or they are 
misled, and, all of a sudden, they murmur and revolt. Then 
comes the formidable alternative of concession or repression. 
Repression is of no use, and there is no end to it. To yield, 
under the menace of a riot, would have the same effect.* 

The Congress of Zemstvos 

Of the various organizations which voiced the popular 
demand for reforms and which excited the interest of the 
French, the Congress of Zemstvos, held at Moscow in June. 
1905, stood foremost High hopes were attached to the 

» Vol 29, 190S, p. 237. 
*VoL ao^ 190S pp. 233-234. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



yo THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1905 [506 

congress by both moderates and radical thinkers. The 
Journal des Dibats in its issue of 23 July, 1905, lauded its 
menri>ership and aims. The members of the congress were 
persons who could be relied upon and with whom one 
could discuss calmly the perplexing problems of Russia. 
WithJheJ^ any- 

thingTbut wlSi th^ Coagtess ofvZemstKOs, M. would be 
able 16 carry out Ws_refQtmJ. - Hi&4^ 
Zemstvos and he should take advantage of their collabora- 
tton. The aims of the congre»s^ it continued, .were most 
gratifying to the friends of Russia. Its members would 
cooperate with the tsar in instituting reforms and in con- 
> jiemning the use of violence. 

>^^ On 25 Septeniber, 1905, when the congress announced 
X ^\is intention to take part in the election of th« duma under 
"* X the provisions of the August Manifesto, its action was 
^'^ ^ favorably received in France by the moderates. U Annie 
^ ^ Politique for the year 1904-1905 recorded its resolution 
"^ -^ as the most correct step to take under the drcimistances. 
"^ It was better to make use of the liberties already accorded 
in order to obtain new ones, it added.^ Rene Millet ex- 
pressed his satisfaction at the conciliatory disposition of 
the congress. It was gratifying, he added, to see the 
bourgeoisie and enlightened persons rally to the govern- 
ment's side against the excesses of workers and peasants.^ 
Robert de Caix, who had been observing the revolutionary 
movement in Russia very closdy, believed that the con- 
gress had a most reasonable view of the Russian situation. 
It was highly desirable that Count Witte should welcome its 
^^ cooperation.' Georges Qemenceau declared that if the 

^U Annie Politique, 1904-1905, pp. 445-446. 

* Revue politique et parlementaire, yoL 46, (1905), p. 612. 

* Journal des Dihats, 28 November, 1905, p. i. ; 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



507] REFORMS FOR RUSSIA 71 

nobles in the congress could gather axound them men with 
**more composure, method, and perseverance than their 
French forefathers of 1789 " and make common cause with 
the Intelligentzia, they were destined to be the brains and 
soul of their future government^ UHumanite editorially 
paid a tribute to the congress : 

The representatives of the zemstvos and dumas in congress 
assembled at Moscow have just written the first page of the 
history of an emancipated people. All the events which, since 
the sinister fusillade of January at Petrograd, have marked 
the stages of the Revolution, are connected with the bloody and 
shameful agony of the autocratic regime. They belonged to 
that period of the Revolution when violence and massacres 
were the order of the day. After the Revolution, which awoke 
with a cry of pain, comes the Revolution which is organized 
with all the strength of hope. The point in question is no 
longer rioting, military ferocities, monstrous exploits of Cos- 
sacks, avenging bombs, judicial executions, but the new right 
which is being elaborated in an assembly, which, by its very 
composition, dominates the tsar.^ 

After six months of violence and bloodshed it was not 
surprising that the advent of a body of earnest and in- 
telligent Russians should be welcomed by every sound- 
thinking man. Frenchmen, as well as the Russian nobility ' 
and bourgeoisie, were already tired of the seemingly end- 
less strikes and pillaging of laborers and peasants. The 
peasants too suffered no less from the chaotic state of the 
country. As the internal disturbances created an imfav- 
orable condition for trade and caused great financial lossesi 
and widespread misery, the end of the disorders was highly 
desirable to every one concerned. 

* UHumanite, 22 July, 1905, p. 3- 
«/W(/., p. I. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



^2 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1905 [go8 

The Congress of Zemstvos found many sympathizers in 
France, because of its composition and aims, which pre- 
saged a better understanding between the tsar and his sub- 
jects. To the French it represented the " best minds " in 
Russia who would likely succeed in cooperating with the 
government in the work of reforms and reconstruction. 

Preparedness for Democratic Government 
The insistent demands of Russian revolutionists for 
political reforms which, if granted, would convert the 
autocratic government into a constitutional monarchy, 
_^ brought up the question as to whether Russia was pre- 

pared for a representative form of government after the 
Western style. There was a divergence of opinion in 
France. T^b^^^fjyanr^ fiii'tiifpr«t^ thfi„ SgcialistSj Jb^ved 
that she was; the moderate t hinkers an d the conservative^ 
answeredf in the negative. ^ 

^ The" French Sc<:ialists reiterated again and again the 
readiness of Russia for democratic reforms. In an article 
in UEuropien of 3 June, 1905, Francois de Pressense de- 
. clared that " Peace and Constitution were the two wordi 

yc^ ("^ which could avert a terrible crisis." The " agonizing tsar- 
f * M d ^^^ " could only be saved by peace with Japan and the 
It * -^ >^ drawing up of a constitution. In a subsequent article he 
reiterated his conviction that only a democratic constitu- 
tional government could save Russia and that she waa 
ready for the change as France was in 1789 and England 
in 1688.* 

Jean Jaures said, replying to the contention of the con- 
\ /, ,.^x< ^ servative French papers that, as Russia had not had any 
\^ , (-'I political experience, she should not venture into full demo- 
, • ' . * cratic government : 

"'' ' \ It is in vain that theorists of passiveness and servitude try 

^ ' ^ ^ • ^ ^ '■} ^UEuropien, 29 July. 1905, PP. 1-3- 



' *< * 



Digitized by 



Google 



509] REFORMS FOR RUSSIA 73 

to prove that Russia in virtue of its ethical and moral constitu- 
tion is not ripe for liberty. In 1789, when there was not ontf 
germ of a representative institution in France, a superficial 
observer might have asked himself how this coimtry, destitute 
of all initiative, of liberty, could bring forth a democratic 
republic, and how a year later, the revolution could shake the 
earth. 

It is true that it had been prepared by the philosophic move- 
ment, as you know. 

But look at Russia. If she has a classic tradition less ancient 
than our own, the Russian intellectual classes have a deeper 
communication with the suffering people; and if the Russian 
bourgeoisie is not that of France of 1789, the Russian prole- 
tariat, moulded, secretly educated in mysterious hiding-places 
by the propagandists, by the theorists from Kropotkin to dis- 
ciples of Karl Marx, is more conscious, more master of itself, 
more alive to the mission of liberation which it has to accom- 
plish over the heads of an insufficient bourgeoisie. 

And if you remember that the democratic and representative 
regime has known how to accommodate itself to the most 
diverse circumstances, you will conclude that Russia will know 
how to find the form of representation suitable to it and to its 
ethic and moral constitution. 

What is necessary is to let it speak, to tear away the muzzle 
which the people have upon their mouths, the bandage which is 
drawn over their eyes. 

And it is Tsarism which is occupied today in binding these 
eyes, which are opening. 

And supposing that the Russian people are incapable of 
governing, there is one who is still more incapable, more un- 
worthy than they, for if he knows the crimes which are being 
committed on his behalf or in his name, there is nothing for it 
but to wait until the hand of destiny shall stop him.^ 

From another quarter of French public opinion came 
* Free Russia, 1 June, igos p. 83. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



74 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1905 [gi^ 

the other view that the Russian people were still unpre- 
f[ ,j ^ pared for democratic government. The Catholic fort- 

^N ^' ' ^ ^**^ nightly La Qmnzaine of i August, 1905, was of the opinion 
;'^\^ "^^^^ Aat the Russian people could not as yet be entrusted with 
I ^ .^f^ ^ the direction of its own destinies. To compare the internal 
v5^ S^l^"^^ ' condition of Russia to that of France of 1789 was a great 
, error, it declared. In France there was a bour geoisie who 
had long been hutiateJ^inj^^blic affairs ; in Russia the most 
Tughly ciiRured class had no experience whatever in the 
management of big business, and as to politics, theirjknow- 
ledge was utterly deficient. Le Petit Journal favored re- 
forms for Russia, but believed that they should be accorded 
with great prudence, for the majority of the people, having 
only a very rudimentary education, were not ready for a 
representative government and still less for liberty.^ Mexr 
^ \c it lX\or^^^^^^ ^^ emphasized the ignorance of the mass of the 
' ^, K$''<^^ (Xf^^^^ ^ ^^ ^^^ serious objection to the introduction of 
f'A i^Ut^S ^^^<^^^^^tic reforms. He wrote: 

Such is the intellectual condition of the Tsar's subjects that 
even if " patriarchal autocracy, ' as represented by the bureau- 
cratic oligarchy, were able to introduce reforms which could 
sweep away the economic, political, and judicial abuses with- 
out destroying itself; even if every man obtained absolute 
liberty of movement, the possibility of working freely for him- 
self, and further the judicial weapons which could render him 
capable of defending himself by personal initiative against the 
bureaucratic arbitrament, nothing would thereby be altered. 
,fc,^ For nine-tenths of the nation, more than 120 millions of 

Russian subjects, would be totally prevented from profiting by 
such advantages, ignorant, unlettered, unconscious of their 
. indignity as they are — ^unconscious of their new rights and pri- 
vileges as they will long remain.^ 

^ 16 February, 1905, p. 2. 
« Op. ciU p. ^1' 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



5 1 1 ] REFORMS FOR RUSSIA 75 

Universal Suffrage 

On the question of universal suffrage, which was one 
of the significant demands of the Russian revolutionaries, 
c onservative opinion in France doubted the capa^iiyof ihe 
Russian^£eogle to exercise tfiis m<>st sacred prerogative. 
Ei^ene Lautier denied: its efficacy to solve the Russian 
problem, as claimed by the revolutionary leaders. " There 
never has been '*, he wrote in Le Figaro of 29 October, 
1905, " a country where the immediate introduction of imi- 
versal suffrage would be more dangerous and fruitless. 
Oh! undoubtedly they will get it sooner or later; but howt 
could men of some intelligence seriously conceive the 
thought of calling to the ballot-»box without preparation 
the immense crowd of illiterate moujiks?" Xhomaa 
Grimm was also of the opinion that Russia was too back- 
ward a^^ouiiTfy Tor' the exercisie of imiversal suffrage. He 
favored the introduction of restricted suff rage. " Initia- 
tion is necessary ", he declared in the Petit Journal of 17 
August, 1905. " To implant our constitutional and par-i 
liamentary regime in Russia, at a single stroke, would be 
as foolish as to admit a child who could hardly read to a 
class in philosophy or higher mathematics." A similar view! 
was held by Paul Beaiu-egard. " There is nothing better 
lof Russia than t<S escape "frtMn autocracy; but to attempt 
to convert her into a f ullfledged Republic would be sheer 
folly. Examples are only too numerous of peoples who, 
in their haste, overlook transitions and fall into anarchy and 
misery.'' Russia, he continued, was not ready for a de- 
mocratic regime. Shejadkwi^thgjn^ 

It would take many years, centuries perhaps, before the 
Russian people would be capable of living in prosperity 
under a political regime analogous to that of France, he as- 

* Le Monde ^conomique, vol. ii, (i905)» p. 57^. 



Digitized byVjOOQlC 



76 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OP 1906 [gj^ 

serted in a previous article/ The distinguished Roman 
Catholic professor Paul Leroy-Beaulieu expressed the 
opinion that it would be inadvisable to grant universal suf- 
frage and to establish a parliamentary government like that 
-r- of France in a country like Russia.* Georges Clemenceau 

was reported to have said that it would be impossible to 
^ introduce universal suffrage in Russia.* 

\r5uuur/ A • '^^^ Socialist leader Jean Jaures held an entirely opposite 
SCXM^s^ vq^y^'^w. He cpRsidered universaLisuggage-as- o t i e at tlie es- 
V iCX Ju>^^f^?^^al^^ iii^e^ of the Russian people^ He 

tiu Cvt«.^4»(A^^^^^^terized the objection of French "reactionaries and 
^uM^^^p^^^^^tes'* as "strangely naive " and "terribly hypocri- 
tical." It was his firm belief that once the Russian nation 
possessed the right to vote, their march toward progress 
would be uninterrupted. To his mind the first reform 
should endow them with imiversal suffrage. 

Constitution 

The dispatches which appeared almost daily in the French 
press reported with singular monotony the clamor for a 
"constitution" in Russia. 4'dde Ebray observed that 
ther e wer e two .classes of agitators^n^^us^^ of 
tKeiSi lie caflecK/ BixQilitipim " or those who stood for 
the organization of a Western form of government, lajring 
aside national traditions, and whose method of actiorTwas 
violence and disorder. JTbe. other class^he termed "Evolu- 
tionists " or /Reformists ", or those who advocated ref<Mths 
"but would respect established institutions and national tradi- 
^„^ tions. In France, it might be added, the advanced thinkers 

sympathized with the former class, while the moderates 
were on the side of the latter. 

' Ibid., vol. i, (1905)1 p. 9B. 
* U^conomiste Frangais, vol. 33*, (1905), p. 843. 
Le Figaro, 31 October, 190s pp. 1-2. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



513] REFORMS FOR RUSSIA yy 

The revolutionaries had fixed their heart on a constitu- 
tion^! iTiey reifefafed many"! imes that onTy^a **^ constilu- 

"tionr^^could put an end to the disturbances in the empire. 
The French conservative thinkers, however, disagreed with 
them. Vicomte Combes de Lastrade, corresponding mem- 
ber of the " Institut de France '\ asserted that very many 
Russians clamored for a " constitution " without knowing 
what kind of a constitution they desired. An "elective 
constitutioii", such as the revolutionaries seeined tO"des^ 
man2C'presupposed an electorate. Was there aii electorate 

"trTTlussia?. -Ae -asked "The nobles are mostly office- 
h33ers, the Intelligentzia or professional class are few 
and too much imbued with Western ideas; there is no 
bourgeoisie; and the peasants and laborers are still incapable 
of judging public questions. In such a society, who will 
form the electorate? And without an electorate, there 
could not be a constitution. Of the numerous reforms de- 
manded for Russia, those designed to please the advocates 
of a Western form of government should be eliminated.*' ** 
Qt^de^Mdinari^ shared this view. He had only a feeble 
confidence in the curative virtue of constitutions, gesides^ 
the^u|igrg]2aredness of the people to enjoy a democratic 
govemmtat. after the We^fern style, ' a ©mstltutiun would 

n^rid Rasgia^f the buresiucracy, but would simply" add 
politlciaxifiL JtCL J>^r^^^?^ts. Far better would it T)e for 

TJussia to simplify the work of the bureaucracy and to 
permit the people to move from place to place without the 
required passports, to form associations, and to speak and 
write fearlessly. Such reforms, he added, "not only 
have the merit of costing nothing, but also of lightening 
expenses and taxes, a merit which no constitution, however 
perfect, possesses ".* 

> Revue des Etudes Franco-Russes, March, 1905, pp. 91-92. 
» Journal des Economistes, voL 7. (i905)» I*. 466. 



, Digitized by LjOOQiC 



78 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1905 [51^ 

An anonymous writer in the Catholic fortnightly La 
Reforme Sociale of i March, 1905, asserted tfiat only 
the advanced intellectuals demanded a constitution. The 
moujiks, composing afeoiri 95% .of. the-popiUtioau-StUF 
l<56ked ujp to the tsar as their father and. protectojr^^jgainst 
tiie tyrannj l^i ,;tS n^^ "A Constitution! A magic 
word which seems to be the salvation of all these big 
children who cannot understand that words cannot save 
people, and that before dreaming of introducing into the 
heavy Russian organism which is already cracked, this new* 
mechanism which might kill it, it is necessary above all to 
fortify public life! by purifying the administration and 
pt«blic morals/* He 'believed that the government should 
be purged of all its dishonest servants before any attempt 
at new and radical changes in the political system should be 
made. 

The French Socialists and_Radicals sympathized with 
the Russian '* Reyofutionnaires "-. . Tii^lhdd thcjopmion^ 
thartfie immediate.need of JRussia was a constitution. La 
Petite R^publique declared tiiat the ^oulbles in Rusisia 
would not cease until the people held in their hands a con- 
stitution.^ Jean Longuet, under the caption " Situation 
Critique'', wrote in UHunumte of 14 November, 1905,. 
that " peace and a democratic constitution '' were indispen- 
sable for Russia's existence. Let the people's voice be 
heard in the government, he suggested. If this was denied 
them, the revolutionary crisis would end fatally; but if the 
people obtained a constitution which would guarantee their 
liberties and protect them against the possibility of any 
reaction, their tyoubles would end and. they would prosper. 

* UHumaniti, 28 October, 1905, p. 3. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



515] REFORMS FOR RUSSIA 79 

Suggested Reforms 
Various sections of French public opinion championed 
several reforms for Russia- The Catholics suggested re- 
ligious, economic, social, and political reforms. Inasmuch 
as the tsar had already granted liberty of worship in the 
early days of the revolution, the Catholics now proposed 
the education of the clergy whose immorality and ignor- 
ance they severely condemned. They declared that the 
clergy of the Russian church were notoriously uneducated 
and utterly unscrupulous about the sources of their income. 
A reform of the seminaries was sorely needed. As to the 
peasants, they should be taught better methods of cultivat- 
ing the land and should be allowed to own or enjoy long 
lease of their holdings. Another reform demanded by 
trade conditions of the country was the improvement of 
commercial coiuts and the prevention of usury. _A la w! 
imposing heavy penalty on those convicted of usury should 
be enactg il^" The workers sHouTd also be supervised by 
tKe ' government so as to promote their welfare. A com- 
mittee, a sort of consultative body, should be created to look 
after workingmen's institutions. In order to correct the 
abuses committed by government officials, a law severely 
punishing bribery should be enacted, giving each govern- 
ment ^ jurisdiction over the enforcement of the law. As: 
the form of central government the Catholics were opposed 
to the establishment of a r^resentative jgoverrraent as found 
inthe Western "Europe. A parliament patterned after 
'Western models would only become a sort of "Tower of 
BSbei " on account of the extreme diversity of races which 
would be represented. Such a parliament was doomed to 

^ This proposed law was aimed at the Jews. The Catholic Church 
has always condemned usury. 

2 A government was a principal political division of the Russian 
Empire. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



8o THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1905 [gig 

failure in a country like Russia. The Catholics would pre- 
fer a " good tyrant '', a benevolent despot, siurounded by 
competent and enlightened counselors, who would rule over 
such a motley crowd as the Russian people.^ 

Professor Paul Leroy-Beaulieu advanced the opinion that 
f \>A</%itt^ agovernment of the Prussian type was the best solution of 
^A^^Pf^yle' problem of a representative government for Russia.* 

^ A French economist, G. de Molinari, emphasized Russia's 

need of economic reforms. The most urgent reform, he 
declared, w^ one"wh!ctrwould reduce government expen- 
^diture and Uie heavy taxation. ^ The^ormous war budgd: 
and navy appropriations were already a heavy burden upon 
^^ the taxpayers. He protested against the protective tariff 

, " Cr c- ; Vi instituted by Count de Witte, which had seriously affected 

I ^ -^ 1 U A Fr^^ch exports to Russia. He asserted that Witfe'SuETS^ 
/^4^W^^<^ tive policy was detrimental to Russia's economic progress. 
x> eK^f^"^^ recommended the suppression of passports which hin- 
, " Vli^ *^ \.j^^^^ ^^ people from moving from one place to another 
^ ^ within the empire. Such reforms, to his mind, would be 

more efficacious in the restoration of order than constitutions 
and parliaments.* 
^ Edusaticml.xeforms were suggested by Thomas Grimm 

in an article in Le Petit Journal of 23 Jime, 1905. He 
urged the education of the moujiks, that vast mass of the 
Russian populace, in order to preparrthem f or a Tiew life. 
According to him 64% of the population was illiterate, 
which indicated that about two-thirds of the children re- 
ceived no instruction. There was no compulsory attend- 
ance at schools, and many of those who did attend school 
remained there only one or two years. Primary instuction 
was very inadequate, altogether insufficient to combat the 

' La Riforme Sociale, 16 April, 1905, pp. 649-668. 

* L'^conomiste Frangais, vol. 33, (i90S)» P- 843- 

* Journal des £conotnistes, vol. 8^ (i90S)» PP. 3<^y^ 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



517] REFORMS FOR RUSSIA gl 

ignorance of the peasants or to prepare them for a civilized 
and prc^essive life. He suggested the following remedies : 
(i) Prolong school attendance- (2) Enlarge the curricu- 
lum. The elements of natural science should be taught 
History, which was not included in the old curriculum, AF a}^ 
should be added in order to develop national consciousness^ q^V (^ ^ 
(3) Establish schools for adults, providing for evening and\ . \^ . t^ V 
Sunday classes. (4) Public lectiu-es should be given. (5) / y^ \\ ^ 
Public libraries should be founded. (6) Relief funds for 1^ W ^" 

poor children should be created. In addition to these edu- '^f* r^ 

cational reforms, he advocated the .convoc ation assooia asi ,. V 

BQssible of a national assembly^ .however, imperfect it might I ' I 

be. I t^should be the duty of this body to perfect gradually ^ \/. v 

the governmental machinery and to exercise a certain 
"amount of control over the acts of the bureaucracy. 

"Another sore spot in the Russian organism which de- 
manded immediate remedy was the agrarian system. Many ^ 
a French publicist devoted special atteiitioii to the agrarian! 
crisis which involved many perplexing problems. As Pro- 
fessor Alfred Anspach said, the agrarian problem was in- 
timately connected with the " constitutional regeneration " 
[of Russia. The bulk of her population was composed of 
peasants, who in a representative government would have 
to participate in the conduct of public affairs. But they 
were amazingly ignorant; in fact, they were the most 

(serious hindrance to the conversion of Russia into a <lemo- 
cratic country after the Western standard. On account of 
tB ei r Igllbm nce'theyliaa been'CTploited by the bureaucracy 
and the result was their deplorable misery. They were 
easy victims of the corrupt bureaucrats, because the Russian 
peasant was a " good, docile creature not lacking in shrewd- 
ness but childish and ingenuous as any half-wit ".^ 

* Charles Rivet, op. cit., p. 7. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



82 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1905 [yg 

Professor Anspach was one of the opponents of the agra- 
rian system prevailing in Russia. The communal system, 
the village administration, and the courts were inadequate 
to protect the property and the work of the peasant. To this 
fact he attributed the exodus of the peasants to the dties. 
He cited the reports of committees investigating rural con- 
ditions, which were adverse to the maintenance of the exist- 
ing communal government. His conclusion was that the 
first reform needed by Russia, which was essentially an 
agricultural country, was a drastic change in the prevail- 
ig agrarian system. He recommended (i) the abolitic«i 
^of the " mir ", (2) the granting of civil and personal rights 
to the peasants, (3) the reorganization of local administrar 
' tion and local tri'bimals in conformity with the institutions 
of the empire, (4) the increase of peasant landholdings, and 
(S) governmental encouragement of emigration. The 
'* mir '\ he declared, was chiefly responsible for the misery, 
backwardness, and discontent of the rural population. With 
this view Vicomte Combes de Lastrade, another student 
sof the Russian agrarian system, heartily agreed. He, too, 
found so many disadvantages in the "mir" government 
that he advocated its abolition as one of the needed changesi 
in Russia. 

Xhe rural administration needed a complete reorganiza- 
tion to render it useful and to assure the peasant protection 
of person and property, according to Professor Anspach. 
HfiL-diseryfidtpp that the local tribtmals were very slow in 
trying cases brought before them and in general very 
deficient. They must be reorganized. It was highly necesr 
sary, in addition, tQjndow the peasants w?th civiLand per- 
sonal rights. The prevailing restrictions on the exercise of 
these rights increased the general discontent and were a 
hindrance to the progress of the rural class.^ 

^ Revue des Btudes Franco-Russes, January, 1905, pp. 1-18. 



J 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



519] REFORMS FOR RUSSIA 83 

In regard to peasant holdings, Professor Ahspach as- 
serted that the amount of land allotted to each peasant was 
ridiculously small and composed of strips of land very often 
widely separated. He suggested the gratllJn& Ql.iaoi:eJand 
Jo each peasant so that he could inrrea.se hi<s proHnrtirm anrl , ^ 

have Q iouj:h to support himself ^^ his family. One way of 1 . ^( j ^^^ 
solvin g this problem wa^.tQ wiCQuragei-emigration to Siberia ^ i^v 
aiid to other parts of European Russia. Thg government^ ' t^, w.A 
should^ render energetic help to emigrants to Siberia in ^ 
OTder 10 induce tHe peasants to move. It should stimulate 
-tia^-movement of Ihe peasants to the vast imcultivated lands! 
belonging to the monastic and ecclesiastical orders and lay- 
men. It would be justified in expropriating these lands for 
public use. If the peasants were given more lands, Pro^ 
f essor Anspach believed, Russia would experience a tremen- 
dous development. He cited the successful experiment ini r^^^^ 
the United States with the Ho mestead Law^enacted in i86i, w^ i^t 
On account of this law, he said, the United StatesTiad not JL^^"^'^ 
had any revolutionary crisis. Therefore, he concluded, if ^^fx ^ 
the Russian government should purchase the vast private jQ.^\^t^^- 
estates in European Russia and divide them among peasants, ^'^^^ 
Russia would be saved from revolutionary crises and her 3ii.^f'^^ ^ 
strength and power would be considerably increased. The /XvTT^* ^' 
government would be fully compensated for the enormous ^^^\\^l 
sums that it would invest in this enterprise.^ He cited the q . ^ ; 
tremendous losses suffered by R,ussia thrcmgh the agrarian ^^^-^ 
<^risis. The peasants pillaged and burned their lords* pro- 
\ P^y ^^d they took possession of the land. They stopped 
1 working, and the cessation of rural work meantA defici t - o f 
Iseveiil millions of roubles to the natiwial revenues and 
hnevTtable famine. The agrarian movement resulted in the 
I decrease of the people's purchasing power and Ihecqnse- 
j^uent fmlure oT merchants and industries; it delayed the_^ 

^ 1 Revue des Etudes Frmco-Russes, June, igas, pp. 276-282. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



84 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1906 [520 

collectiy i of taxes; it caused enormous loss es to the st ate 
bank and the banks ot tHe cities and the zemstvos; and it 
increased the number" of unemployed. 

Manifesto of 19 August 

One of the tsar's manifestoes which caused considerable 
comment in the French press was that published on 19 
August, 1905, which announced that a r epresentative as- 
sgiiblyLucaL.!l>dimiau!L'-„..wQuld bo oummo ttca. Georges Qe- 
menceau stunmarized it in one sentence : " Conservation de 
Tautocratie tsarienne, pas de liberte, et de discours entre 
quatre murs : voila, d'un mot, la grande * Constitution ' der 
Nicolas 11/' The liberties it conceded to the people were 
fallacious, he added. Its effect would be to stir inordinate 
convulsions and precipitate the " revolution d&nocratique 
de liberte ".^ Rene Viviani in an article under the caption 
" Dupeur Dupe-^' -mrh'Humcmite of 24 August, 1905, ex- 
pressed the opinion that the futility of the Russian " Con- 
""stitution " was self-evident. " This charter, granted not 
by the kindness of the tsar but by the terror which the mar- 
velous revolutionary effervescence inspires in him, yields 
only to take back, creates only to destroy, affirms only to 
deny. It is a trap, it is a duperie—sxid the gloomy indiffer- 
cince, the preface of an explosion always possible with much 
repressed wrath, has been the only reply made by the bour- 
geoisie and by the people to the liberal ukase which an 
executioner has drawn up." Nevertheless, he continued, 
the manifesto marked an. important date in the history of 
Russia. Ths^absolute regime of the autocracy without any 
restraint, gave way to a weakened government with an 
uncertain amount of control, which, however limited, anight 
yield some formidable results in the future. He observed 
further that there was some resemblance between the Rus- 

» UHumaniti, 2^ August, 190S p. 3- 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



52 1 ] REFORMS FOR RUSSIA 85 

sian "Constitution" and the charter granted by Louis 
XVIII in 1 8 14. That the charter would some day be en- 
larged was possible, he asserted; but for men to come to- 
gether and refrain from discussion was impossible. In the 

bidde n. But if the duma^ by a fonnidabte majority de- 
manded other changes, the clash between tsar and people 
T^8fflaT)e inevitable. And if the tsar attempted to resort to 
repfessibnTie would drive to the opposite camp those who 
had hitherto placed confidence in him. *' Le dupeur sera 
dupi'\ Then would occur the '' Revolution '\ in which 
the representatives of the people would openly disobey 
their sovereign. ^ 

Jeanj Faures' most outstanding objecticms to the Russian p^' '' 
" ^onst jtutionT^" were the ^restricted, .suffrage _ which wag ^ ^ } 
g ranted to a very small minority, and a conservative min-^ >^ ^\;; 
ority at th at7and the character of the " duma " or assembly ^^' > " 
which w as to be a mere consultative l>ody. Despite this { ,.^ ^ 
restriction, however, he considered it a great victory for ^ \ 
the cause of liberty, for the emperor and his officials would v\^^ , 
no longer remain irresponsible and arbitrary but would be V^ y 

obliged to give an account of their conduct to the elected (V- y \ 

representatives of the nation. The duma had immense op- ^ , 

portunities . _By controlinjB^ theT?^ ^t could73e£5id the 
rig^t^of the.people^^nd deiKtf^ liberties. If 

it could not directly transform or enlarge the " constitution ", 
it could accomplish this end indirectly bjL refusing, to.assent.. 
to measures of which it did not approve. According to 
this view the hope of the people lay in the capacity of the 
duma to avail itself of its opportunities.^ The first im- ^ 
pression created by the August Manifesto in^Socialist cir- 
cles was that it affirmed the intangibility of autocracy. This 

* VHumanitS, 27 August, 1905, p. i. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



86 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1905 [^22 

principle was adhered to throughout the manifesto, and it 
was against this very principle that the Russian people had 
beein protesting vigorously, declared UHumamte of 20 
August, 1905. The Council of the Empire, which possessed 
the right to initiate legislation, it continued, and the tsar's 
right to fix the length of the sessions of the duma and to 
dissolve it at any time, preserved the autocratic principle. 

La Pet ite Republique, a republican socialist daily, com- 
mented tn al tlie AiUi i if e !^ (jC> ^ too fe:lA^^^ wi t h on ^ hand w ha t it 
gave with Jthe other. "Autocracy has made conc(SsiOTis 
to Its subjects but preserves for itself the real and absolute 
power. The tsar's rescript is inaccurate where it says that 
it will call the entire nation to make laws for the empire. 
In reality only a very restricted number is benefited by the 
new political regime." However, it admitted that the 
manifesto was an historic act. It remained for the de- 
puties that would sit in the duma to act, and they would 
inevitably come into conflict with the autocracy as the 
Estates General did with the divine-right monarchy.^ 

La Republique Fran^aise, a progressive daily, advised 
the Russian people to accept without protest the imperial 
rescript, and then later, they should endeavor to modify it 
through legal means.* 

UAnnee Politique for the year 1905 observed that the 
manifesto did not establish a constitutional regime in the 
ordinary sense of the word. It ad ulterated, however, th e 
essence of tsarism^ jeguii^^ must^te 

^uEmitteSr^an^l©^ it could be pro- 

mulgated by theJsar. It was easy to foresee, it continual, 
that the working of this new elective machinery would 
change the character of the Russian government. It con- 

1 L'Hufnaniti, 20 August, 1905, p. 3- 

^Ihid. ? J J 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



523] REFORMS FOR RUSSIA g/ 

eluded that the Nineteenth of August marked the end of 
the autocratic and bureaucratic regime and was an import- 
ant date in the history of Russia/ 

The Revue des Etudes Franco-Russes considered the 
^ ^^f^^yj ^^ pyided f or in thT^nanif^tSTas^^elsferm of Rus- 
sia^s mo ral aiiST social renaissance. Though its memtff si 
were to be eie(ie3T2iaef rigorous and restricted conditions, 
the duma was an important step for Russia.^ The Petit 
Journal declared in its issue of 20 August, 1905, that the 
tsar's manifesto was for Russia a ''veritable revolution 
padfique '\ 

The anarchist daily Temps Nouveaux ridiculed the favor- 
able comments of its French contemporaries on the tsar's 
rescript. It was fallacious to consider it as the beginning 
of a new era. It was only the French pacifists who could 
entertain such ideas.* 

The friends of the tsar in France rejoiced that at last the 
empero r had decided "^r ca ll a nationa l asi^fe nibly -w fajch they 
^th^gfiT^ou^ 

Thomas Grimm it was who sounded the current view that 
the most essential thing for Russia was the convocation as 
soon as possible of a national assembly, however imperfect 
it might be. Such a body should limit the " imgodliness " 
of the bureaucracy and control its acts, and perfect the 
governmental machinery little by little.* The rescript was 
referred to in the French press as the " Russian Constitu- 
tion " though the word " constitution " was not mentioned 
in the rescript. "'Charter" wotdd perhaps be more ap- 
plicable^^, for,.the amird "cainsBtiSm''^was,.Q^ 
in itsWestem sense. The objections advanced came from 

* Op. cit, pp. 416-417. 

* October, 1905, pp. 401-404. 
•9 September, 1905. 

* Petit Journal, 17 August, 1905, p. i. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



88 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1905 [524 

the usual habit of radical thinkers of judging Russian ques- 
tions by Western standards. The Russian charter would 
indeed suffer from comparison with the constitution of a 
limited monarchy as found in Western Europe. 

Manifesto of 30 October 

The manifesto of 19 August soon proved futile in pacify- 
ing the nation. On 25 Septemb er, 1905, the Congress of 

ZemstVOS derlared for ^ hj-Q^rlpf hajai*^ r>^ ^^ p^pcp i^ ^ ^f ti ;^ ^t\A 

a general strike compeUed thetsacta-gxaatiiflw concessions 
ma manifesto published on 29 October. Georges Qemen- 
ceau said that a reccmciliation between tsar and nation was 
still possible if the tsar would renounce his pretension to 
preserve his autocratic power through his "ridiculous 
duma " and abide by his word.^ The manifesto, like its 
predecessor of the Nineteenth August, was discussed for 
several days in the French press. A hostile comment was 
heard from the socialist daily UHumaniti the day after its 
publication. The author was Leon Remy, who said in part : 
" The last attempt of dying tsarism resembles those preced- 
ing. Tlje manifesto contains only promises and it comes 
too late." La Petite Republiqtte asked if the assembly to"Be~ 
summoned under the new rescript would have legislative 
prerogatives!. Would it have control over the budget!? 
Would it have the right of initiating laws? If the assembly 
should exercise these powers, then the new regime in Russia 
would resemble constitutional monarchies such as Germany 
where the ministers were responsible to the emperor and at 
the same time would resemble England and France where 
their tenure depended upon Parliament. The republican 
socialist daily doubted the sincerity of Jthe t^r on~accaunt 
of the vagueness of his rescript. Was the tsar planning to 
cheat the people when their agitation should cease? Con- 

' L'Humaniti, 30 October, 1905, p. 3. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



525] REFORMS FOR RUSSIA 8^ 

temporary history, it added, contained examples of such 
double-dealing/ Jean Jaure s denounced the manifesto as - — - 
insufficient He Asserted that half-measures and semi-con- 
cessions were of no avail. There was only one means left 
f or the tsa r and that was to 'summon'" alruly^ representative 
a ssemb ly, endowed with full legislative powers and to " 
give s ufficient guarantees ag^nst every possibility of reac- 
tion. " Now," he continued, *' autocracy is dead. After the 
recent experience of the Russian people, a return to the 
ancient regime is impossible." ^ Another Socialist, Franqois 
de Pressense, expressed the opinion that the manifesto 
lacked the " straight- forward formulas and loyal and 
firm language " which were the proofs of good faith. " In- 
terpreted in the light of innumera:ble ukases and proclama- 
tions which have preceded it, the manifesto justifies doubt 
and suspicion." * 

Besides the Socialists, a Catholic, Anatole Leroy-Beau- 
lieu, foimd the "constitution" tmsatisfactory. Dubbing 
it as a " quasi-Constitution ", he^ wrote on 19 November, 
1905, that the tsar aimed to preserve autocracy along with 
constitutional government. The word " constitution " was 
not mentioned in the rescript nor in any other official docu- 
ment. He still signed as " Emperor Autocrat ". His at- 
titude in fact left much room for doubt.* 

From another quarter of French opinion, however, there 
came words of commendation for this new proof of the 
tsar's good will toward his subjects. The manifesto indeed 
lacked Jhiat clearness and precision to which Latin peoples Q 
were so accustomed, asserted Charles de Lariviere, but it ' ' 
assured Russia a new era and transformed it into the rank 

1 L'Humaniti, i November, 1905, p. 3- 

' Ibid,, 4 November, 1905, p. i. 

» L'Europien, 4 November, 1905, pp. 1-3. 

* Journal des DSbats, 19 Novcmiber, 1905, p. i. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



90 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1905 [526 

pi^padigmmteT^ " In fact such phrases as these; 

to unite the activity of the superior organs of the govern- 
ment, to give guarantees of civic liberty on the bases of 
mviolability of person, freedom of conscience, speech, asr- 
sodation, and meeting; and so to establish matters that no 
law could be put in force without having been approved by 
the duma of the empire — ^are these not assurances which 
admit of no doubt as to the intentions of the sovereign? " 
jle rea d into the manifesto that the tsar had accorded the 
duma coinpiaeTe^I^^ ancT no"|K>Wat' 1COQ03^ 

jent'it from exercising jthgm if it §0 desired- He added 
that in the manifesto was a declaration ihat.tfa£,dm na coul d 
extend the franchise! This, he concluded, was a step to- 
v.^) ward urirversaf Ttiiirage whidi was the popular demand. 
•-^"^^' t>>'Oiarles de Lariviere, always prontsarist in his view, could 
vj^^*- {) ^'sefr^n the tsar's rescript the promise of a bright future for 
^^''v' his empire.^ 

In st:ri>stantial agreement with this view was that ex- 
^X^ pressed by Eugene Lautier in the Figaro of 31 October, 
1905. A^ew era was ofjening for Russia, he announced. 
The manifesto was a real " Constftudon." It would mean 
for the people, if they wished, the retxun oi prosperity and 
peace. It was l3ie end of the revolution, or rather it was 
the revolution accomplished through the " wisdom and good 
will " of the siovereign. Henceforth, he concluded, there 
ootdd not be any more pretext for the continuation of dis- 
turi)ances in Russia.* 
Moderate tiiiirfcers_Ln France, in their. greaLjd^ire to see 
/^M^^^ the restoration of Russia's internal peace and the resump- 
tion of her normal life, seemed to be content with any con- 
cession the tsar made. , On the other hand, the Sociafists, 
sticking to their principles and conviction that the time wasi 

* Revue des Etudes Franco-Russes, December, 190s pp. 4fiS'4li7' 

* Figaro, 31 October, 1905, pp. 1-2. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



527] REFORMS FOR RUSSIA 9 1 

ripe for the establishment of a real democratic government, 
and driven on by their hatred of the tsar, were not satis- 
fied with the October Manifesto and continued to distrust 
him. 

Reforms in Poland and Finland 

Another Russian problem which was of great im- 
portance to the empire and to the outside world as well 
was the question of nationality. According to the prevail- 
ing opinion in France this problem was closely connected 
with the political reforms in Russia. The different nation- 
alities were so numerous and widely scattered over a vast 
area that no change in the political system would be ad- 
visable if it did not take account of this question. Plehve 
had rightly said that " the revolutionary question is a na- 
tional question, and in order to resolve the one, it would 
be necessary to suppress the other." ^ But the policy of 
*' russification '* had totally failed to suppress the nationali- 
ties in the Russian Empire. 

To solve the general problem of nationalities the French 
SoaaRSET'suggesled decentraEzafion. They claimed that 
in a country like Russia, which was composed of so many 
diverse races, only a decentralized government would be 
satisfactory. P. G. La Chesnais believed that a federalized 
Russia with autonomous provinces would be, a highly des- 
irable political system. The central government under such 
a scheme should have just enough powers for intemational 
relations and the provincial governments should possess ex- 
tengye legislative powers.^ 

The two nationalities which attracted particular atten- 
tion abroad during the revolution of 1905 were the Poles 
and the Finns. 

* Alexandre Ular, op, cit, p. 212, 

* VEuropien, 13 May, igos, pp. $-7. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



92 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1905 ^^^ 

The Polish aspirations found many sympathizers in 
France. Both radical and conservative French thinkers fav- 
ored an autonomous Poland. Eugene Lautier commended 
the soimdness of Polish claims. The Polish movement, he 
said, was not a separatist movement. The demand of the 
Poles was in the realm of the possible. They asked for a 
little liberty; they asked to be delivered from the bicker- 
ings of the bureaucracy like all the other peoples of Russia. 
The program of Polish autonomy left the direction of 
general affairs to the government at Petrograd and to the 
imperial duma. It did not go as far as Gladstone's Irish 
Home Rule. Why should not the Poles be given a little 
justice?^ 

In an editorial the Figaro of 30 November, 1905, stated 
the causes of the tsar's hesitation in granting Poland's de- 
ids. The Polish cause had many sympathizers in Rus* 
sia among whom was the Congress of Zemstvos held at 
[Moscow, and the tsar would not refuse to listen to it had it 
I not been for the Kaiser. The German emperor was ap- 
prehensive of the effects the concessions to Poland might 
have upon German Poland and had counseled the tsar to 
make no further concessions. Eugene Lautier on this ques- 
tion remarked : " Ru§§i|^has long been the conservator of 
ajjtocracy in Europe. Now"the"spirif of aBsolulisnfTias 
changed its capital." 

Charles de liriviere, a defender of the tsar, offered a 
similar explanation of the tsar's attitude toward Polish 
autonomy. Should the tsar grant Poland's demand, Ger- 
many might intervene and thus create an embarrassing situ- 
ation for Russia. In this respect the Polish agitation waa 
a peril to Russia.^ 

* Figaro, 28 November, 1905, p. 3. 

* Revue des Etudes Franco-Russes, December, 1905, pp. 485-487. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



529] REFORMS FOR RUSSIA g^ 

Robert de Caix wrote in the Journal des Dibats of 20 
November, 1905, that it was really the German emperor 
who disapproved ofT^pranS^ autohomy'^aria^he prevailed 
9 yer ihe ^sar. jNe^ he believed that the Folesr- 

should refrain from excesses for their own good. As 
Poland was a highly industrialized country and its pro- 
ducts could be sent to the Russian market only on accotmt 
of tariff barriers, its reformers had the more reason to ex- 
'Crcise moderation in their agitation. 

Tjie condemnation of , the Icaiser's influence oyer the tsar •n. 

vras^ not, surprising, in. Fiance* -Ever since the Franco- 
Prussian War of 1870-1871, hatred of Germany had be- 
come commonplace in that country. And the trend of 
opinion in favor of Poland's aspirations for national auton- 
omy was traditional in France. The two peoples had pro- 
fessed mutual admiration for centuries. Their culture and 
religion were alike and their friendly relations were his- 
toric. 

The other nationalist movement which was widely com- 
mented upon in France was that of Finland. The Finnish 
agitation was distinct from the revolutionary movement of 
the rest of the empire. Alexandre Ular called it " the flies 
on the wheel of the Russian Revolution." " The Finns ", f'^ t^ tJ : ; 
he said, " have been singularly indifferent to the question of '^ £ /^ f^ 
Tsardom in Russia. HighbLP9?i??I3^tiYC*.highly opinionated, 
above all highly 'virtuous' in the Protestant sense, they 
liave' constantly made their stand upon their historical 
rights a pure fiction in a political world where the law is to 
the strong exclusively. And what they have claimed con- 
tinuously, is not the stamping out of Tsardom, nor even 
the practical reforms which would politically be of the 
greatest importance to them, but solely the restitution of 
the rights guaranteed them by Alexander I." ^ 

* Alexandre Ular, op. cit^ p. 203. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



- H 



94 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1905 [g^O 

Sympathy with the Finns was general in France. Not a 
single^fesentinglroice wa^ raisedrrt s to th e- j«&tice of their 
demands. The Socialists characterized their aspiration as 
legitimate and just, and their demands, as firm and clear 
but respectful to the tsar. What they asked was the re- 
storation of the reign of law which had been laid aside since 
the policy of " russification " was inaugurated in their 
country. They simply asked that their autonomy be re- 
spected as formerly.^ 

The Journal des Dibats lauded the Finnish aspiration. 
Their cultiuie, it asserted, was far superior to that of the 
Russian masses and they had every conceivable right to en- 
joy their previous autonomy. Of all the concessions 
granted by the tsar, those given to Finland would be the 
least he would regret.* 

On 4 November, 1905, the tsar restored Finland's con- 
stituBoSlis^t had exists prior to i^g."" The^^iness 
with which the tsar granted the demands of Finland was ex- 
plained by French publicists to be due to the absence of 
German interest involved, unlike the case of Pdfafl tf'where 
GermanyTiad'to be considered. The granting of Finnish de- 
mands, it was alleged, confirmed the suspicion that the Ger- 
man emperor was responsible for the tsar's refusal to make 
concessions in Poland. 

Count Serge de Witte 

Of the Russian reformers who commanded unusual at- 
tention in France, Count de Witte stood foremost His pre- 
vious service to the government and the importanit role he 
played as minister of finance in the economic developmenit 
of Russia were still fresh in the memory of many people. 
He had, in the eyes of the French bourgeoisie, a splendid 

* UEuropSen, 2% January, 1905, pp. y-%, 
^Journal des DSbats, 6 November, 1905, p. i. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



53 1 ] REFORMS FOR RUSSIA 95 

record 'back of him. But the attention he attracted in 1905 
was due to the difficult task which he was called upon to 
perform at one of the most critical periods in the history of 
the Russian people. He was regarded as the most capable 
man in the whole empire who could assist the tsar in pacify- 
ing his tumultuous subjects by liberal methods. His ap- 
pointoenit as prime minister on 30 October, 1905, was con- 
sidered by the majority of Frenchmen as a good omen and 
a proof of the conciliatory attitude of the tsar. Foreign 
financiers, said Eugene Lautier, had confidence in Count de 
Witte, because he himself was a great financier with a very 
practical mind. The Revue des Deux Mondes joined in the 
chorus of approval of the choice of Count de Witte. It 
recalled the important services he had rendered and the 
soundness of his judgment whidi he had already revealed 
on many occasions. He was equal to the task to which he 
was called.^ Rene Fillet declared that all the good wishes 
of France were with Coimt de Witte^ for his success would 
mean the re-establishment of Europe's equilibrium — the 
consolidation of the Franco-Russian Alliance. The econ- 
omist Paul Beauregard recalled the inestimable service ren- 
dered by Witte as minister of finance when he restored the 
gold standard in Russia which replaced that country in the 
rank of those nations that enjoyed irreproachable finances. 
In addition to his financial farsightedness, he had always 
shown liberal tendencies throughout his career, and to the 
new task before him he would be able to apply them. For 
the sake of Russia and France, Beauregard concluded, Q>unt 
de Witte should succeed in his work.* 

An exception to the favorable views mentioned above 

deserves to be noted in this connection. ,_Ihe„ French 

^^SraJiiliTt's and gnnif> f>f thy Radicals showed a marked di s- 

" Revue des Deux Mondes, vol. 30, (1905), p. 234. 
^Le Monde J^cononUque, vol. 2, (1905), p. 578. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



96 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1906 [532 

tf^st^ Coimt de Witte. Georges Clemenceau called him 
a defender' or ^utiAri a cy , the " factotum " of autocracy 
whose faults and crimes he attempted to cover. He was 
absolutely jgnorant of the movement of p ublic o pmion 
which had just conquered the tsar's resistance. How could 
he become the leader at the hour of decisions? ^ Jean Lon- 
guet distrusted him and would not be persuaded to give 
credence to his liberal promises. He said that " the Rus- 
sian reactionaries hate him, but the liberals, not to mention 
the revolutionaries, have no confidence in him *\^ 

Anatole Leroy-Beaulieu, a prominent Catholic layman, 
concurred in this view. The distrust wa§ due, he said, 
to the fact that he had been minister imder the jiutocratic 
r e gime for eleven years. His impopularity at home was 
demonstrated when he was trying to form his cabinet. The 
Russian liberals refused to join it, alleging that they would 
serve their country better by staying out and remaining as 
leaders of their party.* 

The great problem of the day with which Count de Witte 
was chiefly concerned was reform. Eugene Lautier feoped 
that upon his entrance into office he would immediately put 
into practice a workable constitution in order to gain the 
people's confidence. The Revue des Deux Mondes recog- 
nized the heavy burden and responsibility resting on his 
shoulders. He was working against odds, it declared. There 
were the strikers who insisted that the government listeff TO 
their extravagant demands despite Count de Witters warn- 
ing, that. If they persisted in their hostile attitude and. Adr 

^L'Humaniti, 17 November, 1905, p. 3. 

*Ibid„ 8 November, 1905, p. 2. 

• Journal des Dihats, 19 November, 190s p. i. This conduct of the 
Russian Liberals was condemned by French Conservatives. " They have 
committed a great error," declared Eugene Lautier. "They would 
lose nothing by sitting in his cabinet ; on the contrary, they would be 
able to observe things at close range." 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



533] REFORMS FOR RUSSIA 97 

destructiv e activities, they would bcasposefl tf> rigorous re- 
pression or to the anger of the suffering populacp. Then 
fliere was the tsar whose lamentable lack of independence 
and firmness of mind was a fatal drawback to any well-in- 
tentioned reformer. It was imder these forbidding cir- 
cumstances that Count de Witte had to work/ 

The French Socialists and Radicals began to criticize his 
g^cy after he had been in office a few months. Georges 
Clemenceau declared that despite his promises of liberal 
reform, he had put not a single one into practice. " To 
every petition, M. Witte has only one response : * I will 
sjgdyjt'. He ' studies '^"^ the ^g^rsmtees of^n d i vidua i 
liberty, justice, and common right. During that time the 
violence of the despot continues to rage. He ' studies ' the 
conditions for internal peace. During that time, civil war 
causes great havoc. Why did he not study to act from the 
very start once he was master of the government? " * 

The Petite Republique joined in the hostile criticism of 
Count de Witte's policy. All his splendid promises were 
of no avail ; they would lure no one. The nation wanted 
realities, it declared, and the disorder, which was ruining 
Sie country, would not cease until the people held in their 
hands a " Constitution " which, judging from daily re- 
ports of the condition in Russia, the revolutionaries were 
determined to snatch from the powers that be at any price, 
it concluded that despite his versatility and composure,! 
Count de Witte couM not escape the exigency of the situa-j 

tion.» 

The adverse^ criticism of French Socialists and Radicals 
was due to" their impatim^^ to see positive results of hist 
work. To their minds, Count de Witte was too slow ta 

Vol. 30, (1905), pp. 234-235. 
« UHumanite, 17 November, 1905, p. 3. 
» Ibid., 28 October, 1905, p. 3. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



98 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1906 [534 

act. They wanted him to effect a reconciliation between 
the government and the revolutionaries at the earliest 
possible date but the settlement must be in favor of the 
revolutionaries. 

The French moderate thinkers regretted that the disturb- 
ances in Russia had not ceased despite the appointment of 
Count de Witte and his liberal policy. The Reviie des Deux 
Mondes expressed the opinion that after Count de Witte 
had promised to introduce reforms, the Russian Liberals, 
if not the revolutionaries, should show confidence in his 
government The effect of his promises was deplorable, 
it observed. There still existed throughout the empire 
what Taine called " anarchic spontanee " during the French 
Revolution. Terrorist acts were prevalent and their end 
seemed remote. 

Toward the dose of the year 1905 Count de Witte as a 
reformer no longer figure conspicuously in the French 
press. The revolutionaries were already losing ground, and 
repression by the government, which had regained its lost 
strength, became the order of the day. The change of 
opinion of many a supporter of Count de Witte as a re- 
former was ably expressed by an advanced thinker, Charles 
Rivet : " Count de Witte, the father of the Constitution of 
1905, after having hesitated for a moment before the in- 
surrection, soon became again the obedient servant of the 
sovereign whom he ironiadly called his ' august master ', 
but whose too servile Minister he none the less showed him- 
self too happy to be." ^ 

* Charles Rivet, op. cit^ p. 124. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



CHAPTER VI 

The End of the Revolution 

The Dissolution of the First Duma 

Since the proclamation of the famous October Mani- 
festo the French public had been looking forward to the 
time when, under its provisions, the first representative 
assembly or dtmia should come into being. On lo May, 
J906, the much longed-for duma met. 

l-tgon the publication of the October Manifesto there was 
speculation in Trance as"IcrwKat f61e the future duma 
woul3 actually play in the government. Some French con- 
^servafives h^ giocmy forebodings. TheRcTme des Deux 
Mofides pi^edicted that a rupture between the tsar and the 
duma was certain. The clash of the two forces would be 
inevitable, for neither one would be willing to submit to 
the other ; but they were so imequal in strength that it would 
be easy to foresee who would remain master of the situation. 
" The dud will not be long; the tsar will be the master ".'• 
And the prediction came true. 

'-Qctr!es-de-t.arivicrc» sl friend of the tsar, outiined the 
duties the duma should perform. The-iir&t duty, of Jhe 
duma should be to denounce and correct the abuses of the 
Bui^ucracy which were so flagrant that they offended even 
"the least sensitive individual. If they imdertook this work 
"Ihey would win the people's confidence and create a public 
opinion favorable to their projects. In this way, with the 

^Revut des Deux Mondts, vol. 29, (1905), p. 237. . 

535 99 : :: 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



lOO T'HE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1905 [5^5 

people back of them, they could enlarge gradually their 
prerogatives and, as a result, the duma would assume the 
role of a lower house beside the council of the empire 
erected as an upper house. He recognized the limited 
powers of the dtmia as provided in the manifesto and, like 
other moderate French thinkers, Ji e advised the Russian 
^ pgople to make the most of what they ha.f1 in h ailj^ 3e 
believed that the only way to create a duma with prepon- 
derant powers rested on the ability and wisdom of the 
members elected to the first diuna. If they behaved wisely 
and refrained from excessive demands, they could convert 
the duma into a veritable force in the governmental 
machinery. It remained then to the members of the first 
duma to raise this new political institution into the dignified 
position which it should occupy in the state. 

The tsar's attitude toward the duma was criticized by 
the Catholic fortnightly. La Quinzcdne. It questioned the 
wisdom of the tsar's proclamation of the " Fui^3at'llt!!iual' 
Laws of the Empire " precisely on the eve of the convoca- 
tion of the duma. The tsar, it asserted, was not playing 
fair. He had g^ranted ^ charts .when the pcc^le were 
clamoring for a ^ " Constitution ". His " Fundamental 
Laws " aroused distrust ^d increased the hostility of hi^ 
subjects toward his government and his meagre cpnces- 
^ionsT "If the duma so desired, it continued, no " Funda- 
mental Laws" could prevent it from discussing matters, 
that the tsar had forbidden it to touch. The tsar had com- 
mitted a grave error by proclaiming the fundamental laws 
of the empire. It was far better, it concluded, that he 
should not attempt to prevent the inevitable.^ 

When the first duma finally met on 10 May^ igp6, its? 
composition as well as its behavior evoked diverse opinionsi^ 
in France The membership of the duma, wrote Baron 

^-: : 1I41 Quifusame, 16 May, 1906^ p. 283. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



537] ^^^ ^^^ ^^ ^^^ REVOLUTION iqi 

M. de Berwick in the Revue des Etudes Franco-Russes for 
June, 1906, left much to be desired. The elements com- 
posin^ it werp a^ ip^f^hf^rpt^t ^»^ ^'^^^gnV^us as Ti Oi^^JbaMl 
b een elec ted fay direct suffrage. The true interests, the fun- 
damental interests of the country, were but feebly repre- 
sented. BesijJi^.aJas2:- xuea^ wwthy^ ta figm^ ia aay^ faaHaL- 
ment there sat a " crowd of rebels " of all descriptions and 
a'^smallgr^^ot ttmid conseryatiyes^ prultra-repuhlicans. 
"^j^ -"■ 5^^!'^ " and the peasants were *' idealists jwithout 
talent ^^ and^ftogetfier unconscious as much of the good 
that they couI3*Bo'fof their country as of the evil they would 
undoubtedly do her. 

The majority of the members of the duma, recorded the 
Annuaire du Parhment ior th.^ year 1905, were without 
experience in parliamentary procedure and were novices 
in politics. For this reason the by-laws of the duma were 

" full of details and very clear. The pjresident of the duma, 
it observed, played a very modest role. His own powersi 
were reduced to such unimportant details as fixing the 
hours of a meeting. For all other measures of discipline 
the assent of the duma was necessary. 

The behavior of the duma was the subject of various 
comments. That it desired to convert itself into a real 
parliamentary body was the prevailing opinion in France. 

'Baron M. de Berwick said that the duma pretended to as- 
sumTalf the powers of govemmea*; it encraarhed on the 
powers of the council of the empire and the tsar. It in- 
sisted on a general amnesty, responsible ministers, arid com- 
pulsory expropriation of land for the benefit of the peasants. 
This was asking too much at one time, he declared. It 
should bear in mind that " Every concession obtained by 
force is destined to remain sterile, if it does not turn loose 
•worse evils than those it pretends to cure".* 

• Revue des Etudes Franco-Russes, June, 190^ p. 27$- 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



102 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1906 [^jg 

La Vie Politique dans les Deux Mondes for the year 1906 
noted that neither the council of the empire nor the duma 
would tolerate each other and on neither side was there 
any attempt at conciliation. The coimdl expected the duma 
to be docile and disposed to register the bills brought to it 
without any discussion. The duma insisted, on the other 
hand, on participating fully in the elaboration of the laws 
like a real legislative body. With such an aspiration and 
the council's resistance it inevitably came into conflict with 
the government* 

Charles Rivet stated that the first duma became " a safety- 
valve for public dislconte>it ''. It denounced the public 
system and the corrupt practices in the government; it 
became the mouthpiece and ardent advocate of popular 
opinion. But, to his mind, it lacked moderation and it was 
openly radical and revolutionary.* It was dissolved by the 
tsar and a second dtuna was stmimoned. 

In summarizing its work. Professor Alfred Anspach 
called attention to the poor showing it made. It spent its 
time in futile discussion. It accomplished nothing, and by 
overstepping its powers, it committed a fatal mistake. 

The dissolution of the first duma was regarded by French 
Socialists as 6rie^Qf1he"' i u u & l c o nvlu c iiig prooH""WKtiie 
tsarist government's determination not to sbare its power 
with the representatives of the people. It confirmed their 
earlier suspicion that the tsar was not sincere when he pro- 
claimed the famous October Manifesto, and that he still 
adhered to the principle of the intangibility of autocracy. 
With the dissolution of the first duma the revolution of 1905 
came to an end. 

* Charles Rivet, op, cit., ^ 179. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



539] ^^J^ ^^^ OF THE REVOLUTION 103 

Repression 

About the end of the year 1905, when the tsar's govern- 1 
ment was already recovering from its recent disasters, it I 
took up the work of suppressing the revolution and getting ' 
back again from the country " the semi-liberties which had 
been granted under revolutionary pressure ". 

The French Socialists were among: theJ&rst to deuouxice 
the reactionary policy of the government Bitterly disap- 
pSInt^ at flie outcome of the revolutionary agitation, they 
became fault-finding. Qn Count de Witte they put th§ 
blame for the government's repressive measures. Thgr 
^Bbed'K m Ihe accomplice of the tsar. The ^ciafist 
Pierre (JuillaM openly acfcused Tnm of organizing or allow- 
ing to be organized tfie outrageous repression, the " white 
terror '\ He said that before the people Count de Witte 
posed as an ardent reformer who would concede whatever 
was compatible with the actual social life in Russia. He 
was profuse with promises. At court he was the firm sup- 
porter^ of the tsar and reaction. TTypocnsy was hisp^- 
sonal characteristic and in no way did he differ f rom the^ 
^absolutists.* Jean Longuet added that Count de Witte' si 
aim was to suppress the revolution by extreme reactionary 
measures. 

The F rench Socialists blamed the Russian people, too, for 
having allowed their revolutionary ardcwr. to .wane before 
they had reached^ their ^gal^ for s urr ende ri n g too. SQCwci.tct, 
the wiles of tsari||n._ They denounced their conciliatory 
attitude toward the tsar; they scorned their sudden change 
of mind.' 

The reactionary minister of the interior and later prime 
minister Peter Stolypin was another target of Socialist 

^L'Europien, 25 November, 1905, pp. 2-3. 
^UHumanitS, 13 December, 1905, p. 2. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



104 ^^^ RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1905 [j^q 

attack s. His policy, the French Socialists declared, was 
"to rtSlOffe absolute autocracy with the help of the ultra- 
conservatives and the " Black Hundred ", a reactionary or- 
ganization. What made him so much hated, according to 
UHutnanitS of lo September, 1906, was his maintenance of 
martial law. For the slightest offense anyone could be sum- 
moned before the war council The law produced a depres- 
sing impression and was one of the principal causes of the 
general effervescence, i^tolypin liafj jy^fji^g^ira ted a '' regim e 
of massacres ". " A frightful regime has been inaugurated 
^the^remier bourreau '. The troops reply with voUejrs 
at the slightest provocation; massacres follow massacres. 
The black bands are busy ". Even f oreigners, the Socialists 
declared, were not safe. The terrorist regmie' end angered 
ttieif Itves. But Stolypin would be greatly deceived if he 
ever thought for a moment that he could curb the revolu;^ 
"Itonary agitation by his reactionary measures. On the con- 
trary he had increased the terror and confusion 'in the- — 
country by the license and excesses of the government of- 
ficials. The horrible crimes that were being committed for 
the tsar and the orthodox faith were imparalleled. Jean Lon- 
guet expressed the opinion that the horrors of the repression 
in Russia surpassed the atrocities of the Versailles repres- 
sion in the month of May, 1871. Another French Socialist 
who was an eyewitness described the methods of repression 
employed by the police in Moscow.^ He described the 
** organized massacres of peaceful citizens ", assaults made 
on private houses, and the " foolish hunt for inoffensive 
peasants who carried on their persons arms solely for self- 
defense." All these atrocities, he added, were committed 
under the pretext of curbing an armed insurrection, referr- 
ing to the Moscow insurrection of December, 1905. The 
tsar's troops used cannons and machine guns to put down 

* L'Europien, 6 January, 1^06, pp. 1-2. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



541] THE END OF THE REVOLUTION 105 

a petty, but madly heroic, outburst of some groups of men, 
practically unarmed. 

The suppression of the Moscow insurrection, because of ^"^ 
the simmiary way with which the government coped with 
it, was repeatedly cited by Socialists as typical of the 
methods of pacification employed by the Russian police. 
The violence of Anarchists, they concluded, would suffer 
from comparison with the actual massacres and bombard- 
ments carried on by the agents of the Russian government. 

Thg disillusionment of the French So cialists was natural — ^ 
The prophecies they had pronounced at the beginning of the 
revolution — the advent of Russian democracy, the inevitable 
death of tsarism, the victory of the oppressed classes, and 
the triumph of the proletariat — ^all these were not yet real- 
i2 «i at the beginning.^f tihe ye^^^lg^^wESHHelsar 
eminent agmn could make it§, r^S^ned. strength felt and 
was effectiyely putting dai&gi.thft.xarolutioinajryjSPQvement 
The "agonizing tsarism" had recovered from its illness 
and no longer was in the throes of death as the French 
5>ocialists had foreseen. For some years more the tsar 
remained on his throne and was able to maintain peace and 
order within his empire. / ^ 

Egrthis recovery of the tsar the French Socialists held the ^ ^ 
French government responsible. To their minds the tsar 
v/as enabled to suppress the revolution by the help of 
French'capital. This was also the opinion of Charles Rivet, 
"an advanced French thinker.' He said that "tsarist Kussia 
Tiias been Clever enough— in order to help in the repression 
of its awakening people — to borrow from France a matter 
of fifteen milliards of francs ". What a paradox, he ex- 
claimed, for French democracy to support Russian despot- 
ism by its gold! ^ Jean Longuet attributed the strength of 
the reaction to French and German capital. Assured of 

* Charles Rivet, op. ciU p. 277^ 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



Iq6 the RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1906 [543 

the support of European finaiiciers through the co-operation: 
of the chief French and German banks, theLt§ar washable to 
put down the revolution by repressive measures worthy of 
his fame. * 

The French government s hearty support of the Russian 
loan, decTared Professor Charles Seignobos, was not dictated 
by financial motives, as for example, to prevent the Isfll in 
the value of the rouble. M. Rouvier*s reason was rather 
political. He considered it the duty of France to help the 
Jlussian goveniroent I ' estoie uidcf. -Bttt m so^-doing^ " he 
should have explained as the representative of France that 
in French opinion * to restore order ' does not mean to re- 
store the absolutism of the bureaucracy and the r^me of 
embezzlements and per^cutions, and that if France aids 
Russia, her ally, it is to enable her to recover her credit and 
prosperity and ultimately to establish a constitutional r^fime, 
individual liberty, and freedom of the press ".^ 
For the suppression of the revolution the French Socialists 
-i^ blamed the reactionary ministers of the tsar, the Russian 
people in general, and the French government Their only 
liope remaining was the Russian Socialists to whom they 
gave the credit of starting the revolution and who were the 
tireless leaders of the agitation. Jean Longuet asserted 
that their conduct during the heat of the struggle between 
tsarism and the people indicated that they would in the near 
future triumph over their hated enemy, autocracy. They 
had demonstrated heroism and devotion to the cause. 
Citing the suppression of the Moscow insurrection, he de- 

lared that the admirable resistance offered by the pro- 
riat of the city was a splendid example of the persever- 

ice and everlasting courage which could be expected from 

^e Russian Socialists. 
In r^jard to the suppression of the revolution by the tsar 

* UEuropSen, 20 January, 1906^ p. 36. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



543] ^^^ ^^^ OF THE REVOLUTION 107 

the French Socialists believed that his victory would bo 
short-lived. Tsarism had merely deferred its inevitable 
downfall and stayed for some years more the progress of 
the " socialist conscience of the masses ". Jean Longuet 
admitted tha t tsari^ would come out triiimpiafif in fKe 
p resent s truggle with the reyolutionan^ but it wouFdlRh 
itself imre ffi^^ ia/la,jsilJjati<m. without. an issue ". 

TD«;pite the success of the reaction, the French Socialists still 
hoped that throujhjhejriffoit^^^^ confreres, 

R ussia wo uld be delivered some day from autocracir. * 
'^The t'rSicfiTAnarchists were in the same frame of mind 
as the Sodalisits. When it was reported how successful the 
government was in extinguishing every lingering spark of 
the revolutionary fire, they became indignant and blamed 
the Russian revolutionaries for having forgotten too soon 
their vows to fight tsarism to the end. They found fault 
with their methods of action. Although they upheld the 
general strike as the best means of accomplishing the revolu- 
tion, they criticised severely the third general strike, which 
was a dismal failure. .The government's success in check- 
ing this strike demonstrated the impotence of the revoTu- 
tionar y or^anizajJXMa iid its^.lad^Q!£,pj:eparation to direct 
the strike. Un der the caption " Memento Mori '* Lucien 
Descaves wrote in the Temps Noiwecmx of 13 January, 
1906, thq Uhe failure of the third ^eneral^^trUce mariced a 
pause injthe movement toward liberty, and it Jrg^ 

'"the3trembiir^ " autocratic r^me. 

The Anarchists dreWaTTesson from the failure of the 
third general strike, whidi should be heeded by the revolu- 
tionaries of other countries. A ^general strike, they de- 
clared, succeeded remarkably when it was a spoiitaneons 
movementriBut failed when^^direbted'by "a "committee as in 
the case of the third general strike. The revolution in Rusr- 
lia illustrated the efficacy i>f a spont^eous jgeneral strike 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



y^\ 



1 08 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1905 [-4^ 

which spread rapidly over the country by the s heer conta - 
giorToFexangi)^^ of an uprising, 

tKeyadded, armed insturection and the general strike must 
go hand in hand.^ 

The Anarchists concurred in the Socialist opinion that 
the French government was the tsar's accomplice in the sup- 
pression of the revolution. The tsar could not have pursued 
a reactionary policy had it not been for French money. He 
was in pressing need of money when France came to his 
rescue. With the aid of the money of the French bour- 
geoisie the success of the reaction was assured. 

The y pr otested too a^nst the repr^sive measures of 
the Russian government. As an instance of the " barbar- 
ous **'methods used, they cited the suppression of the Mos- 
cow uprising of December, 1905. " The crushing of the 
Moscow insurrection was the signal of a general reaction. 
Arrests by the hundreds and thousands, martial law in al- 
most all the provinces, simimary judgments, fussillades" 
— these were the means of " pacification " employed by the 
reactionaries. 

The possible consequences of either repression or the 
revolution's victory were a matter of grave concern to the 
tsar's friends in France. "A triumphant repression", 
thought the progressive paper La RSpublique Frangaise, 
" would leave incurable hatreds. A victory of the revolu- 
tionaries would drive the emperor to flight father than- to 
submission, and would perhaps bring foreign intervention 
or surely a dreadful anarchy. The actual government h 
indisputable. To replace it, there is nothing but a chasm, 
there is neither a leading class sufficiently intelligent and 
numerous, nor leaders, nor precise ideas, nor political educa- 
tion, but dreams, excuses, insubordination, covetousness, 
foolish and destructive pillage, revolt of subject races — in 

[jTJ^T '^r. 1 Temps Nouveaux, ao Janua<ry, 1906, pp. 2-3. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



545] ^^^ ^NI> OF THE REVOLUTION 109 

a word, a frightful anarchy which only an enemy of Russia 
can wish for ".* , ^0 the peace-loving bou rgeois Frenchmen 
the con sequence of the triumph of the revolution such as 
eicturecil iere wou ld be detestable! ^rrtiirhtoTtsansFgov- 

enmigit ti^pgrf^ ^>b V^^^ ^"^ rf^lnrfanfly gr^ntH £0n- 

cessipn was jFar^pf^ore desirable. , 

The Figaro of 28 October, 1905, f»red that if repression 
did no«fc at once put dawn the revo^f-. it nU^KTunchain more 
violently the people's passions and precipjtate worsfii-hap-, 
penings. What was expedient then was to take vigorousi 
measures of pacification. Any half-measure or uncertain 
step on the part of the government was futile, if not danger- 
ous. 

While the Socialist papers mostly printed reports of the 
horrible persecutions of the reactionaries, the moderate 
French newspapers, guided by their desire to calm the 
French public, published less highly colored tales. 

Accordingjp the. French moderate and conservative opin- 
ion, the days following_th^e_pix)cl2miatioiLojf.,.th^^ Q9*:^bcf 
Manifesto were calm. The Russian people had acquiesced 
in the tsar's concessions and were already resuming the acti- 
vities of normal life. The terrorist acts and massacres which 
figured conspicuously in the reports to the Socialist press, 
they asserted, were merely local and were easily suppressed 
by the government. In November, 1905, Eugene Lautier 
was already telling his readers of the Figaro about the res- 
toration of order throughout Russia and the resumption of 
normal life in the chief cities such as Moscow and Petrograd. 
In the latter city, he said, the workers themselves aided the 
government in the difficult task of pacification. They gave 
up their plan for a great demonstration on the occasion of the 
funeral of the victims of the recent collisions when the gov- 

1 UHumaniti, 29 October, 1905, p. 3. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



I JO THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1906 [546 

cmment requested the inhabitants of the city to refrain from 
any act that might render the situation more critical and 
endanger the safety of peaceful subjects. This, he con- 
cluded, was indicative of the conciliatory attitude of the 
revolutionaries. 

In regard to the massacres of Jews the French moderate 
and conservative, thinkers counseled the tsar to forbidlhem 
and in fliat' way he would become the protector of all his 
subjects without distinction of religion or race. He should 
apply the liberal pmdples whidi he had recognized'^in T3§ 
concessions. 1 his Wtc sra piupitiuus time for him te-^y 
the role oFan^arbiter between the political parties and the 
various races in his empire. 

In the opinion of Eugene Lautier the Russian govern- 
me5t'wai"conf routed wiSi three difficulties in die^work of 
pacification. Fim^j there was the j;eneral strike whidi Frendi 
Socialists had pronounced the most effective weapofT'tiy 
which the revolution could be won. Secondly the Russian 
liberals were still ddiant. A majority of them h ad n ot 
ceased agitating in the hope of wringing more concessions 
from the tsar. , Finally there was the Polish agitation which 
had not subsided and whidi nright involve Russia in Jnfer- 
natioixal complications on account of the threat of Germany 
to intervene should the tsar be unable to restore order in 
his Polish province, . Despite all these obstacles the Russian 
government was able to pacify the immense empire, and by 
.the middle of the year 1906 the revolution of 1905 was 
; generally regarded as ended. 

* The result of the revolution was summarized by Charles 
Rivet as follows: 

The reforms introduced as the result of the pressure of 
opinion, the convocation of a Duma which in theory was to 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



547] ^^^ ^^^ ^P ^^^ REVOLUTION 1 1 1 

constitute a national representation, did not in fact make any 
alteration at all in the old state of affairs. The system remained 
the same : the Russian bureaucracy, more royalist than the king, 
* more autocratic than the monarch, gave up no iota of its power 
or of its prerogatives.^ 

1 Charles Rivet, op, cit, p. 90. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



-! 



Conclusion 

In the foregoing survey of French contemporary opinion 
of the Russian revolution of 1905 it has been said that the 
interest vrhich the revolutionary movement created in 
France could be explained by the political relations exist- 
ing between the countries as parties to the Franco-Rus- 
sian Alliance, by their financial relations represented by 
French capital in Russia, and by the ardent sympathy of the 
French Socialists. For these reasons the outbreak of the re- 
volution caused much comment in France and divers opinions 
were expressed as to the significance, character, and extent of 
the incipient movement. At the outset the tsar became the 
target of the diatribes of French extremists, the Socialists 
and Anarchists; at the same time he was defended by the 
conservatives or moderate French thinkers. But the notor- 
ious Russian bureaucracy found no partisans in France; it 
was vehemently denounced by both extremists and moder- 
ates. 

Many distinguished French writers, among whom were 
Anatole Leroy-Bcaulieu, Paul Beaiu'egard, Rene Millet, and 
Victor Berard, contributed many articles to current period- 
icals, analyzing the causes of the revolution. Although 
they did not belittle the political causes of the upheaval, in 
general they laid emphasis on the social and economic 
causes. It was the Socialists who affirmed that cardinaf 
causes of the agitation were political. As to the aims of the 
revolution there was a divergence of opinion. The majority 
of French conservatives contended that it was aimless or 
else the end in view of the agitators was sheer destruction. 
112 [543 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



549] CONCLUSION 1 1 3 

The Socialists, on the other hand, held the opinion that the 
revolution had very laudable aims, such as the overthrow 
of the rule of the corrupt bureaucracy and the establish- 
ment of a constitutional government. They claimed that 
the Russian revolutionaries had a definite program. 

The progress of the revolution preoccupied the French, 
and comments on the tragic and spectacular events were 
profuse. The mutiny of the crew of the " Ktrnz-Potem-- 
kin ", the assassination of Grand Duke Serge, the general 
strike, and the role of tiie Socialists in the movement evoked 
divers opinions and copious comments in the press. 

There was a consensus of opinion on the urgent need of 
reforms in Russia, but opinions differed in regard to the 
kind of reforms that should be introduced. The majorityX 
of French Socialists advocated the complete transformation A 
of Russia into a democratic country with universal suffrage 1 
and a constitution patterned after those in vogue in Western f 
Europe. The French conservatives and moderates, how- \ 
ever, stood for less drastic reform, alleging that the Russian f 
people were not prepared for a truly democratic and re- \ 
presentative government. They suggested such political j 
reforms as would do away with the arbitrariness of the j 
bureaucracy, and certain economic, religious, and social re- J 
forms. y^ 

Toward the end of the year 1905 the Russian government 
gave undivided attention to its domestic affairs. French 
moderate thinkers rallied to its side, justifying the suppres- 
sion of the revolt, which they preferred to call " pacifica- 
tion " rather than by the harsh term " repression," and re- 
joicing at the restoration of order whidi meant the return of 
peace and prosperity to the afflicted ally who had been weak- 
ened by foreign disasters and internal dissensions. The 
French Socialists continued their denimdation of tiie govern- 
mental policy of repression, and, though disappointed at the 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



1 14 THE RUSSIAN REVOLUTION OF 1905 [550 

outoome of the revolutionary agitation, they still hoped for 
better times when the lofty aspiration of their Russian con- 
freres would be realized. At the time of writing it can be 
safely asserted that there was a great deal of truth in their 
pronouncement that the trivimph of. tsarism in 1905 was 
merely temporary, that it had simply postponed for a few: 
more years its final downfall. They declared that the 
tsarist edifice rested on crumbling foundations to which 
another shock might prove fatal. Full well did they realize 
that the political and social evils which were undermining 
the autocratic regime still remained after that brief but 
highly significant revolutionary movement, a porteintous 
prelude to the greater and more decisive Revolution of 
March, 191 7. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 



PERIODICALS ANI> NEWSPAPERS 

L'^conomiste Frangais, weekly. Useful on the ifinoncial aspect of the 

revolution. 
UEuropien, Socialist weekly. It publidies many good articles by 

prominent writers. 
Le Figaro, daily, Paris. Decidedly pro-tsar in its views. 
La France lUustrie, Catholic weekly. Brief comments. 
Free Russia, weekly. Devoted to the promotion of the cause of the 

Russian revolutionists. Published news of the activities of French 

sympathizers in favor of the Russian revolution. 
La Grande Revue, monthly. Each number has a summary of current 

events in Russia with good comments. 
L'Humaniti, Socialist daily under the direction of Jean Jaur^s. Very 

valuaible for .Socialist opinion. 
Journal des Debats, Conservative daily, Paris. Well-written editoriab 

and intelligent comments on Russian questions. 
Journal des ^cononUstes, monthly. Illuminating comments on political 

and! financial questions by distinguished French economists. 
Le Monde £conomique, weekly. Each issue contains intelligent reflec- 
tions on the effect of the revolutionary movement on finance. 
Le Mouvement Socialiste, monthly. It contains few materials for this 

subject. 
Le Petit Journal, Republican Independent daily, Paris. Timely edi- 
torial comments and moderate in its opinion. 
La Quinsaine, iCatholic fortnightly. Brief comments. 
La Ri forme So dale. Catholic fortnightly. Its articles on the Russian 

revolution deal mainly with the problem of reforms. Moderate 

opinion. 
Revue des Etudes Franc o-Russes, monthly. Dedd!ediy pro-tsarist in 

its views. Publishes valuable studies of the various phases of the 

revolution by distingruished French writers. 
Reime des Deux Mondes, monthly. Illuminating refleotions on the 

revolution by fair-minded writers. 
551 115 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



Il6 BIBLIOGRAPHY [551J 

Revue de Paris, monthly. In volumes II and III is a series of well- 
written articles on Russian problems by Victor Berard. 

Reime du Monde Catholique, Catholic monthly. Stanch supporter of 
the Roman Catholic Church. Illuminating comments on liberty of 
worship in Russia. 

Revue Politique et Littiraire (Revue Bleue), fortnightly. There are 
scholarly articles by Anatole Leroy-Beaulieu, a prominent Catholic 
layman. 

Revue Politique et Parle mentaire, momthly. Abounds in discussions of 
Russian problems and current events by well-known writers. Ver? 
useful. 

Revue Socialiste, monthly. Many good articles by E. Foumiere, its 
director. Emphasizes the role of the Russian Socialists in the 
revolution. Comments on the financial relations of France and 
Russia from the Socialist point of view. 

Les Temps Nouveaux, Anarchist weekly. Copious comments on the 
revolution. 

BOOKS 

Alfassa, Georges, La crise agraire en Russie, Giard et Briere, Paris, 
(1905). A fair discussion of the causes of the peasant movement 
during the revolution of 1905. 

Jaures, Jean, Action Socialiste, Georges Bellais, Paris (1899). A col- 
lection of articles contributed by Jaures to French periodicals and 
newspapers. There are articles on the Franco-Russian Alliance 
giving his early views. 

Pease, iM., Jean Jauris, Huebsch, New York (191 7). A S3mipathetic 
biography of the Socialist leader. 

Rivet, Charles, The Last of the Romanoffs, Dutton, New York (i9i8)» 
A translation from the French Le dernier Romanof, Perrin et Cie, 
Paris (1917). The opinion of an advanced French thinker. De- 
cidedly unfavorable to the tsar Nicholas II. 

Tardieu, Andre, France and the Alliances, -Macmillan, New York (i9o8)» 
Chapter I deals with France and the Russian Alliance; scholarly; 
the opinion of a distinguished French statesman. 

Ular, Alexandre, Russia from Within, London (1905). A translation 
from the French La revolution russe, F. Juven, Paris (1905). The 
book deals with the underlying causes of the revolution and is 
pronouncedly against the tsarist regime. 

ANNUALS 

Annuaire du Parlement, 1906. It contains an article on the by-laws of 
the first duma. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



553] BIBLIOGRAPHY II7 

La Vie Politique dans les Deux Mondes, 1906- 1907, Felix Alcan, Paris 
(1908). Published under the direction of Professor Achille Vial- 
late. Reviews the political events in Russia, especially the Russian 
duma. 

U Annie Politique, 1904-1905. A brief summary of the revolutionary 
movement. 

MISCELLANEOUS 

Encyclopedie Socialiste, Paris. Edited by Aristide Quillet Valuable 
monographs on socialism in Russia. 

International Socialist Congress of Stuttgart, Augfust, 1907. Proceed- 
ings of the congress including the resolution of the French Social- 
ist party in favor of the Russian revolutionists. 

Journal OfUciel, Reports of the debates in the Chamber of Deputies. 

The periodicals and newspapers used were those published in the 
years 1905 and 1906. Definite dtaitions can be found in Che footnotes. 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



VITA 

'Born on 23 March, 1895, Binan, Laguna, Philippine 
Islands. Attended the University of the Philippines, 191 3- 
1918; University of Chicago, 1919; RadclifFe College, 1919- 
1920; Coltunbia University, 1920^1921. Received the 
degrees of B. Sc. (1917), M. A. (1918), University of the 
Philippines; M. A. (1920), Radcliffe College. Attended 
at Columbia University courses of Professors William A. 
Dunning, Carlton J. H. Ha)res, William R. Shepherd, 
Robert L. Schuyler, David S. Muzzey, and Franklin H. 
Giddings and Mr. Henry F. Munro. 

"9 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



Digitized byLjOOQlC 



